

I

The question "Does civilization civilize?" is a fine example of _petitio
principii_, and decides itself in the affirmative; for civilization must
needs do that from the doing of which it has its name. But it is not
necessary to suppose that he who propounds is either unconscious of his
lapse in logic or desirous of digging a pitfall for the feet of those
who discuss; I take it he simply wishes to put the matter in an
impressive way, and relies upon a certain degree of intelligence in the
interpretation.

Concerning uncivilized peoples we know but little except what we are
told by travelers--who, speaking generally, can know very little but the
fact of uncivilization, as shown in externals and irrelevances, and are
moreover, greatly given to lying. From the savages we hear very little.
Judging them in all things by our own standards in default of a
knowledge of theirs, we necessarily condemn, disparage and belittle. One
thing that civilization certainly has not done is to make us intelligent
enough to understand that the contrary of a virtue is not necessarily a
vice. Because, as a rule, we have but one wife and several mistresses
each it is not certain that polygamy is everywhere--nor, for that
matter, anywhere--either wrong or inexpedient. Because the brutality of
the civilized slave owners and dealers created a conquering sentiment
against slavery it is not intelligent to assume that slavery is a
maleficent thing amongst Oriental peoples (for example) where the slave
is not oppressed. Some of these same Orientals whom we are pleased to
term half-civilized have no regard for truth. "Takest thou me for a
Christian dog," said one of them, "that I should be the slave of my
word?" So far as I can perceive, the "Christian dog" is no more the
slave of his word than the True Believer, and I think the
savage--allowing for the fact that his inveracity has dominion over
fewer things--as great a liar as either of them. For my part, I do not
know what, in all circumstances, is right or wrong; but I know that, if
right, it is at least stupid, to judge an uncivilized people by the
standards of morality and intelligence set up by civilized ones. Life in
civilized countries is so complex that men there have more ways to be
good than savages have, and more to be bad; more to be happy, and more
to be miserable. And in each way to be good or bad, their generally
superior knowledge--their knowledge of more things--enables them to
commit greater excesses than the savage can. The civilized
philanthropist wreaks upon his fellows a ranker philanthropy, the
civilized rascal a sturdier rascality. And--splendid triumph of
enlightenment!--the two characters are, in civilization, frequently
combined in one person.

I know of no savage custom or habit of thought which has not its mate
in civilized countries. For every mischievous or absurd practice of the
natural man I can name you one of ours that is essentially the same. And
nearly every custom of our barbarian ancestors in historic times
persists in some form today. We make ourselves look formidable in
battle--for that matter, we fight. Our women paint their faces. We feel
it obligatory to dress more or less alike, inventing the most ingenious
reasons for doing so and actually despising and persecuting those who do
not care to conform. Almost within the memory of living persons bearded
men were stoned in the streets; and a clergyman in New York who wore his
beard as Christ wore his, was put into jail and variously persecuted
till he died.

Civilization does not, I think, make the race any better. It makes men
know more: and if knowledge makes them happy it is useful and desirable.
The one purpose of every sane human being is to be happy. No one can
have any other motive than that. There is no such thing as
unselfishness. We perform the most "generous" and "self-sacrificing"
acts because we should be unhappy if we did not. We move on lines of
least reluctance. Whatever tends to increase the beggarly sum of human
happiness is worth having; nothing else has any value.

The cant of civilization fatigues. Civilization, is a fine and beautiful
structure. It is as picturesque as a Gothic cathedral, but it is built
upon the bones and cemented with the blood of those whose part in all
its pomp is that and nothing more. It cannot be reared in the
ungenerous tropics, for there the people will not contribute their
blood and bones. The proposition that the average American workingman or
European peasant is "better off" than the South Sea islander, lolling
under a palm and drunk with over-eating, will not bear a moment's
examination. It is we scholars and gentlemen that are better off.

It is admitted that the South Sea islander in a state of nature is
overmuch addicted to the practice of eating human flesh; but concerning
that I submit: first, that he likes it; second, that those who supply it
are mostly dead. It is upon his enemies that he feeds, and these he
would kill anyhow, as we do ours. In civilized, enlightened and
Christian countries, where cannibalism has not yet established itself,
wars are as frequent and destructive as among the maneaters. The
untitled savage knows at least why he goes killing, whereas our private
soldier is commonly in black ignorance of the apparent cause of
quarrel--of the actual cause, always. Their shares in the fruits of
victory are about equal, for the chief takes all the dead, the general
all the glory.


II

Transplanted institutions grow slowly; civilization can not be put into
a ship and carried across an ocean. The history of this country is a
sequence of illustrations of these truths. It was settled by civilized
men and women from civilized countries, yet after two and a half
centuries, with unbroken communication with the mother systems, it is
still imperfectly civilized. In learning and letters, in art and the
science of government, America is but a faint and stammering echo of
Europe.

For nearly all that is good in our American civilization we
are indebted to the Old World; the errors and mischiefs are of our own
creation. We have originated little, because there is little to
originate, but we have unconsciously reproduced many of the discredited
systems of former ages and other countries--receiving them at second
hand, but making them ours by the sheer strength and immobility of the
national belief in their novelty. Novelty! Why, it is not possible to
make an experiment in government, in art, in literature, in sociology,
or in morals, that has not been made over, and over, and over again.

The glories of England are our glories. She can achieve nothing that our
fathers did not help to make possible to her. The learning, the power,
the refinement of a great nation, are not the growth of a century, but
of many centuries; each generation builds upon the work of the
preceding. For untold ages our ancestors wrought to rear that "reverend
pile," the civilization of England. And shall we now try to belittle the
mighty structure because other though kindred hands are laying the top
courses while we have elected to found a new tower in another land? The
American eulogist of civilization who is not proud of his heritage in
England's glory is unworthy to enjoy his lesser heritage in the lesser
glory of his own country.

The English, are undoubtedly our intellectual superiors; and as the
virtues are solely the product of intelligence and cultivation--a rogue
being only a dunce considered from another point of view--they are our
moral superiors likewise. Why should they not be? Theirs is a land, not
of ugly schoolhouses grudgingly erected, containing schools supported by
such niggardly tax levies as a sparse and hard-handed population will
consent to pay, but of ancient institutions splendidly endowed by the
state and by centuries of private benefaction. As a means of dispensing
formulated ignorance our boasted public school system is not without
merit; it spreads out education sufficiently thin to give everyone
enough to make him a more competent fool than he would have been without
it; but to compare it with that which is not the creature of legislation
acting with malice aforethought, but the unnoted out-growth of ages, is
to be ridiculous. It is like comparing the laid-out town of a western
prairie, its right-angled streets, prim cottages, and wooden a-b-c
shops, with the grand old town of Oxford, topped with the clustered
domes and towers of its twenty-odd great colleges, the very names of
many of whose founders have perished from human record, as have the
chronicles of the times in which they lived.

It is not only that we have had to "subdue the wilderness"; our
educational conditions are adverse otherwise. Our political system is
unfavorable. Our fortunes, accumulated in one generation, are dispersed
in the next. If it takes three generations to make a gentleman one will
not make a thinker. Instruction is acquired, but capacity for
instruction is transmitted. The brain that is to contain a trained
intellect is not the result of a haphazard marriage between a clown and
a wench, nor does it get its tractable tissues from a hard-headed farmer
and a soft-headed milliner. If you confess the importance of race and
pedigree in a horse and a dog how dare you deny it in a man?

I do not hold that the political and social system that creates an
aristocracy of leisure is the best possible kind of human organization;
I perceive its disadvantages clearly enough. But I do hold that a system
under which most important public trusts, political and professional,
civil and military ecclesiastical and secular, are held by educated
men--that is, men of trained faculties and disciplined judgment--is
not an altogether faulty system.

It is a universal human weakness to disparage the knowledge that we do
not ourselves possess, but it is only my own beloved country that can
justly boast herself the last refuge and asylum of the impotents and
incapables who deny the advantage of all knowledge whatsoever. It was an
American senator who declared that he had devoted a couple of weeks to
the study of finance, and found the accepted authorities all wrong. It
was another American senator who, confronted with certain hostile facts
in the history of another country, proposed "to brush away all facts,
and argue the question on consideration of plain common sense."

Republican institutions have this disadvantage: by incessant changes in
the _personnel_ of government--to say nothing of the manner of men that
ignorant constituencies elect; and all constituencies are ignorant--we
attain to no fixed principles and standards. There is no such thing here
as a science of politics, because it is not to any one's interest to
make politics the study of his life. Nothing is settled; no truth finds
general acceptance. What we do one year we undo the next, and do over
again the year following. Our energy is wasted in, and our prosperity
suffers from, experiments endlessly repeated.

Every patriot believes his country better than any other country. Now,
they cannot all be the best; indeed, only one can be the best, and it
follows that the patriots of all the others have suffered themselves to
be misled by a mere sentiment into blind unreason. In its active
manifestation--it is fond of killing--patriotism would be well if it
were simply defensive; but it is also aggressive, and the same feeling
that prompts us to strike for our altars and our fires impels us over
the border to quench the fires and overturn the altars of our neighbors.
It is all very pretty and spirited, what the poets tell us about
Thermopylæ, but there was as much patriotism at one end of that pass as
there was at the other.

Patriotism deliberately and with folly aforethought subordinates the
interests of a whole to the interests of a part. Worse still, the
fraction so favored is determined by an accident of birth or residence.
The Western hoodlum who cuts the tail from a Chinaman's nowl, and would
cut the nowl from the body, if he dared, is simply a patriot with a
logical mind, having the courage of his opinions. Patriotism is fierce
as a fever, pitiless as the grave and blind as a stone.


III

There are two ways of clarifying liquids--ebullition and precipitation;
one forces the impurities to the surface as scum, the other sends them
to the bottom as dregs. The former is the more offensive, and that seems
to be our way; but neither is useful if the impurities are merely
separated but not removed. We are told with tiresome iteration that our
social and political systems are clarifying; but when is the skimmer to
appear? If the purpose of free institutions is good government where is
the good government?--when may it be expected to begin?--how is it to
come about? Systems of government have no sanctity; they are practical
means to a simple end--the public welfare; worthy of no respect if they
fail of its accomplishment. The tree is known by its fruit. Ours is
bearing crab-apples. If the body politic is constitutionally diseased,
as I verily believe; if the disorder inheres in the system; there is no
remedy. The fever must burn itself out, and then Nature will do the
rest. One does not prescribe what time alone can administer. We have put
our criminals and dunces into power; do we suppose they will efface
themselves? Will they restore to _us_ the power of governing _them_?
They must have their way and go their length. The natural and immemorial
sequence is: tyranny, insurrection, combat. In combat everything that
wears a sword has a chance--even the right. History does not forbid us
to hope. But it forbids us to rely upon numbers; they will be against
us. If history teaches anything worth learning it teaches that the
majority of mankind is neither good nor wise. When government is founded
upon the public conscience and the public intelligence the stability of
states is a dream.

In that moment of time that is covered by historical records we have
abundant evidence that each generation has believed itself wiser and
better than any of its predecessors; that each people has believed
itself to have the secret of national perpetuity. In support of this
universal delusion there is nothing to be said; the desolate places of
the earth cry out against it. Vestiges of obliterated civilizations
cover the earth; no savage but has camped upon the sites of proud and
populous cities; no desert but has heard the statesman's boast of
national stability. Our nation, our laws, our history--all shall go down
to everlasting oblivion with the others, and by the same road. But I
submit that we are traveling it with needless haste.

It can be spared--this Jonah's gourd civilization of ours. We have
hardly the rudiments of a true one; compared with the splendors of which
we catch dim glimpses in the fading past, ours are as an illumination of
tallow candles. We know no more than the ancients; we only know other
things, but nothing in which is an assurance of perpetuity, and little
that is truly wisdom. Our vaunted _elixir vitae_ is the art of
printing. What good will that do when posterity, struck by the
inevitable intellectual blight, shall have ceased to read what is
printed? Our libraries will become its stables, our books its fuel.

Ours is a civilization that might be heard from afar in space as a
scolding and a riot; a civilization in which the race has so
differentiated as to have no longer a community of interest and feeling;
which shows as a ripe result of the principles underlying it a
reasonless and rascally feud between rich and poor; in which one is
offered a choice (if one have the means to take it) between American
plutocracy and European militocracy, with an imminent chance of
renouncing either for a stultocratic republic with a headsman in the
presidential chair and every laundress in exile.

I have not a "solution" to the "labor problem." I have only a story.
Many and many years ago lived a man who was so good and wise that none
in all the world was so good and wise as he. He was one of those few
whose goodness and wisdom are such that after some time has passed their
foolish fellowmen begin to think them gods and treasure their words as
divine law; and by millions they are worshiped through centuries of
time. Amongst the utterances of this man was one command--not a new nor
perfect one--which has seemed to his adorers so preeminently wise that
they have given it a name by which it is known over half the world. One
of the sovereign virtues of this famous law is its simplicity, which is
such that all hearing must understand; and obedience is so easy that
any nation refusing is unfit to exist except in the turbulence and
adversity that will surely come to it. When a people would avert want
and strife, or, having them, would restore plenty and peace, this noble
commandment offers the only means--all other plans for safety or relief
are as vain as dreams, as empty as the crooning of hags. And behold,
here is it: "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them."

What! you unappeasable rich, coining the sweat and blood of your workmen
into drachmas, understanding the law of supply and demand as mandatory
and justifying your cruel greed by the senseless dictum that "business
is business"; you lazy workmen, railing at the capitalist by whose
desertion, when you have frightened away his capital, you
starve--rioting and shedding blood and torturing and poisoning by way of
answer to exaction and by way of exaction; you foul anarchists,
applauding with untidy palms when one of your coward kind hurls a bomb
amongst powerless and helpless women and children; you imbecile
politicians with a plague of remedial legislation for the irremediable;
you writers and thinkers unread in history, with as many "solutions to
the labor problem" as there are among you those who can not coherently
define it--do you really think yourselves wiser than Jesus of Nazareth?
Do you seriously suppose yourselves competent to amend his plan for
dealing with evils besetting nations and souls? Have you the effrontery
to believe that those who spurn his Golden Rule you can bind to
obedience of an act entitled an act to amend an act? Bah! you fatigue
the spirit. Go get ye to your scoundrel lockouts, your villain strikes,
your blacklisting, your boycotting, your speeching, marching and
maundering; but if ye do not to others as ye would that they do to you
it shall occur, and that right soon, that ye be drowned in your own
blood and your pick-pocket civilization quenched as a star that falls
into the sea.




THE GIFT O' GAB


A book entitled _Forensic Eloquence_, by Mr. John Goss, appears to have
for purpose to teach the young idea how to spout, and that purpose, I
dare say, it will accomplish if something is not done to prevent. I know
nothing of the matter myself, a strong distaste for forensic eloquence,
or eloquence of any kind implying a man mounted on his legs and doing
all the talking, having averted me from its study. The training of the
youth of this country to utterance of themselves after that fashion I
should regard as a disaster of magnitude. So far as I know it, forensic
eloquence is the art of saying things in such a way as to make them pass
for more than they are worth. Employed in matters of importance (and for
other employment it were hardly worth acquiring) it is mischievous
because dishonest and misleading. In the public service Truth toils best
when not clad in cloth-of-gold and bedaubed with fine lace. If eloquence
does not beget action it is valueless; but action which results from the
passions, sentiments and emotions is less likely to be wise than that
which comes of a persuaded judgment. For that reason I cannot help
thinking that the influence of Bismarck in German politics was more
wholesome than is that of Mr. John Temple Graves.

For eloquence _per se_--considered merely as an art of pleasing--I
entertain something of the respect evoked by success; for it always
pleases at least the speaker. It is to speech what an ornate style is to
writing--good and pleasant enough in its time and place and, like
pie-crust and the evening girl, destitute of any basis in common sense.
Forensic eloquence, on the contrary, has an all too sufficient
foundation in reason and the order of things: it promotes the ambition
of tricksters and advances the fortunes of rogues. For I take it that
the Ciceros, the Mirabeaus, the Burkes, the O'Connells, the Patrick
Henrys and the rest of them--pets of the text-bookers and scourges of
youth--belong in either the one category or the other, or in both.
Anyhow I find it impossible to think of them as highminded men and
right-forth statesmen--with their actors' tricks, their devices of the
countenance, inventions of gesture and other cunning expedients having
nothing to do with the matter in hand. Extinction of the orator I hold
to be the most beneficent possibility of evolution. If Mr. Goss has done
anything to retard that blessed time when the Bourke Cockrans shall
cease from troubling and the weary be at rest he is an enemy of his race.

"What!" exclaims the thoughtless reader--I have but one--"are not the
great forensic speeches by the world's famous orators good reading?
Considering them merely as literature do you not derive a high and
refining pleasure from them?" I do not: I find them turgid and tumid no
end. They are bad reading, though they may have been good hearing. In
order to enjoy them one must have in memory what, indeed, one is seldom
permitted to forget: that they were addressed to the ear; and in
imagination one must hold some shadowy simulacrum of the orator himself,
uttering his work. These conditions being fulfilled there remains for
application to the matter of the discourse too little attention to get
much good of it, and the total effect is confusion. Literature by which
the reader is compelled to bear in mind the producer and the
circumstances under which it was produced can be spared.




NATURA BENIGNA


It is not always on remote islands peopled with pagans that great
disasters occur, as memory witnesseth. Nor are the forces of nature
inadequate to production of a fiercer throe than any that we have known.
The situation is this: we are tied by the feet to a fragile shell
imperfectly confining a force powerful enough under favoring conditions,
to burst it asunder and set the fragments wallowing and grinding
together in liquid flame, in the blind fury of a readjustment. Nay, it
needs no such stupendous cataclysm to depeople this uneasy orb. Let but
a square mile be blown out of the bottom of the sea, or a great rift
open there. Is it to be supposed that we would be unaffected in the
altered conditions generated by a contest between the ocean and the
earth's molten core? These fatalities are not only possible but in the
highest degree probable. It is probable, indeed, that they have occurred
over and over again, effacing all the more highly organized forms of
life, and compelling the slow march of evolution to begin anew. Slow? On
the stage of Eternity the passing of races--the entrances and exits of
Life--are incidents in a brisk and lively drama, following one another
with confusing rapidity.

Mankind has not found it practicable to abandon and avoid those places
where the forces of nature have been most malign. The track, of the
Western tornado is speedily repeopled. San Francisco is still populous,
despite its earthquake, Galveston despite its storm, and even the courts
of Lisbon are not kept by the lion and the lizard. In the Peruvian
village straight downward into whose streets the crew of a United States
warship once looked from the crest of a wave that stranded her a half
mile inland are heard the tinkle of the guitar and the voices of
children at play. There are people living at Herculaneum and Pompeii. On
the slopes about Catania the goatherd endures with what courage he may
the trembling of the ground beneath his feet as old Enceladus again
turns over on his other side. As the Hoang-Ho goes back inside its banks
after fertilizing its contiguity with hydrate of China-man the living
agriculturist follows the receding wave, sets up his habitation beneath
the broken embankment, and again the Valley of the Gone Away blossoms
as the rose, its people diving with Death.

This matter can not be amended: the race exposes itself to peril because
it can do no otherwise. In all the world there is no city of refuge--no
temple in which to take sanctuary, clinging to the horns of the
altar--no "place apart" where, like hunted deer, we can hope to elude
the baying pack of Nature's malevolences. The dead-line is drawn at the
gate of life: Man crosses it at birth. His advent is a challenge to the
entire pack--earthquake, storm, fire, flood, drought, heat, cold, wild
beasts, venomous reptiles, noxious insects, bacilli, spectacular plague
and velvet-footed household disease--all are fierce and tireless in
pursuit. Dodge, turn and double how he can, there's no eluding them;
soon or late some of them have him by the throat and his spirit returns
to the God who gave it--and gave them.

We are told that this earth was made for our inhabiting. Our dearly
beloved brethren in the faith, our spiritual guides, philosophers and
friends of the pulpit, never tire of pointing out the goodness of God in
giving us so excellent a place to live in and commending the admirable
adaptation of all things to our needs.

What a fine world it is, to be sure--a darling little world, "so suited
to the needs of man." A globe of liquid fire, straining within a shell
relatively no thicker than that of an egg--a shell constantly cracking
and in momentary danger of going all to pieces! Three-fourths of this
delectable field of human activity are covered with an element in which
we can not breathe, and which swallows us by myriads:

  With moldering bones the deep is white
  From the frozen zones to the tropic bright.

Of the other one-fourth more than one-half is uninhabitable by reason of
climate. On the remaining one-eighth we pass a comfortless and
precarious existence in disputed occupancy with countless ministers of
death and pain--pass it in fighting for it, tooth and nail, a hopeless
battle in which we are foredoomed to defeat. Everywhere death, terror,
lamentation and the laughter that is more terrible than tears--the fury
and despair of a race hanging on to life by the tips of its fingers. And
the prize for which we strive, "to have and to hold"--what is it? A
thing that is neither enjoyed while had, or missed when lost. So
worthless it is, so unsatisfying, so inadequate to purpose, so false to
hope and at its best so brief, that for consolation and compensation we
set up fantastic faiths of an aftertime in a better world from which no
confirming whisper has ever reached us across the void. Heaven is a
prophecy uttered by the lips of despair, but Hell is an inference from
analogy.




THE DEATH PENALTY


I

"Down with the gallows!" is a cry not unfamiliar in America. There is
always a movement afoot to make odious the just principle; of "a life
for a life"--to represent it as "a relic of barbarism," "a usurpation of
the divine authority," and the rest of it. The law making murder
punishable by death is as purely a measure of self-defense as is the
display of a pistol to one diligently endeavoring to kill without
provocation. It is in precisely the same sense an admonition, a warning
to abstain from crime. Society says by that law: "If you kill one of us
you die," just as by display of the pistol the individual whose life is
attacked says: "Desist or be shot." To be effective the warning in
either case must be more than an idle threat. Even the most unearthly
reasoner among the anti-hanging unfortunates would hardly expect to
frighten away an assassin who knew the pistol to be unloaded. Of course
these queer illogicians can not be made to understand that their
position commits them to absolute non-resistance to any kind of
aggression; and that is fortunate for the rest of us, for if as
Christians they frankly and consistently took that ground we should be
under the miserable necessity of respecting them.

We have good reason to hold that the horrible prevalence of murder in
this country is due to the fact that we do not execute our laws--that
the death penalty is threatened but not inflicted--that the pistol is
not loaded. In civilized countries where there is enough respect for the
laws to administer them, there is enough to obey them. While man still
has as much of the ancestral brute as his skin can hold without cracking
we shall have thieves and demagogues and anarchists and assassins and
persons with a private system of lexicography who define murder as
disease and hanging as murder, but in all this welter of crime and
stupidity are areas where human life is comparatively secure against the
human hand. It is at least a significant coincidence that in these the
death penalty for murder is fairly well enforced by judges who do not
derive any part of their authority from those for whose restraint and
punishment they hold it. Against the life of one guiltless person the
lives of ten thousand murderers count for nothing; their hanging is a
public good, without reference to the crimes that disclose their
deserts. If we could discover them by other signs than their bloody
deeds they should be hanged anyhow. Unfortunately we must have a death
as evidence. The scientist who will tell us how to recognize the
potential assassin, and persuade us to kill him, will be the greatest
benefactor of his century.

What would these enemies of the gibbet have--these lineal descendants
of the drunken mobs that hooted the hangman at Tyburn Tree; this progeny
of criminals, which has so defiled with the mud of its animosity the
noble office of public, executioner that even "in this enlightened age"
he shirks his high duty, entrusting it to a hidden or unnamed
subordinate? If murder is unjust of what importance is it whether its
punishment by death be just or not?--nobody needs to incur it. Men are
not drafted for the death penalty; they volunteer. "Then it is not
deterrent," mutters the gentleman whose rude forefather hooted the
hangman. Well, as to that, the law which is to accomplish more than a
part of its purpose must be awaited with great patience. Every murder
proves that hanging is not altogether deterrent; every hanging, that it
is somewhat deterrent--it deters the person hanged. A man's first murder
is his crime, his second is ours.

The socialists, it seems, believe with Alphonse Karr, in the expediency
of abolishing the death penalty; but apparently they do not hold, with
him, that the assassins should begin. They want the state to begin,
believing that the magnanimous example will effect a change of heart in
those about to murder. This, I take it, is the meaning of their
assertion that death penalties have not the deterring influence that
imprisonment for life carries. In this they obviously err: death deters
at least the person who suffers it--he commits no more murder; whereas
the assassin who is imprisoned for life and immune from further
punishment may with impunity kill his keeper or whomsoever he may be
able to get at. Even as matters now are, incessant vigilance is required
to prevent convicts in prison from murdering their attendants and one
another. How would it be if the "life-termer" were assured against any
additional inconvenience for braining a guard occasionally, or
strangling a chaplain now and then? A penitentiary may be described as a
place of punishment and reward; and under the system proposed, the
difference in desirableness between a sentence and an appointment would
be virtually effaced. To overcome this objection a life sentence would
have to mean solitary confinement, and that means insanity. Is that what
these gentlemen propose to substitute for death?

The death penalty, say these amiables and futilitarians, creates
blood-thirstiness in the unthinking masses and defeats its own ends--is
itself a cause of murder, not a check. These gentlemen are themselves of
"the unthinking masses"--they do not know how to think. Let them try to
trace and lucidly expound the chain of motives lying between the
knowledge that a murderer has been hanged and the wish to commit a
murder. How, precisely, does the one beget the other? By what unearthly
process of reasoning does a man turning away from the gallows persuade
himself that it is expedient to incur the danger of hanging? Let us have
pointed out to us the several steps in that remarkable mental progress.
Obviously, the thing is absurd; one might as reasonably say that
contemplation of a pitted face will make a man wish to go and catch
smallpox, or the spectacle of an amputated limb on the scrap-heap of a
hospital tempt him to cut off his arm or renounce his leg.

"An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth," say the opponents of the
death penalty, "is not justice; it is revenge and unworthy of a
Christian civilization." It is exact justice: nobody can think of
anything more accurately just than such punishments would be, whatever
the motive in awarding them. Unfortunately such a system is not
practicable, but he who denies its justice must deny also the justice of
a bushel of corn for a bushel of corn, a dollar for a dollar, service
for service. We can not undertake by such clumsy means as laws and
courts to do to the criminal exactly what he has done to his victim,
but to demand a life for a life is simple, practicable, expedient and
(therefore) right.

"Taking the life of a murderer does not restore the life he took,
therefore it is a most illogical punishment. Two wrongs do not make a
right."

Here's richness! Hanging an assassin is illogical because it does not
restore the life of his victim; incarceration is logical; therefore,
incarceration does--_quod, erat demonstrandum._

Two wrongs certainly do not make a right, but the veritable thing in
dispute is whether taking the life of a life-taker is a wrong. So naked
and unashamed an example of _petitio principii_ would disgrace a debater
in a pinafore. And these wonder-mongers have the effrontery to babble of
"logic"! Why, if one of them were to meet a syllogism in a lonely road
he would run away in a hundred and fifty directions as hard as ever he
could hoof it. One is almost ashamed to dispute with such intellectual
cloutlings.

Whatever an individual may rightly do to protect himself society may
rightly do to protect him, for he is a part of itself. If he may rightly
take life in defending himself society may rightly take life in
defending him. If society may rightly take life in defending him it may
rightly threaten to take it. Having rightly and mercifully threatened to
take it, it not only rightly may take it, but expediently must.


II

The law of a life for a life does not altogether prevent murder. No law
can altogether prevent any form of crime, nor is it desirable that it
should. Doubtless God could so have created us that our sense of right
and justice could have existed without contemplation of injustice and
wrong; as doubtless he could so have created us that we could have felt
compassion without a knowledge of suffering; but he did not. Constituted
as we are, we can know good only by contrast with evil. Our sense of sin
is what our virtues feed upon; in the thin air of universal morality the
altar-fires of honor and the beacons of conscience could not be kept
alight. A community without crime would be a community without warm and
elevated sentiments--without the sense of justice, without generosity,
without courage, without mercy, without magnanimity--a community of
small, smug souls, uninteresting to God and uncoveted by the Devil. We
can have, and do have, too much crime, no doubt; what the wholesome
proportion is none can tell. Just now we are running a good deal to
murder, but he who can gravely attribute that phenomenon, or any part of
it, to infliction of the death penalty, instead of to virtual immunity
from any penalty at all, is justly entitled to the innocent satisfaction
that comes of being a simpleton.


III

The New Woman is against the death penalty, naturally, for she is hot
and hardy in the conviction that whatever is is wrong. She has visited
this world in order to straighten things about a bit, and is in distress
lest the number of things be insufficient to her need. The matter is
important variously; not least so in its relation to the new heaven and
the new earth that are to be the outcome of woman suffrage. There can be
no doubt that the vast majority of women have sentimental objections to
the death penalty that quite outweigh such practical considerations in
its favor as they can be persuaded to comprehend. Aided by the minority
of men afflicted by the same mental malady, they will indubitably effect
its abolition in the first lustrum of their political "equality." The
New Woman will scarcely feel the seat of power warm beneath her before
giving to the assassin's "unhand me, villain!" the authority of law. So
we shall make again the old experiment, discredited by a thousand
failures, of preventing crime by tenderness to caught criminals. And the
criminal uncaught will treat us to a quantity and quality of crime
notably augmented by the Christian spirit of the new _régime_.


IV

As to painless execution, the simple and practical way to make them both
just and expedient is the adoption by murderers of a system of painless
assassinations. Until this is done there seems to be no call to
renounce the wholesome discomfort of the style of executions endeared to
us by memories and associations of the tenderest character. There is, I
fancy, a shaping notion in the observant mind that the penologists and
their allies have gone about as far as they can safely be permitted to
go in the direction of a softer suasion of the criminal nature toward
good behavior. The modern prison has become a rather more comfortable
habitation than the dangerous classes are accustomed to at home. Modern
prison life has in their eyes something of the charm and glamor of an
ideal existence, like that in the Happy Valley from which Rasselas had
the folly to escape. Whatever advantages to the public may be secured by
abating the rigors of imprisonment and inconveniences incident to
execution, there is this objection: it makes them less deterrent. Let
the penologers and philanthropers have their way and even hanging might
be made so pleasant and withal so interesting a social distinction that
it would deter nobody but the person hanged. Adopt the euthanasian
method of electricity, asphyxia by smothering in rose-leaves, or slow
poisoning with rich food, and the death penalty may come to be regarded
as the object of a noble ambition to the _bon vivant_, and the rising
young suicide may go and kill somebody else instead of himself, in order
to receive from the public executioner a happier dispatch than his own
'prentice hand can assure him.

But the advocates of agreeable pains and penalties tell us that in the
darker ages, when cruel and degrading punishment was the rule, and was
freely inflicted for every light infraction of the law, crime was more
common than it is now; and in this they appear to be right. But one and
all, they overlook a fact equally obvious and vastly significant, that
the intellectual, moral and social condition of the masses was very low.
Crime was more common because ignorance was more common, poverty was
more common, sins of authority, and therefore hatred of authority, were
more common. The world of even a century ago was a different world from
the world of today, and a vastly more uncomfortable one. The popular
adage to the contrary notwithstanding, human nature was not by a long
cut the same then that it is now. In the very ancient time of that early
English king, George III, when women were burned at the stake in public
for various offenses and men were hanged for "coining" and children for
theft, and in the still remoter period (_circa_ 1530), when prisoners
were boiled in several waters, divers sorts of criminals were
disemboweled and some are thought to have undergone the _peine forte et
dure_ of cold-pressing (an infliction which the pen of Hugo has since
made popular--in literature)--in these wicked old days crime flourished,
not because of the law's severity, but in spite of it. It is possible
that our law-making ancestors understood the situation as it then was a
trifle better than we can understand it on the hither side of this gulf
of years, and that they were not the reasonless barbarians that we
think them to have been. And if they were, what must have been the
unreason and barbarity of the criminal element with which they had to
deal?

I am far from thinking that severity of punishment can have the same
restraining effect as probability of some punishment being inflicted;
but if mildness of penalty is to be superadded to difficulty of
conviction, and both are to be mounted upon laxity in detection, the
pile will be complete indeed. There is a peculiar fitness, perhaps, in
the fact that all these pleas for comfortable punishment should be urged
at a time when there appears to be a general disposition to inflict no
punishment at all. There are, however, still a few old-fashioned persons
who hold it obvious that one who is ambitious to break the laws of his
country will not with so light a heart and so airy an indifference incur
the peril of a harsh penalty as he will the chance of one more nearly
resembling that which he would himself select.


V

After lying for more than a century dead I was revived, dowered with a
new body, and restored to society. The first thing of interest that I
observed was an enormous building, covering a square mile of ground. It
was surrounded on all sides by a high, strong wall of hewn stone upon
which armed sentinels paced to and fro. In one face of the wall was a
single gate of massive iron, strongly guarded. While admiring the
Cyclopean architecture of the "reverend pile" I was accosted by a man in
uniform, evidently the warden, with a cheerful salutation.

"Colonel," I said, "pray tell me what is this building."

"This," said he, "is the new state penitentiary. It is one of twelve,
all alike."

"You surprise me," I replied. "Surely the criminal element must have
increased enormously."

"Yes, indeed," he assented; "under the Reform _régime_, which began in
your day, crime became so powerful, bold and fierce that arrests were no
longer possible and the prisons then in existence were soon overcrowded.
The state was compelled to erect others of greater capacity."

"But, Colonel," I protested, "if the criminals were too bold and
powerful to be taken into custody, of what use are the prisons? And how
are they crowded?"

He fixed upon me a look that I could not fail to interpret as expressing
a doubt of my sanity. "What!" he said, "is it possible that the modern
penology is unknown to you? Do you suppose we practice the antiquated
and ineffective method of shutting up the rascals? Sir, the growth of
the criminal element has, as I said, compelled the erection of more and
larger prisons. We have enough to hold comfortably all the honest men
and women of the state. Within these protecting walls they carry on all
the necessary vocations of life excepting commerce. That is necessarily
in the hands of the rogues, as before."

"Venerated representative of Reform," I exclaimed, wringing his hand
with effusion, "you are Knowledge, you are History, you are the Higher
Education! We must talk further. Come, let us enter this benign edifice;
you shall show me your dominion and instruct me in the rules. You shall
propose me as an inmate."

I walked rapidly to the gate. When challenged by the sentinel, I turned
to summon my instructor. He was nowhere visible. I turned again to look
at the prison. Nothing was there: desolate and forbidding, as about the
broken statue of Ozymandias.

The lone and level sands stretched far away.




IMMORTALITY


The desire for life everlasting has commonly been affirmed to be
universal--at least that is the view taken by those unacquainted with
Oriental faiths and with Oriental character. Those of us whose knowledge
is a trifle wider are not prepared to say that the desire is universal
nor even general.

If the devout Buddhist, for example, wishes to "live always," he has not
succeeded in very clearly formulating the desire. The sort of thing that
he is pleased to hope for is not what we should call life, and not what
many of us would care for.

When a man says that everybody has "a horror of annihilation," we may
be very sure that he has not many opportunities for observation, or that
he has not availed himself of all that he has. Most persons go to sleep
rather gladly, yet sleep is virtual annihilation while it lasts; and if
it should last forever the sleeper would be no worse off after a million
years of it than after an hour of it. There are minds sufficiently
logical to think of it that way, and to them annihilation is not a
disagreeable thing to contemplate and expect.

In this matter of immortality, people's beliefs appear to go along with
their wishes. The man who is content with annihilation thinks he will
get it; those that want immortality are pretty sure they are immortal;
and that is a very comfortable allotment of faiths. The few of us that
are left unprovided for are those who do not bother themselves much
about the matter, one way or another.

The question of human immortality is the most momentous that the mind is
capable of conceiving. If it is a fact that the dead live all other
facts are in comparison trivial and without interest. The prospect of
obtaining certain knowledge with regard to this stupendous matter is not
encouraging. In all countries but those in barbarism the powers of the
profoundest and most penetrating intelligences have been ceaselessly
addressed to the task of glimpsing a life beyond this life; yet today no
one can truly say that he knows. It is as much a matter of faith as ever
it was.

Our modern Christian nations profess a passionate hope and belief in
another world, yet the most popular writer and speaker of his time, the
man whose lectures drew the largest audiences, the work of whose pen
brought him the highest rewards, was he who most strenuously strove to
destroy the ground of that hope and unsettle the foundations of that
belief.

The famous and popular Frenchman, Professor of Spectacular Astronomy,
Camille Flammarion, affirms immortality because he has talked with
departed souls who said that it was true. Yes, monsieur, but surely you
know the rule about hearsay evidence. We Anglo-Saxons are very
particular about that.

M. Flammarion says:

"I don't repudiate the presumptive arguments of schoolmen. I merely
supplement them with something positive. For instance, if you assumed
the existence of God this argument of the scholastics is a good one. God
has implanted in all men the desire of perfect happiness. This desire
cannot be satisfied in our lives here. If there were not another life
wherein to satisfy it then God would be a deceiver. _Voila tout_."

There is more: the desire of perfect happiness does not imply
immortality, even if there is a God, for

(1) God may not have implanted it, but merely suffers it to exist, as he
suffers sin to exist, the desire of wealth, the desire to live longer
than we do in this world. It is not held that God implanted all the
desires of the human heart. Then why hold that he implanted that of
perfect happiness?

(2) Even if he did--even if a divinely implanted desire entail its own
gratification--even if it cannot be gratified in this life--that does
not imply immortality. It implies _only_ another life long enough for
its gratification just once. An eternity of gratification is not a
logical inference from it.

(3) Perhaps God _is_ "a deceiver;" who knows that he is not? Assumption
of the existence of a God is one thing; assumption of the existence of a
God who is honorable and candid according to our conception of honor and
candor is another.

(4) There may be an honorable and candid God. He may have implanted in
us the desire of perfect happiness. It may be--it is--impossible to
gratify that desire in this life. Still, another life is not implied,
for God may not have intended us to draw the inference that he is going
to gratify it. If omniscient and omnipotent, God must be held to have
intended whatever occurs, but no such God is assumed in M. Flammarion's
illustration, and it may be that God's knowledge and power are limited,
or that one of them is limited.

M. Flammarion is a learned, if somewhat theatrical, astronomer. He has a
tremendous imagination, which naturally is more at home in the marvelous
and catastrophic than in the orderly regions of familiar phenomena. To
him the heavens are an immense pyrotechnicon and he is the master of the
show and sets off the fireworks. But he knows nothing of logic, which is
the science of straight thinking, and his views of things have
therefore no value; they are nebulous.

Nothing is clearer than that our pre-existence is a dream, having
absolutely no basis in anything that we know or can hope to know. Of
after-existence there is said to be evidence, or rather testimony, in
assurances of those who are in present enjoyment of it--if it is
enjoyable. Whether this testimony has actually been given--and it is the
only testimony worth a moment's consideration--is a disputed point. Many
persons living this life profess to have received it. But nobody
professes, or ever has professed, to have received a communication of
any kind from one in actual experience of the fore-life. "The souls as
yet ungarmented," if such there are, are dumb to question. The Land
beyond the Grave has been, if not observed, yet often and variously
described: if not explored and surveyed, yet carefully charted. From
among so many accounts of it that we have, he must be fastidious indeed
who cannot be suited. But of the Fatherland that spreads before the
cradle--the great Heretofore, wherein we all dwelt if we are to dwell in
the Hereafter, we have no account. Nobody professes knowledge of that.
No testimony reaches our ears of flesh concerning its topographical or
other features; no one has been so enterprising as to wrest from its
actual inhabitants any particulars of their character and appearance.
And among educated experts and professional proponents of worlds to be
there is a general denial of its existence.

I am of their way of thinking about that. The fact that we have no
recollection of a former life is entirely conclusive of the matter. To
have lived an unrecollected life is impossible and unthinkable, for
there would be nothing to connect the new life with the old--no thread
of continuity--nothing that persisted from the one life to the other.
The later birth would be that of another person, an altogether different
being, unrelated to the first--a new John Smith succeeding to the late
Tom Jones.

Let us not be misled here by a false analogy. Today I may get a thwack
o' the mazzard which will give me an intervening season of
unconsciousness between yesterday and to-morrow. Thereafter I may live to
a green old age with no recollection of anything that I knew, or did, or
was before the accident; yet I shall be the same person, for between the
old life and the new there will be a _nexus_, a thread of continuity,
something spanning the gulf from the one state to the other, and the
same in both--namely, my body with its habits, capacities and powers.
That is I; that identifies me to others as my former self--authenticates
and credentials me as the person that incurred the cranial mischance,
dislodging memory.

But when death occurs _all_ is dislodged if memory is; for between two
merely mental or spiritual existences memory is the only _nexus_
conceivable; consciousness of identity is the only identity. To live
again without memory of having lived before is to live another.
Re-existence without recollection is absurd. There is nothing to
re-exist.




EMANCIPATED WOMAN


What I should like to know is, how "the enlargement of woman's sphere"
by her entrance into various activities of commercial, professional and
industrial life benefits the sex. It may please Helen Gougar and satisfy
her sense of logical accuracy to say, as she does: "We women must work
in order to fill the places left vacant by liquor-drinking men." But who
filled these places before? Did they remain vacant, or were there then
disappointed applicants, as now? If my memory serves, there has been no
time in the period that it covers when the supply of workers--abstemious
male workers--was not in excess of the demand. That it has always been
so is sufficiently attested by the universally inadequate wage rate.

Employers seldom fail, and never for long, to get all the workmen they
need. The field into which women have put their sickles was already
overcrowded with reapers. Whatever employment women have obtained has
been got by displacing men--who would otherwise be supporting women.
Where is the general advantage? We may shout "high tariff," "combination
of capital," "demonetization of silver," and what not, but if searching
for the cause of augmented poverty and crime, "industrial discontent"
and the tramp evil, instead of dogmatically expounding it, we should
take some account of this enormous, sudden addition to the number of
workers seeking work. If any one thinks that within the brief period of
a generation the visible supply of labor can be enormously augmented
without profoundly affecting the stability of things and disastrously
touching the interests of wage-workers let no rude voice dispel his
dream of such maleficent agencies as his slumbrous understanding may joy
to affirm. And let our Widows of Ashur unlung themselves in advocacy of
quack remedies for evils of which themselves are cause; it remains true
that when the contention of two lions for one bone is exacerbated by the
accession of a lioness the squabble is not composable by stirring up
some bears in the cage adjacent.

Indubitably a woman is under no obligation to sacrifice herself to the
good of her sex by foregoing needed employment in the hope that it may
fall to a man gifted with dependent women. Nevertheless our
congratulations are more intelligent when bestowed upon her individual
head than when sifted into the hair of all Eve's daughters. This is a
world of complexities, in which the lines of interest are so
intertangled as frequently to transgress that of sex; and one ambitious
to help but half the race may profitably know that every effort to that
end provokes a counterbalancing mischief. The "enlargement of woman's
opportunities" has benefited individual women. It has not benefited the
sex as a whole, and has distinctly damaged the race. The mind that can
not discern a score of great and irreparable general evils distinctly
traceable to "emancipation of woman" is as impregnable to the light as a
toad in a rock.

A marked demerit of the new order of things--the _régime_ of female
commercial service--is that its main advantage accrues, not to the race,
not to the sex, not to the class, not to the individual woman, but to
the person of least need and worth--the male employer. (Female employers
in any considerable number there will not be, but those that we have
could give the male ones profitable instruction in grinding the faces of
their employees.) This constant increase of the army of labor--always and
everywhere too large for the work in sight--by accession of a new
contingent of natural oppressibles makes the very teeth of old Munniglut
thrill with a poignant delight. It brings in that situation known as two
laborers seeking one job--and one of them a person whose bones he can
easily grind to make his bread; and Munniglut is a miller of skill and
experience, dusted all over with the evidence of his useful craft. When
Heaven has assisted the Daughters of Hope to open to women a new "avenue
of opportunities" the first to enter and walk therein, like God in the
Garden of Eden, is the good Mr. Munniglut, contentedly smoothing the
folds out of the superior slope of his paunch, exuding the peculiar
aroma of his oleaginous personality and larding the new roadway with
the overflow of a righteousness stimulated to action by relish of his
own identity. And ever thereafter the subtle suggestion of a fat
philistinism lingers along that path of progress like an assertion of a
possessory right.

It is God's own crystal truth that in dealing with women unfortunate
enough to be compelled to earn their own living and fortunate enough to
have wrested from Fate an opportunity to do so, men of business and
affairs treat them with about the same delicate consideration that they
show to dogs and horses of the inferior breeds. It does not commonly
occur to the wealthy "professional man," or "prominent merchant," to be
ashamed to add to his yearly thousands a part of the salary justly due
to his female bookkeeper or typewriter, who sits before him all day with
an empty belly in order to have an habilimented back. He has a vague,
hazy notion that the law of supply and demand is mandatory, and that in
submitting himself to it by paying her a half of what he would have to
pay a man of inferior efficiency he is supplying the world with a noble
example of obedience. I must take the liberty to remind him that the law
of supply and demand is not imperative; it is not a statute but a
phenomenon. He may reply: "It is imperative; the penalty for
disobedience is failure. If I pay more in salaries and wages than I need
to, my competitor will not; and with that advantage he will drive me
from the field." If his margin of profit is so small that he must eke it
out by coining the sweat of his workwomen into nickels I've nothing to
say to him. Let him adopt in peace the motto, "I cheat to eat." I do not
know why he should eat, but Nature, who has provided sustenance for the
worming sparrow, the sparrowing owl and the owling eagle, approves the
needy man of prey and makes a place for him at table.

Human nature is pretty well balanced; for every lacking virtue there is
a rough substitute that will serve at a pinch--as cunning is the wisdom
of the unwise, and ferocity the courage of the coward. Nobody is
altogether bad; the scoundrel who has grown rich by underpaying workmen
in his factory will sometimes endow an asylum for indigent seamen. To
oppress one's own workmen, and provide for the workmen of a neighbor--to
skin those in charge of one's own interests while cottoning and oiling
the residuary product of another's skinnery--that is not very good
benevolence, nor very good sense, but it serves in place of both. The
man who eats _pâté de fois gras_ in the sweat of his girl cashier's
face, or wears purple and fine linen in order that his typewriter may
have an eocene gown and a pliocene hat, seems a tolerably satisfactory
specimen of the genus thief; but let us not forget that in his own
home--a fairly good one--he may enjoy and merit that highest and most
honorable title on the scroll of woman's favor, "a good provider." One
having a claim to that glittering distinction should enjoy immunity from
the coarse and troublesome question, "From whose backs and bellies do
you provide?"

So much for the material results to the sex. What are the moral results?
One does not like to speak of them, particularly to those who do not and
can not know--to good women in whose innocent minds female immorality is
inseparable from flashy gowning and the painted face; to foolish,
book-taught men who honestly believe in some protective sanctity that
hedges womanhood. If men of the world with years enough to have lived
out of the old _régime_ into the new would testify in this matter there
would ensue a great rattling of dry bones in bodices of reform-ladies.
Nay, if the young man about town, knowing nothing of how things were in
the "dark backward and absym of time," but something of the moral
distance between even so free-running a creature as the society girl and
the average working girl of the factory, the shop and the office, would
speak out (under assurance of immunity from prosecution) his testimony
would be a surprise to the cartilaginous virgins, blowsy matrons, acrid
relicts and hairy males of Emancipation. It would pain, too, some very
worthy but unobservant persons not in sympathy with "the cause."

Certain significant facts are within the purview of all but the very
young and the comfortably blind. To the woman of to-day the man of
to-day is imperfectly polite. In place of reverence he gives her
"deference"; to the language of compliment has succeeded the language of
raillery. Men have almost forgotten how to bow. Doubtless the advanced
female prefers the new manner, as may some of her less forward sisters,
thinking it more sincere. It is not; our giddy grandfather talked
high-flown nonsense because his heart had tangled his tongue. He treated
his woman more civilly than we ours because he loved her better. He
never had seen her on the "rostrum" and in the lobby, never had heard
her in advocacy of herself, never had read her confessions of his sins,
never had felt the stress of her competition, nor himself assisted by
daily personal contact in rubbing the bloom off her. He did not know
that her virtues were due to her secluded life, but thought, dear old
boy, that they were a gift of God.




A MAD WORLD


Let us suppose that in tracing its cycloidal curves through the
unthinkable reaches of space traversed by the solar system our planet
should pass through a "belt" of attenuated matter having the property of
dementing us! It is a conception easily enough entertained. That space
is full of malign conditions incontinuously distributed; that we are at
one time traversing a zone comparatively innocuous and at another
spinning through a region of infection; that away behind us in the wake
of our swirling flight are fields of plague and pain still agitated by
our passage through them,--all this is as good as known. It is almost as
certain as it is that in our little annual circle round the sun are
points at which we are stoned and brick-batted like a pig in a
potato-patch--pelted with little nodules of meteoric metal flung like
gravel, and bombarded with gigantic masses hurled by God knows what?
What strange adventures await us in those yet untraveled regions toward
which we speed?--into what malign conditions may we not at any time
plunge?--to the strength and stress of what frightful environment may
we not at last succumb? The subject lends itself readily enough to a
jest, but I am not jesting: it is really altogether probable that our
solar system, racing through space with inconceivable velocity, will one
day enter a region charged with something deleterious to the human
brain, minding us all mad-wise.

By the way, dear reader, did you ever happen to consider the possibility
that you are a lunatic, and perhaps confined in an asylum? It seems to
you that you are not--that you go with freedom where you will, and use a
sweet reasonableness in all your works and ways; but to many a lunatic
it seems that he is Rameses II, or the Holkar of Indore. Many a plunging
maniac, ironed to the floor of a cell, believes himself the Goddess of
Liberty careering gaily through the Ten Commandments in a chariot of
gold. Of your own sanity and identity you have no evidence that is any
better than he has of his. More accurately, I have none of mine; for
anything I know, you do not exist, nor any one of all the things with
which I think myself familiarly conscious. All may be fictions of my
disordered imagination. I really know of but one reason for doubting
that I am an inmate of an asylum for the insane--namely, the probability
that there is nowhere any such thing as an asylum for the insane.

This kind of speculation has charms that get a good neck-hold upon
attention. For example, if I am really a lunatic, and the persons and
things that I seem to see about me have no objective existence, what an
ingenious though disordered imagination I must have! What a clever
_coup_ it was to invent Mr. Rockefeller and clothe him with the
attribute of permanence! With what amusing qualities I have endowed my
laird of Skibo, philanthropist. What a masterpiece of creative humor is
my Fatty Taft, statesman, taking himself seriously, even solemnly, and
persuading others to do the same! And this city of Washington, with its
motley population of silurians, parvenoodles and scamps pranking
unashamed in the light of day, and its saving contingent of the forsaken
righteous, their seed begging bread,--did Rabelais' exuberant fancy ever
conceive so--but Rabelais is, perhaps, himself a conception.

Surely he is no common maniac who has wrought out of nothing the
history, the philosophies, sciences, arts, laws, religions, politics and
morals of this imaginary world. Nay, the world itself, tumbling uneasily
through space like a beetle's ball, is no mean achievement, and I am
proud of it. But the mental feat in which I take most satisfaction, and
which I doubt not is most diverting to my keepers, is that of creating
Mr. W.R. Hearst, pointing his eyes toward the White House and endowing
him with a perilous Jacksonian ambition to defile it. The Hearst is
distinctly a treasure.

On the whole, I have done, I think, tolerably well, and when I
contemplate the fertility and originality of my inventions, the queer
unearthliness and grotesque actions of the characters whom I have
evolved, isolated and am cultivating, I cannot help thinking that if
Heaven had not made me a lunatic my peculiar talent might have made me
an entertaining writer.




EPIGRAMS OF A CYNIC


If every hypocrite in the United States were to break his leg to-day
the country could be successfully invaded to-morrow by the warlike
hypocrites of Canada.

To Dogmatism the Spirit of Inquiry is the same as the Spirit of Evil,
and to pictures of the latter it appends a tail to represent the note of
interrogation.

"Immoral" is the judgment of the stalled ox on the gamboling lamb.

In forgiving an injury be somewhat ceremonious, lest your magnanimity be
construed as indifference.

True, man does not know woman. But neither does woman.

Age is provident because the less future we have the more we fear it.

Reason is fallible and virtue invincible; the winds vary and the needle
forsakes the pole, but stupidity never errs and never intermits. Since
it has been found that the axis of the earth wabbles, stupidity is
indispensable as a standard of constancy.

In order that the list of able women may be memorized for use at
meetings of the oppressed sex, Heaven has considerately made it brief.

Firmness is my persistency; obstinacy is yours.

  A little heap of dust,
  A little streak of rust,
  A stone without a name--
  Lo! hero, sword and fame.

Our vocabulary is defective; we give the same name to woman's lack of
temptation and man's lack of opportunity.

"You scoundrel, you have wronged me," hissed the philosopher. "May you
live forever!"

The man who thinks that a garnet can be made a ruby by setting it in
brass is writing "dialect" for publication.

"Who art thou, stranger, and what dost thou seek?" "I am Generosity, and
I seek a person named Gratitude." "Then thou dost not deserve to find
her." "True. I will go about my business and think of her no more. But
who art thou, to be so wise?" "I am Gratitude--farewell forever."

There was never a genius who was not thought a fool until he disclosed
himself; whereas he is a fool then only.

The boundaries that Napoleon drew have been effaced; the kingdoms that
he set up have disappeared. But all the armies and statecraft of Europe
cannot unsay what you have said.

  Strive not for singularity in dress;
  Fools have the more and men of sense the less.
  To look original is not worth while,
  But be in mind a little out of style.

A conqueror arose from the dead. "Yesterday," he said, "I ruled half the
world." "Please show me the half that you ruled," said an angel,
pointing out a wisp of glowing vapor floating in space. "That is the
world."

"Who art thou, shivering in thy furs?" "My name is Avarice. What is
thine?" "Unselfishness." "Where is thy clothing, placid one?" "Thou art
wearing it."

To be comic is merely to be playful, but wit is a serious matter. To
laugh at it is to confess that you do not understand.

If you would be accounted great by your contemporaries, be not too much
greater than they.

To have something that he will not desire, nor know that he has--such is
the hope of him who seeks the admiration of posterity. The character of
his work does not matter; he is a humorist.

Women, and foxes, being weak, are distinguished by superior tact.

To fatten pigs, confine and feed them; to fatten rogues, cultivate a
generous disposition.

Every heart is the lair of a ferocious animal. The greatest wrong that
you can put upon a man is to provoke him to let out his beast.

When two irreconcilable propositions are presented for assent the safest
way is to thank Heaven that we are not as the unreasoning brutes, and
believe both.

Truth is more deceptive than falsehood, for it is more frequently
presented by those from whom we do not expect it, and so has against it
a numerical presumption.

A bad marriage is like an electrical thrilling machine: it makes you
dance, but you can't let go.

Meeting Merit on a street-crossing, Success stood still. Merit stepped
off into the mud and went around him, bowing his apologies, which
Success had the grace to accept.

"I think," says the philosopher divine, "Therefore I am." Sir, here's a
surer sign: We know we live, for with our every breath we feel the fear
and imminence of death.

The first man you meet is a fool. If you do not think so ask him and he
will prove it.

He who would rather inflict injustice than suffer it will always have
his choice, for no injustice can be done to him.

There are as many conceptions of a perfect happiness hereafter as there
are minds that have marred their happiness here.

We yearn to be, not what we are, but what we are not. If we were
immortal we should not crave immortality.

A rabbit's foot may bring good luck to you, but it brought none to the
rabbit.

Before praising the wisdom of the man who knows how to hold his tongue
ascertain if he knows how to hold his pen.

The most charming view in the world is obtained by introspection.

Love is unlike chess, in that the pieces are moved secretly and the
player sees most of the game. But the looker-on has one incomparable
advantage: he is not the stake.

It is not for nothing that tigers choose to hide in the jungle, for
commerce and trade are carried on, mostly, in the open.

We say that we love, not whom we will, but whom we must. Our judgment
need not, therefore, go to confession.

Of two kinds of temporary insanity, one ends in suicide, the other in
marriage.

If you give alms from compassion, why require the beneficiary to be "a
deserving object?" No other adversity is so sharp as destitution of
merit.

Bereavement is the name that selfishness gives to a particular
privation.

  O proud philanthropist, your hope is vain
  To get by giving what you lost by gain.
  With every gift you do but swell the cloud
  Of witnesses against you, swift and loud--
  Accomplices who turn and swear you split
  Your life: half robber and half hypocrite.
  You're least unsafe when most intact you hold
  Your curst allotment of dishonest gold.

The highest and rarest form of contentment is approval of the success of
another.

  If Inclination challenge, stand and fight--
  From Opportunity the wise take flight.

What a woman most admires in a man is distinction among men. What a man
most admires in a woman is devotion to himself.

Those who most loudly invite God's attention to themselves when in peril
of death are those who should most fervently wish to escape his
observation.

When you have made a catalogue of your friend's faults it is only fair
to supply him with a duplicate, so that he may know yours.

How fascinating is Antiquity!--in what a golden haze the ancients lived
their lives! We, too, are ancients. Of our enchanting time Posterity's
great poets will sing immortal songs, and its archaeologists will
reverently uncover the foundations of our palaces and temples. Meantime
we swap jack-knives.

Observe, my son, with how austere a virtue the man without a cent puts
aside the temptation to manipulate the market or acquire a monopoly.

For study of the good and the bad in woman two women are a needless
expense.

  "There's no free will," says the philosopher;
    "To hang is most unjust."
  "There is no free will," assents the officer;
    "We hang because we must."

Hope is an explorer who surveys the country ahead. That is why we know
so much about the Hereafter and so little about the Heretofore.

Remembering that it was a woman who lost the world, we should accept the
act of cackling geese in saving Rome as partial reparation.

There are two classes of women who may do as they please; those who are
rich and those who are poor. The former can count on assent, the latter
on inattention.

When into the house of the heart Curiosity is admitted as the guest of
Love she turns her host out of doors.

Happiness has not to all the same name: to Youth she is known as the
Future; Age knows her as the Dream.

"Who art thou, there in the mire?" "Intuition. I leaped all the way
from where thou standest in fear on the brink of the bog." "A great
feat, madam; accept the admiration of Reason, sometimes known as
Dryfoot."

In eradicating an evil, it makes a difference whether it is uprooted or
rooted up. The difference is in the reformer.

The Audible Sisterhood rightly affirms the equality of the sexes: no man
is so base but some woman is base enough to love him.

Having no eyes in the back of the head, we see ourselves on the verge of
the outlook. Only he who has accomplished the notable feat of turning
about knows himself the central figure in the universe.

Truth is so good a thing that falsehood can not afford to be without it.

If women did the writing of the world, instead of the talking, men would
be regarded as the superior sex in beauty, grace and goodness.

Love is a delightful day's journey. At the farther end kiss your
companion and say farewell.

Let him who would wish to duplicate his every experience prate of the
value of life.

The game of discontent has its rules, and he who disregards them cheats.
It is not permitted to you to wish to add another's advantages or
possessions to your own; you are permitted only to wish to be another.

The creator and arbiter of beauty is the heart; to the male rattlesnake
the female rattlesnake is the loveliest thing in nature.

Thought and emotion dwell apart. When the heart goes into the head there
is no dissension; only an eviction.

If you want to read a perfect book there is only one way: write it.

"Where goest thou, Ignorance?" "To fortify the mind of a maiden against
a peril." "I am going thy way. My name is Knowledge." "Scoundrel! Thou
art the peril."

A prude is one who blushes modestly at the indelicacy of her thoughts
and virtuously flies from the temptation of her desires.

The man who is always taking you by the hand is the same who if you were
hungry would take you by the cafe.

When a certain sovereign wanted war he threw out a diplomatic
intimation; when ready, a diplomat.

If public opinion were determined by a throw of the dice, it would in
the long run be half the time right.

The gambling known as business looks with austere disfavor upon the
business known as gambling.

A virtuous widow is the most loyal of mortals; she is faithful to that
which is neither pleased nor profited by her fidelity.

Of one who was "foolish" the creators of our language said that he was
"fond." That we have not definitely reversed the meanings of the words
should be set down to the credit of our courtesy.

Rioting gains its end by the power of numbers. To a believer in the
wisdom and goodness of majorities it is not permitted to denounce a
successful mob.

  Artistically set to grace
  The wall of a dissecting-place,
  A human pericardium
  Was fastened with a bit of gum,
  While, simply underrunning it,
  The one word, "Charity," was writ
  To show the student band that hovered
  About it what it once had covered.

Virtue is not necessary to a good reputation, but a good reputation is
helpful to virtue.

When lost in a forest go always down hill. When lost in a philosophy or
doctrine go up-ward.

We submit to the majority because we have to. But we are not compelled
to call our attitude of subjection a posture of respect.

Pascal says that an inch added to the length of Cleopatra's nose would
have changed the fortunes of the world. But having said this, he has
said nothing, for all the forces of nature and all the power of
dynasties could not have added an inch to the length of Cleopatra's
nose.

Our luxuries are always masquerading as necessaries. Woman is the only
necessary having the boldness and address to compel recognition as a
luxury.

"I am the seat of the affections," said the heart. "Thank you," said the
judgment, "you save my face."

"Who art thou that weepest?" "Man." "Nay, thou art Egotism. I am the
Scheme of the Universe. Study me and learn that nothing matters." "Then
how does it happen that I weep?"

A slight is less easily forgiven than an injury, because it implies
something of contempt, indifference, an overlooking of our importance;
whereas an injury presupposes some degree of consideration. "The
blackguards!" said a traveler whom Sicilian brigands had released
without ransom; "did they think me a person of no consequence?"

The people's plaudits are unheard in hell.

Generosity to a fallen foe is a virtue that takes no chances.

If there was a world before this we must all have died impenitent.

We are what we laugh at. The stupid person is a poor joke, the clever, a
good one.

If every man who resents being called a rogue resented being one this
would be a world of wrath.

Force and charm are important elements of character, but it counts for
little to be stronger than honey and sweeter than a lion.

  Grief and discomfiture are coals that cool:
  Why keep them glowing with thy sighs, poor fool?

A popular author is one who writes what the people think. Genius invites
them to think something else.

Asked to describe the Deity, a donkey would represent him with long ears
and a tail. Man's conception is higher and truer: he thinks of him as
somewhat resembling a man.

Christians and camels receive their burdens kneeling.

The sky is a concave mirror in which Man sees his own distorted image
and seeks to propitiate it.

Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long in the land,
but do not hope that the life insurance companies will offer thee
special rates.

Persons who are horrified by what they believe to be Darwin's theory of
the descent of Man from the Ape may find comfort in the hope of his
return.

A strong mind is more easily impressed than a weak; you shall not so
readily convince a fool that you are a philosopher as a philosopher that
you are a fool.

A cheap and easy cynicism rails at everything. The master of the art
accomplishes the formidable task of discrimination.

When publicly censured our first instinct is to make everybody a
codefendant.

  O lady fine, fear not to lead
    To Hymen's shrine a clown:
  Love cannot level up, indeed,
    But he can level down.

Men are polygamous by nature and monogamous for opportunity. It is a
faithful man who is willing to be watched by a half-dozen wives.

The virtues chose Modesty to be their queen. "I did not know that I was
a virtue," she said. "Why did you not choose Innocence?" "Because of her
ignorance," they replied. "She knows nothing but that she is a virtue."

It is a wise "man's man" who knows what it is that he despises in a
"ladies' man."

If the vices of women worshiped their creators men would boast of the
adoration they inspire.

The only distinction that democracies reward is a high degree of
conformity.

Slang is the speech of him who robs the literary garbage carts on their
way to the dumps.

A woman died who had passed her life in affirming the superiority of her
sex. "At last," she said, "I shall have rest and honors." "Enter," said
Saint Peter; "thou shalt wash the faces of the dear little cherubim."

To woman a general truth has neither value nor interest unless she can
make a particular application of it. And we say that women are not
practical!

The ignorant know not the depth of their ignorance, but the learned know
the shallowness of their learning.

He who relates his success in charming woman's heart may be assured of
his failure to charm man's ear.

  What poignant memories the shadows bring
  What songs of triumph in the dawning ring!
  By night a coward and by day a king.

When among the graves of thy fellows, walk with circumspection; thine
own is open at thy feet.

As the physiognomist takes his own face as the highest type and
standard, so the critic's theories are imposed by his own limitations.

"Heaven lies about us in our infancy," and our neighbors take up the
tale as we mature.

  "My laws," she said, "are of myself a part:
    I read them by examining my heart."
  "True," he replied; "like those to Moses known,
    Thine also are engraven upon stone."

Love is a distracted attention: from contemplation of one's self one
turns to consider one's dream.

"Halt!--who goes there?" "Death." "Advance, Death, and give the
countersign." "How needless! I care not to enter thy camp tonight. Thou
shalt enter mine." "What! I a deserter?" "Nay, a great soldier. Thou
shalt overcome all the enemies of mankind." "Who are they?" "Life and
the Fear of Death."

The palmist looks at the wrinkles made by closing the hand and says they
signify character. The philosopher reads character by what the hand most
loves to close upon.

  Ah, woe is his, with length of living cursed,
  Who, nearing second childhood, had no first.
  Behind, no glimmer, and before no ray--
  A night at either end of his dark day.

A noble enthusiasm in praise of Woman is not incompatible with a
spirited zeal in defamation of women.

The money-getter who pleads his love of work has a lame defense, for
love of work at money-getting is a lower taste than love of money.

He who thinks that praise of mediocrity atones for disparagement of
genius is like one who should plead robbery in excuse of theft.

The most disagreeable form of masculine hypocrisy is that which finds
expression in pretended remorse for impossible gallantries.

Any one can say that which is new; any one that which is true. For that
which is both new and true we must go duly accredited to the gods and
await their pleasure.

The test of truth is Reason, not Faith; for to the court of Reason must
be submitted even the claims of Faith.

"Whither goest thou?" said the angel. "I know not." "And whence hast
thou come?" "I know not." "But who art thou?" "I know not." "Then thou
art Man. See that thou turn not back, but pass on to the place whence
thou hast come."

If Expediency and Righteousness are not father and son they are the most
harmonious brothers that ever were seen.

Train the head, and the heart will take care of itself; a rascal is one
who knows not how to think.

  Do you to others as you would
    That others do to you;
  But see that you no service good
  Would have from others that they could
    Not rightly do.

Taunts are allowable in the case of an obstinate husband: balky horses
may best be made to go by having their ears bitten.

Adam probably regarded Eve as the woman of his choice, and exacted a
certain gratitude for the distinction of his preference.

A man is the sum of his ancestors; to reform him you must begin with a
dead ape and work downward through a million graves. He is like the
lower end of a suspended chain; you can sway him slightly to the right
or the left, but remove your hand and he falls into line with the other
links.

He who thinks with difficulty believes with alacrity. A fool is a
natural proselyte, but he must be caught young, for his convictions,
unlike those of the wise, harden with age.

These are the prerogatives of genius: To know without having learned; to
draw just conclusions from unknown premises; to discern the soul of
things.

Although one love a dozen times, yet will the latest love seem the
first. He who says he has loved twice has not loved once.

Men who expect universal peace through invention of destructive weapons
of war are no wiser than one who, noting the improvement of agricultural
implements, should prophesy an end to the tilling of the soil.

To parents only, death brings an inconsolable sorrow. When the young die
and the old live, nature's machinery is working with the friction that
we name grief.

Empty wine bottles have a bad opinion of women.

Civilization is the child of human ignorance and conceit. If Man knew
his insignificance in the scheme of things he would not think it worth
while to rise from barbarity to enlightenment. But it is only through
enlightenment that he can know.

Along the road of life are many pleasure resorts, but think not that by
tarrying in them you will take more days to the journey. The day of your
arrival is already recorded.

The most offensive egotist is he that fears to say "I" and "me." "It
will probably rain"--that is dogmatic. "I think it will rain"--that is
natural and modest. Montaigne is the most delightful of essayists
because so great is his humility that he does not think it important
that we see not Montaigne. He so forgets himself that he employs no
artifice to make us forget him.

  On fair foundations Theocrats unwise
  Rear superstructures that offend the skies.
  "Behold," they cry, "this pile so fair and tall!
  Come dwell within it and be happy all."
  But they alone inhabit it, and find,
  Poor fools, 'tis but a prison for the mind.

If thou wilt not laugh at a rich man's wit thou art an anarchist, and if
thou take not his word thou shalt take nothing that he hath. Make haste,
therefore, to be civil to thy betters, and so prosper, for prosperity is
the foundation of the state.

Death is not the end; there remains the litigation over the estate.

When God makes a beautiful woman, the devil opens a new register.

When Eve first saw her reflection in a pool, she sought Adam and accused
him of infidelity.

"Why dost thou weep?" "For the death of my wife. Alas! I shall never
again see her!" "Thy wife will never again see thee, yet she does not
weep."

What theology is to religion and jurisprudence to justice, etiquette is
to civility.

"Who art thou that despite the piercing cold and thy robe's raggedness
seemest to enjoy thyself?" "Naught else is enjoyable--I am Contentment."
"Ha! thine must be a magic shirt. Off with it! I shiver in my fine
attire." "I have no shirt. Pass on, Success."

Ignorance when inevitable is excusable. It may be harmless, even
beneficial; but it is charming only to the unwise. To affect a spurious
ignorance is to disclose a genuine.

Because you will not take by theft what you can have by cheating, think
not yours is the only conscience in the world. Even he who permits you
to cheat his neighbor will shrink from permitting you to cheat himself.

"God keep thee, stranger; what is thy name?" "Wisdom. And thine?"
"Knowledge. How does it happen that we meet?" "This is an intersection
of our paths." "Will it ever be decreed that we travel always the same
road?" "We were well named if we knew."

Nothing is more logical than persecution. Religious tolerance is a kind
of infidelity.

Convictions are variable; to be always consistent is to be sometimes
dishonest.

The philosopher's profoundest conviction is that which he is most
reluctant to express, lest he mislead.

When exchange of identities is possible, be careful; you may choose a
person who is willing.

The most intolerant advocate is he who is trying to convince himself.

In the Parliament of Otumwee the Chancellor of the Exchequer proposed a
tax on fools. "The right honorable and generous gentleman," said a
member, "forgets that we already have it in the poll tax."

"Whose dead body is that?" "Credulity's." "By whom was he slain?"
"Credulity." "Ah, suicide." "No, surfeit. He dined at the table of
Science, and swallowed all that was set before him."

Don't board with the devil if you wish to be fat.

Pray do not despise your delinquent debtor; his default is no proof of
poverty.

Courage is the acceptance of the gambler's chance: a brave man bets
against the game of the gods.

"Who art thou?" "A philanthropist. And thou?" "A pauper." "Away! you
have nothing to relieve my needs."

Youth looks forward, for nothing is behind! Age backward, for nothing is
before.





A man stood upon a railroad bridge in northern Alabama, looking down
into the swift water twenty feet below.  The man's hands were behind
his back, the wrists bound with a cord.  A rope closely encircled his
neck.  It was attached to a stout cross-timber above his head and the
slack fell to the level of his knees.  Some loose boards laid upon the
ties supporting the rails of the railway supplied a footing for him
and his executioners--two private soldiers of the Federal army,
directed by a sergeant who in civil life may have been a deputy
sheriff.  At a short remove upon the same temporary platform was an
officer in the uniform of his rank, armed.  He was a captain.  A
sentinel at each end of the bridge stood with his rifle in the
position known as "support," that is to say, vertical in front of the
left shoulder, the hammer resting on the forearm thrown straight
across the chest--a formal and unnatural position, enforcing an erect
carriage of the body.  It did not appear to be the duty of these two
men to know what was occurring at the center of the bridge; they
merely blockaded the two ends of the foot planking that traversed it.

Beyond one of the sentinels nobody was in sight; the railroad ran
straight away into a forest for a hundred yards, then, curving, was
lost to view.  Doubtless there was an outpost farther along.  The
other bank of the stream was open ground--a gentle slope topped with
a stockade of vertical tree trunks, loopholed for rifles, with a
single embrasure through which protruded the muzzle of a brass cannon
commanding the bridge.  Midway up the slope between the bridge and
fort were the spectators--a single company of infantry in line, at
"parade rest," the butts of their rifles on the ground, the barrels
inclining slightly backward against the right shoulder, the hands
crossed upon the stock. A lieutenant stood at the right of the line,
the point of his sword upon the ground, his left hand resting upon his
right.  Excepting the group of four at the center of the bridge, not a
man moved.  The company faced the bridge, staring stonily, motionless.
The sentinels, facing the banks of the stream, might have been statues
to adorn the bridge.  The captain stood with folded arms, silent,
observing the work of his subordinates, but making no sign. Death is a
dignitary who when he comes announced is to be received with formal
manifestations of respect, even by those most familiar with him.  In
the code of military etiquette silence and fixity are forms of
deference.

The man who was engaged in being hanged was apparently about
thirty-five years of age.  He was a civilian, if one might judge from
his habit, which was that of a planter.  His features were good--a
straight nose, firm mouth, broad forehead, from which his long, dark
hair was combed straight back, falling behind his ears to the collar
of his well fitting frock coat.  He wore a moustache and pointed
beard, but no whiskers; his eyes were large and dark gray, and had a
kindly expression which one would hardly have expected in one whose
neck was in the hemp.  Evidently this was no vulgar assassin.  The
liberal military code makes provision for hanging many kinds of
persons, and gentlemen are not excluded.

The preparations being complete, the two private soldiers stepped
aside and each drew away the plank upon which he had been standing.
The sergeant turned to the captain, saluted and placed himself
immediately behind that officer, who in turn moved apart one pace.
These movements left the condemned man and the sergeant standing on
the two ends of the same plank, which spanned three of the cross-ties
of the bridge.  The end upon which the civilian stood almost, but not
quite, reached a fourth.  This plank had been held in place by the
weight of the captain; it was now held by that of the sergeant.  At a
signal from the former the latter would step aside, the plank would
tilt and the condemned man go down between two ties.  The arrangement
commended itself to his judgement as simple and effective.  His face
had not been covered nor his eyes bandaged.  He looked a moment at his
"unsteadfast footing," then let his gaze wander to the swirling water
of the stream racing madly beneath his feet. A piece of dancing
driftwood caught his attention and his eyes followed it down the
current.  How slowly it appeared to move!  What a sluggish stream!

He closed his eyes in order to fix his last thoughts upon his wife and
children.  The water, touched to gold by the early sun, the brooding
mists under the banks at some distance down the stream, the fort, the
soldiers, the piece of drift--all had distracted him.  And now he
became conscious of a new disturbance.  Striking through the thought
of his dear ones was sound which he could neither ignore nor
understand, a sharp, distinct, metallic percussion like the stroke of
a blacksmith's hammer upon the anvil; it had the same ringing quality.
He wondered what it was, and whether immeasurably distant or near by--
it seemed both.  Its recurrence was regular, but as slow as the
tolling of a death knell.  He awaited each new stroke with impatience
and--he knew not why--apprehension.  The intervals of silence grew
progressively longer; the delays became maddening.  With their greater
infrequency the sounds increased in strength and sharpness.  They hurt
his ear like the trust of a knife; he feared he would shriek.  What he
heard was the ticking of his watch.

He unclosed his eyes and saw again the water below him.  "If I could
free my hands," he thought, "I might throw off the noose and spring
into the stream.  By diving I could evade the bullets and, swimming
vigorously, reach the bank, take to the woods and get away home.  My
home, thank God, is as yet outside their lines; my wife and little
ones are still beyond the invader's farthest advance."

As these thoughts, which have here to be set down in words, were
flashed into the doomed man's brain rather than evolved from it the
captain nodded to the sergeant.  The sergeant stepped aside.

II

Peyton Farquhar was a well to do planter, of an old and highly
respected Alabama family.  Being a slave owner and like other slave
owners a politician, he was naturally an original secessionist and
ardently devoted to the Southern cause.  Circumstances of an imperious
nature, which it is unnecessary to relate here, had prevented him from
taking service with that gallant army which had fought the disastrous
campaigns ending with the fall of Corinth, and he chafed under the
inglorious restraint, longing for the release of his energies, the
larger life of the soldier, the opportunity for distinction.  That
opportunity, he felt, would come, as it comes to all in wartime.
Meanwhile he did what he could.  No service was too humble for him to
perform in the aid of the South, no adventure to perilous for him to
undertake if consistent with the character of a civilian who was at
heart a soldier, and who in good faith and without too much
qualification assented to at least a part of the frankly villainous
dictum that all is fair in love and war.

One evening while Farquhar and his wife were sitting on a rustic bench
near the entrance to his grounds, a gray-clad soldier rode up to the
gate and asked for a drink of water. Mrs. Farquhar was only too happy
to serve him with her own white hands.  While she was fetching the
water her husband approached the dusty horseman and inquired eagerly
for news from the front.

"The Yanks are repairing the railroads," said the man, "and are
getting ready for another advance.  They have reached the Owl Creek
bridge, put it in order and built a stockade on the north bank.  The
commandant has issued an order, which is posted everywhere, declaring
that any civilian caught interfering with the railroad, its bridges,
tunnels, or trains will be summarily hanged.  I saw the order."

"How far is it to the Owl Creek bridge?" Farquhar asked.

"About thirty miles."

"Is there no force on this side of the creek?"

"Only a picket post half a mile out, on the railroad, and a single
sentinel at this end of the bridge."

"Suppose a man--a civilian and student of hanging--should elude the
picket post and perhaps get the better of the sentinel," said
Farquhar, smiling, "what could he accomplish?"

The soldier reflected.  "I was there a month ago," he replied.  "I
observed that the flood of last winter had lodged a great quantity of
driftwood against the wooden pier at this end of the bridge.  It is
now dry and would burn like tinder."

The lady had now brought the water, which the soldier drank. He
thanked her ceremoniously, bowed to her husband and rode away.  An
hour later, after nightfall, he repassed the plantation, going
northward in the direction from which he had come.  He was a Federal
scout.

III

As Peyton Farquhar fell straight downward through the bridge he lost
consciousness and was as one already dead. From this state he was
awakened--ages later, it seemed to him--by the pain of a sharp
pressure upon his throat, followed by a sense of suffocation.  Keen,
poignant agonies seemed to shoot from his neck downward through every
fiber of his body and limbs.  These pains appeared to flash along well
defined lines of ramification and to beat with an inconceivably rapid
periodicity.  They seemed like streams of pulsating fire heating him
to an intolerable temperature.  As to his head, he was conscious of
nothing but a feeling of fullness--of congestion.  These sensations
were unaccompanied by thought.  The intellectual part of his nature
was already effaced; he had power only to feel, and feeling was
torment.  He was conscious of motion. Encompassed in a luminous cloud,
of which he was now merely the fiery heart, without material
substance, he swung through unthinkable arcs of oscillation, like a
vast pendulum.  Then all at once, with terrible suddenness, the light
about him shot upward with the noise of a loud splash; a frightful
roaring was in his ears, and all was cold and dark.  The power of
thought was restored; he knew that the rope had broken and he had
fallen into the stream.  There was no additional strangulation; the
noose about his neck was already suffocating him and kept the water
from his lungs.  To die of hanging at the bottom of a river!--the idea
seemed to him ludicrous.  He opened his eyes in the darkness and saw
above him a gleam of light, but how distant, how inaccessible!  He was
still sinking, for the light became fainter and fainter until it was a
mere glimmer.  Then it began to grow and brighten, and he knew that he
was rising toward the surface--knew it with reluctance, for he was now
very comfortable.  "To be hanged and drowned," he thought, "that is
not so bad; but I do not wish to be shot.  No; I will not be shot;
that is not fair."

He was not conscious of an effort, but a sharp pain in his wrist
apprised him that he was trying to free his hands.  He gave the
struggle his attention, as an idler might observe the feat of a
juggler, without interest in the outcome.  What splendid effort!--what
magnificent, what superhuman strength!  Ah, that was a fine endeavor!
Bravo!  The cord fell away; his arms parted and floated upward, the
hands dimly seen on each side in the growing light.  He watched them
with a new interest as first one and then the other pounced upon the
noose at his neck.  They tore it away and thrust it fiercely aside,
its undulations resembling those of a water snake.  "Put it back, put
it back!"  He thought he shouted these words to his hands, for the
undoing of the noose had been succeeded by the direst pang that he had
yet experienced.  His neck ached horribly; his brain was on fire, his
heart, which had been fluttering faintly, gave a great leap, trying to
force itself out at his mouth.  His whole body was racked and wrenched
with an insupportable anguish! But his disobedient hands gave no heed
to the command.  They beat the water vigorously with quick, downward
strokes, forcing him to the surface.  He felt his head emerge; his
eyes were blinded by the sunlight; his chest expanded convulsively,
and with a supreme and crowning agony his lungs engulfed a great
draught of air, which instantly he expelled in a shriek!

He was now in full possession of his physical senses.  They were,
indeed, preternaturally keen and alert.  Something in the awful
disturbance of his organic system had so exalted and refined them that
they made record of things never before perceived.  He felt the
ripples upon his face and heard their separate sounds as they struck.
He looked at the forest on the bank of the stream, saw the individual
trees, the leaves and the veining of each leaf--he saw the very
insects upon them:  the locusts, the brilliant bodied flies, the gray
spiders stretching their webs from twig to twig.  He noted the
prismatic colors in all the dewdrops upon a million blades of grass.
The humming of the gnats that danced above the eddies of the stream,
the beating of the dragon flies' wings, the strokes of the water
spiders' legs, like oars which had lifted their boat--all these made
audible music.  A fish slid along beneath his eyes and he heard the
rush of its body parting the water.

He had come to the surface facing down the stream; in a moment the
visible world seemed to wheel slowly round, himself the pivotal point,
and he saw the bridge, the fort, the soldiers upon the bridge, the
captain, the sergeant, the two privates, his executioners.  They were
in silhouette against the blue sky.  They shouted and gesticulated,
pointing at him.  The captain had drawn his pistol, but did not fire;
the others were unarmed.  Their movements were grotesque and horrible,
their forms gigantic.

Suddenly he heard a sharp report and something struck the water
smartly within a few inches of his head, spattering his face with
spray.  He heard a second report, and saw one of the sentinels with
his rifle at his shoulder, a light cloud of blue smoke rising from the
muzzle.  The man in the water saw the eye of the man on the bridge
gazing into his own through the sights of the rifle.  He observed that
it was a gray eye and remembered having read that gray eyes were
keenest, and that all famous marksmen had them. Nevertheless, this one
had missed.

A counter-swirl had caught Farquhar and turned him half round; he was
again looking at the forest on the bank opposite the fort.  The sound
of a clear, high voice in a monotonous singsong now rang out behind
him and came across the water with a distinctness that pierced and
subdued all other sounds, even the beating of the ripples in his ears.
Although no soldier, he had frequented camps enough to know the dread
significance of that deliberate, drawling, aspirated chant; the
lieutenant on shore was taking a part in the morning's work.  How
coldly and pitilessly--with what an even, calm intonation, presaging,
and enforcing tranquility in the men--with what accurately measured
interval fell those cruel words:

"Company! . . . Attention! . . . Shoulder arms! . . . Ready!. . .
Aim! . . . Fire!"

Farquhar dived--dived as deeply as he could.  The water roared in his
ears like the voice of Niagara, yet he heard the dull thunder of the
volley and, rising again toward the surface, met shining bits of
metal, singularly flattened, oscillating slowly downward.  Some of
them touched him on the face and hands, then fell away, continuing
their descent. One lodged between his collar and neck; it was
uncomfortably warm and he snatched it out.

As he rose to the surface, gasping for breath, he saw that he had been
a long time under water; he was perceptibly farther downstream--nearer
to safety.  The soldiers had almost finished reloading; the metal
ramrods flashed all at once in the sunshine as they were drawn from
the barrels, turned in the air, and thrust into their sockets.  The
two sentinels fired again, independently and ineffectually.

The hunted man saw all this over his shoulder; he was now swimming
vigorously with the current.  His brain was as energetic as his arms
and legs; he thought with the rapidity of lightning:

"The officer," he reasoned, "will not make that martinet's error a
second time.  It is as easy to dodge a volley as a single shot.  He
has probably already given the command to fire at will.  God help me,
I cannot dodge them all!"

An appalling splash within two yards of him was followed by a loud,
rushing sound, DIMINUENDO, which seemed to travel back through the air
to the fort and died in an explosion which stirred the very river to
its deeps!  A rising sheet of water curved over him, fell down upon
him, blinded him, strangled him!  The cannon had taken an hand in the
game.  As he shook his head free from the commotion of the smitten
water he heard the deflected shot humming through the air ahead, and
in an instant it was cracking and smashing the branches in the forest
beyond.

"They will not do that again," he thought; "the next time they will
use a charge of grape.  I must keep my eye upon the gun; the smoke
will apprise me--the report arrives too late; it lags behind the
missile.  That is a good gun."

Suddenly he felt himself whirled round and round--spinning like a top.
The water, the banks, the forests, the now distant bridge, fort and
men, all were commingled and blurred.  Objects were represented by
their colors only; circular horizontal streaks of color--that was all
he saw. He had been caught in a vortex and was being whirled on with a
velocity of advance and gyration that made him giddy and sick.  In few
moments he was flung upon the gravel at the foot of the left bank of
the stream--the southern bank--and behind a projecting point which
concealed him from his enemies.  The sudden arrest of his motion, the
abrasion of one of his hands on the gravel, restored him, and he wept
with delight.  He dug his fingers into the sand, threw it over himself
in handfuls and audibly blessed it.  It looked like diamonds, rubies,
emeralds; he could think of nothing beautiful which it did not
resemble.  The trees upon the bank were giant garden plants; he noted
a definite order in their arrangement, inhaled the fragrance of their
blooms.  A strange roseate light shone through the spaces among their
trunks and the wind made in their branches the music of AEolian harps.
He had not wish to perfect his escape--he was content to remain in
that enchanting spot until retaken.

A whiz and a rattle of grapeshot among the branches high above his
head roused him from his dream.  The baffled cannoneer had fired him a
random farewell.  He sprang to his feet, rushed up the sloping bank,
and plunged into the forest.

All that day he traveled, laying his course by the rounding sun.  The
forest seemed interminable; nowhere did he discover a break in it, not
even a woodman's road.  He had not known that he lived in so wild a
region.  There was something uncanny in the revelation.

By nightfall he was fatigued, footsore, famished.  The thought of his
wife and children urged him on.  At last he found a road which led him
in what he knew to be the right direction.  It was as wide and
straight as a city street, yet it seemed untraveled.  No fields
bordered it, no dwelling anywhere.  Not so much as the barking of a
dog suggested human habitation.  The black bodies of the trees formed
a straight wall on both sides, terminating on the horizon in a point,
like a diagram in a lesson in perspective.  Overhead, as he looked up
through this rift in the wood, shone great golden stars looking
unfamiliar and grouped in strange constellations.  He was sure they
were arranged in some order which had a secret and malign
significance.  The wood on either side was full of singular noises,
among which--once, twice, and again--he distinctly heard whispers in
an unknown tongue.

His neck was in pain and lifting his hand to it found it horribly
swollen.  He knew that it had a circle of black where the rope had
bruised it.  His eyes felt congested; he could no longer close them.
His tongue was swollen with thirst; he relieved its fever by thrusting
it forward from between his teeth into the cold air.  How softly the
turf had carpeted the untraveled avenue--he could no longer feel the
roadway beneath his feet!

Doubtless, despite his suffering, he had fallen asleep while walking,
for now he sees another scene--perhaps he has merely recovered from a
delirium.  He stands at the gate of his own home.  All is as he left
it, and all bright and beautiful in the morning sunshine.  He must
have traveled the entire night.  As he pushes open the gate and passes
up the wide white walk, he sees a flutter of female garments; his
wife, looking fresh and cool and sweet, steps down from the veranda to
meet him.  At the bottom of the steps she stands waiting, with a smile
of ineffable joy, an attitude of matchless grace and dignity.  Ah, how
beautiful she is!  He springs forwards with extended arms.  As he is
about to clasp her he feels a stunning blow upon the back of the neck;
a blinding white light blazes all about him with a sound like the
shock of a cannon--then all is darkness and silence!

Peyton Farquhar was dead; his body, with a broken neck, swung gently
from side to side beneath the timbers of the Owl Creek bridge.







The Introduction


Brilliant and magnetic as are these two studies by Ambrose Bierce, and
especially significant as coming from one who was a boy soldier in the
Civil War, they merely reflect one side of his original and many-faceted
genius. Poet, critic, satirist, fun-maker, incomparable writer of fables
and masterly prose sketches, a seer of startling insight, a reasoner
mercilessly logical, with the delicate wit and keenness of an Irving or
an Addison, the dramatic quality of a Hugo,--all of these, and still in
the prime of his powers; yet so restricted has been his output and so
little exploited that only the judicious few have been impressed.

Although an American, he formed his bent years ago in London, where
he was associated with the younger Hood on Fun. There he laid the
foundation for that reputation which he today enjoys: the distinction of
being the last of the scholarly satirists. With that training he came
to San Francisco, where, in an environment equally as genial, his talent
grew and mellowed through the years. Then he was summoned to New York to
assist a newspaper fight against a great railroad, since the conclusion
of which brilliant campaign eastern journalism and magazine work have
claimed his attention.

Two volumes, "The Fiend's Delight" and "Cobwebs from an Empty Skull"
titles that would damn modern books--were collections published years
ago from his work on London Fun. Their appearance made him at once the
chief wit and humorist of England, and, combined with his satirical
work on Fun, led to his engagement by friends of the exiled Eugénie
to conduct a periodical against her enemies, who purposed to make her
refuge in England untenable by means of newspaper attacks. It is easy
to imagine the zest with which the chivalrous Bierce plunged into
preparations for the fight. But the struggle never came; it was
sufficient to learn that Bierce would be the Richmond; the attack upon
the stricken ex-empress was abandoned.

When he was urged in San Francisco, years afterward, to write more of
the inimitable things that filled those two volumes, he said that it was
only fun, a boy's work. Only fun! There has never been such delicious
fun since the beginning of literature, and there is nothing better than
fun. Yet it held his own peculiar quality, which is not that of American
fun,--quality of a brilliant intellectuality: the keenness of a rapier,
a teasing subtlety, a contempt for pharisaism and squeamishness, and
above all a fine philosophy. While he has never lost his sense of the
whimsical, the grotesque, the unusual, he--unfortunately, perhaps--came
oftener to give it the form of pure wit rather than of cajoling humor.
Few Americans know him as a humorist, because his humor is not built
on the broad, rough lines that are typically American. It belongs to an
older civilization, yet it is jollier than the English and bolder than
the French.

At all times his incomparable wit and satire has appealed rather to the
cultured, and even the emotional quality of his fiction is frequently so
profound and unusual as to be fully enjoyed only by the intellectually
untrammelled. His writing was never for those who could only read and
feel, not think.

Another factor against his wider acceptance has been the infrequency and
fragmentary character of his work, particularly his satire. No sustained
fort in that field has come from him. His satire was born largely of
a transient stimulus, and was evanescent. Even his short stories are,
generally, but blinding flashes of a moment in a life. He laughingly
ascribes the meagerness of his output to indolence; but there may be a
deeper reason, of which he is unconscious. What is more dampening than
a seeming lack of appreciation? "Tales of Soldiers and Civilians" had
a disheartening search for an established publisher, and finally was
brought out by an admiring merchant of San Francisco. It attracted so
much critical attention that its re-publication was soon undertaken by a
regular house.

Had Bierce never produced anything but these prose tales, his right to a
place high in American letters would nevertheless be secure, and of all
his work, serious or otherwise, here is his greatest claim to popular
and permanent recognition. No stories for which the Civil War has
furnished such dramatic setting surpass these masterpieces of short
fiction, either in power of description, subtlety of touch or literary
finish. It is deeply to be regretted that he has not given us more such
prose.

W. C. Morrow.





A SON OF THE GODS


A breezy day and a sunny landscape. An open country to right and left
and forward; behind, a wood. In the edge of this wood, facing the open
but not venturing into it, long lines of troops halted. The wood is
alive with them, and full of confused noises: the occasional rattle
of wheels as a battery of artillery goes into position to cover
the advance; the hum and murmur of the soldiers talking; a sound of
innumerable feet in the dry leaves that strew the interspaces among the
trees; hoarse commands of officers. Detached groups of horsemen are well
in front--not altogether exposed--many of them intently regarding the
crest of a hill a mile away in the direction of the interrupted advance.
For this powerful army, moving in battle order through a forest, has met
with a formidable obstacle--the open country. The crest of that gentle
hill a mile away has a sinister look; it says, Beware! Along it runs a
stone wall extending to left and right a great distance. Behind the
wall is a hedge; behind the hedge are seen the tops of trees in rather
straggling order. Among the trees--what? It is necessary to know.

Yesterday, and for many days and nights previously, we were fighting
somewhere; always there was cannonading, with occasional keen rattlings
of musketry, mingled with cheers, our own or the enemy's, we seldom
knew, attesting some temporary advantage. This morning at daybreak the
enemy was gone. We have moved forward across his earthworks, across
which we have so often vainly attempted to move before, through the
debris of his abandoned camps, among the graves of his fallen, into the
woods beyond.

How curiously we regarded everything! How odd it all seemed! Nothing
appeared quite familiar; the most commonplace objects--an old saddle,
a splintered wheel, a forgotten canteen everything related something of
the mysterious personality of those strange men who had been killing
us. The soldier never becomes wholly familiar with the conception of his
foes as men like himself; he cannot divest himself of the feeling
that they are another order of beings, differently conditioned, in an
environment not altogether of the earth. The smallest vestiges of
them rivet his attention and engage his interest. He thinks of them as
inaccessible; and, catching an unexpected glimpse of them, they appear
farther away, and therefore larger, than they really are--like objects
in a fog. He is somewhat in awe of them.

From the edge of the wood leading up the acclivity are the tracks of
horses and wheels--the wheels of cannon. The yellow grass is beaten down
by the feet of infantry. Clearly they have passed this way in thousands;
they have not withdrawn by the country roads. This is significant--it is
the difference between retiring and retreating.

That group of horsemen is our commander, his staff, and escort. He is
facing the distant crest, holding his field-glass against his eyes with
both hands, his elbows needlessly elevated. It is a fashion; it seems to
dignify the act; we are all addicted to it. Suddenly he lowers the
glass and says a few words to those about him. Two or three aides detach
themselves from the group and canter away into the woods, along the
lines in each direction. We did not hear his words, but we knew them:
"Tell General X. to send forward the skirmish line." Those of us who
have been out of place resume our positions; the men resting at ease
straighten themselves, and the ranks are reformed without a command.
Some of us staff officers dismount and look at our saddle-girths; those
already on the ground remount.

Galloping rapidly along in the edge of the open ground comes a young
officer on a snow-white horse. His saddle-blanket is scarlet. What a
fool! No one who has ever been in battle but remembers how naturally
every rifle turns toward the man on a white horse; no one but has
observed how a bit of red enrages the bull of battle. That such
colors are fashionable in military life must be accepted as the most
astonishing of all the phenomena of human vanity. They would seem to
have been devised to increase the death-rate.

This young officer is in full uniform, as if on parade. He is all agleam
with bullion, a blue-and-gold edition of the Poetry of War. A wave
of derisive laughter runs abreast of him all along the line. But how
handsome he is! With what careless grace he sits his horse!

He reins up within a respectful distance of the corps commander and
salutes. The old soldier nods familiarly; he evidently knows him. A
brief colloquy between them is going on; the young man seems to be
preferring some request which the elder one is indisposed to grant. Let
us ride a little nearer. Ah! too late--it is ended. The young officer
salutes again, wheels his horse, and rides straight toward the crest of
the hill. He is deadly pale.

A thin line of skirmishers, the men deployed at six paces or so apart,
now pushes from the wood into the open. The commander speaks to his
bugler, who claps his instrument to his lips. Tra-la-la! Tra-la-la! The
skirmishers halt in their tracks.

Meantime the young horseman has advanced a hundred yards. He is riding
at a walk, straight up the long slope, with never a turn of the head.
How glorious! Gods! what would we not give to be in his place--with his
soul! He does not draw his sabre; his right hand hangs easily at his
side. The breeze catches the plume in his hat and flutters it smartly.
The sunshine rests upon his shoulder-straps, lovingly, like a visible
benediction. Straight on he rides. Ten thousand pairs of eyes are fixed
upon him with an intensity that he can hardly fail to feel; ten thousand
hearts keep quick time to the inaudible hoof-beats of his snowy steed.
He is not alone--he draws all souls after him; we are but "dead men
all." But we remember that we laughed! On and on, straight for the
hedge-lined wall, he rides. Not a look backward. Oh, if he would but
turn--if he could but see the love, the adoration, the atonement!

Not a word is spoken; the populous depths of the forest still murmur
with their unseen and unseeing swarm, but all along the fringe there
is silence absolute. The burly commander is an equestrian statue
of himself. The mounted staff officers, their field-glasses up, are
motionless all. The line of battle in the edge of the wood stands at a
new kind of "attention," each man in the attitude in which he was
caught by the consciousness of what is going on. All these hardened and
impenitent man-killers, to whom death in its awfulest forms is a fact
familiar to their every-day observation; who sleep on hills trembling
with the thunder of great guns, dine in the midst of streaming missiles,
and play at cards among the dead faces of their dearest friends,--all
are watching with suspended breath and beating hearts the outcome of an
act involving the life of one man. Such is the magnetism of courage and
devotion.

If now you should turn your head you would see a simultaneous movement
among the spectators a start, as if they had received an electric
shock--and looking forward again to the now distant horseman you would
see that he has in that instant altered his direction and is riding
at an angle to his former course. The spectators suppose the sudden
deflection to be caused by a shot, perhaps a wound; but take this
field-glass and you will observe that he is riding toward a break in the
wall and hedge. He means, if not killed, to ride through and overlook
the country beyond.

You are not to forget the nature of this man's act; it is not permitted
to you to think of it as an instance of bravado, nor, on the other hand,
a needless sacrifice of self. If the enemy has not retreated, he is in
force on that ridge. The investigator will encounter nothing less than
a line of battle; there is no need of pickets, videttes, skirmishers,
to give warning of our approach; our attacking lines will be visible,
conspicuous, exposed to an artillery fire that will shave the ground the
moment they break from cover, and for half the distance to a sheet
of rifle bullets in which nothing can live. In short, if the enemy is
there, it would be madness to attack him in front; he must be maneuvered
out by the immemorial plan of threatening his line of communication, as
necessary to his existence as to the diver at the bottom of the sea his
air-tube. But how ascertain if the enemy is there? There is but one way:
somebody must go and see. The natural and customary thing to do is to
send forward a line of skirmishers. But in this case they will answer
in the affirmative with all their lives; the enemy, crouching in double
ranks behind the stone wall and in cover of the hedge, will wait until
it is possible to count each assailant's teeth. At the first volley a
half of the questioning line will fall, the other half before it can
accomplish the predestined retreat. What a price to pay for gratified
curiosity! At what a dear rate an army must sometimes purchase
knowledge! "Let me pay all," says this gallant man--this military
Christ!

There is no hope except the hope against hope that the crest is clear.
True, he might prefer capture to death. So long as he advances, the line
will not fire,--why should it? He can safely ride into the hostile ranks
and become a prisoner of war. But this would defeat his object. It would
not answer our question; it is necessary either that he return unharmed
or be shot to death before our eyes. Only so shall we know how to act.
If captured--why, that might have been done by a half-dozen stragglers.

Now begins an extraordinary contest of intellect between a man and
an army. Our horseman, now within a quarter of a mile of the crest,
suddenly wheels to the left and gallops in a direction parallel to
it. He has caught sight of his antagonist; he knows all. Some slight
advantage of ground has enabled him to overlook a part of the line. If
he were here, he could tell us in words. But that is now hopeless; he
must make the best use of the few minutes of life remaining to him,
by compelling the enemy himself to tell us as much and as plainly as
possible--which, naturally, that discreet power is reluctant to do. Not
a rifleman in those crouching ranks, not a cannoneer at those masked and
shotted guns, but knows the needs of the situation, the imperative duty
of forbearance. Besides, there has been time enough to forbid them
all to fire. True, a single rifle-shot might drop him and be no great
disclosure. But firing is infectious--and see how rapidly he moves,
with never a pause except as he whirls his horse about to take a new
direction, never directly backward toward us, never directly forward
toward his executioners. All this is visible through the glass; it seems
occurring within pistol-shot; we see all but the enemy, whose presence,
whose thoughts, whose motives we infer. To the unaided eye there is
nothing but a black figure on a white horse, tracing slow zigzags
against the slope of a distant hill--so slowly they seem almost to
creep.

Now--the glass again--he has tired of his failure, or sees his error, or
has gone mad; he is dashing directly forward at the wall, as if to take
it at a leap, hedge and all! One moment only and he wheels right about
and is speeding like the wind straight down the slope--toward his
friends, toward his death! Instantly the wall is topped with a fierce
roll of smoke for a distance of hundreds of yards to, right and left.
This is as instantly dissipated by the wind, and before the rattle of
the rifles reaches us, he is down. No, he recovers his seat; he has but
pulled his horse upon its haunches. They are up and away! A tremendous
cheer bursts from our ranks, relieving the insupportable tension of our
feelings. And the horse and its rider? Yes, they are up and away.
Away, indeed--they are making directly to our left, parallel to the
now steadily blazing and smoking wall. The rattle of the musketry is
continuous, and every bullet's target is that courageous heart.

Suddenly a great bank of white smoke pushes upward from behind the
wall. Another and another--a dozen roll up before the thunder of the
explosions and the humming of the missiles reach our ears, and the
missiles themselves come bounding through clouds of dust into our
covert, knocking over here and there a man and causing a temporary
distraction, a passing thought of self.

The dust drifts away. Incredible!--that enchanted horse and rider
have passed a ravine and are climbing another slope to unveil another
conspiracy of silence, to thwart the will of another armed host. Another
moment and that crest too is in eruption. The horse rears and strikes
the air with its forefeet. They are down at last. But look again--the
man has detached himself from the dead animal. He stands erect,
motionless, holding his sabre in his right hand straight above his head.
His face is toward us. Now he lowers his hand to a level with his face
and moves it outward, the blade of the sabre describing a downward
curve. It is a sign to us, to the world, to posterity. It is a hero's
salute to death and history.

Again the spell is broken; our men attempt to cheer; they are choking
with emotion; they utter hoarse, discordant cries; they clutch their
weapons and press tumultuously forward into the open. The skirmishers,
without orders, against orders, are going forward at a keen run, like
hounds unleashed. Our cannon speak and the enemy's now open in full
chorus; to right and left as far as we can see, the distant crest,
seeming now so near, erects its towers of cloud, and the great shot
pitch roaring down among our moving masses. Flag after flag of ours
emerges from the wood, line after line sweeps forth, catching the
sunlight on its burnished arms. The rear battalions alone are in
obedience; they preserve their proper distance from the insurgent front.

The commander has not moved. He now removes his field-glass from his
eyes and glances to the right and left. He sees the human current
flowing on either side of him and his huddled escort, like tide waves
parted by a rock. Not a sign of feeling in his face; he is thinking.
Again he directs his eyes forward; they slowly traverse that malign
and awful crest. He addresses a calm word to his bugler. Tra-la-la!
Tra-la-la! The injunction has an imperiousness which enforces it. It is
repeated by all the bugles of all the subordinate commanders; the sharp
metallic notes assert themselves above the hum of the advance, and
penetrate the sound of the cannon. To halt is to withdraw. The colors
move slowly back, the lines face about and sullenly follow, bearing
their wounded; the skirmishers return, gathering up the dead.

Ah, those many, many needless dead! That great soul whose beautiful body
is lying over yonder, so conspicuous against the sere hillside--could it
not have been spared the bitter consciousness of a vain devotion?
Would one exception have marred too much the pitiless perfection of the
divine, eternal plan?





A HORSEMAN IN THE SKY


One sunny afternoon in the autumn of the year 1861, a soldier lay in
a clump of laurel by the side of a road in Western Virginia. He lay at
full length, upon his stomach, his feet resting upon the toes, his
head upon the left forearm. His extended right hand loosely grasped his
rifle. But for the somewhat methodical disposition of his limbs and a
slight rhythmic movement of the cartridge-box at the back of his belt,
he might have been thought to be dead. He was asleep at his post of
duty. But if detected he would be dead shortly afterward, that being the
just and legal penalty of his crime.

The clump of laurel in which the criminal lay was in the angle of a road
which, after, ascending, southward, a steep acclivity to that point,
turned sharply to the west, running along the summit for perhaps one
hundred yards. There it turned southward again and went zigzagging
downward through the forest. At the salient of that second angle was a
large flat rock, jutting out northward, overlooking the deep valley from
which the road ascended. The rock capped a high cliff; a stone dropped
from its outer edge would have fallen sheer downward one thousand feet
to the tops of the pines. The angle where the soldier lay was on another
spur of the same cliff. Had he been awake, he would have commanded a
view, not only of the short arm of the road and the jutting rock, but
of the entire profile of the cliff below it. It might well have made him
giddy to look.

The country was wooded everywhere except at the bottom of the valley
to the northward, where there was a small natural meadow, through which
flowed a stream scarcely visible from the valley's rim. This open ground
looked hardly larger than an ordinary dooryard, but was really several
acres in extent. Its green was more vivid than that of the inclosing
forest. Away beyond it rose a line of giant cliffs similar to those upon
which we are supposed to stand in our survey of the savage scene, and
through which the road had some how made its climb to the summit. The
configuration of the valley, indeed, was such that from this point
of observation it seemed entirely shut in, and one could not but have
wondered how the road which found a way out of it had found a way into
it, and whence came and whither went the waters of the stream that
parted the meadow two thousand feet below.

No country is so wild and difficult but men will make it a theater of
war; concealed in the forest at the bottom of that military rat-trap, in
which half a hundred men in possession of the exits might have starved
an army to submission, lay five regiments of Federal infantry. They had
marched all the previous day and night, and were resting. At nightfall
they would take to the road again, climb to the place where their
unfaithful sentinel now slept, and, descending the other slope of the
ridge, fall upon a camp of the enemy at about midnight. Their hope was
to surprise it, for the road led to the rear of it. In case of failure,
their position would be perilous in the extreme; and fail they surely
would, should accident or vigilance apprise the enemy of the movement.

The sleeping sentinel in the clump of laurel was a young Virginian named
Carter Druse. He was the son of wealthy parents, an only child, and had
known such ease and cultivation and high living as wealth and taste were
able to command in the mountain country of Western Virginia. His home
was but a few miles from where he now lay. One morning he had risen
from the breakfast table and said, quietly but gravely: "Father, a Union
regiment has arrived at Grafton. I am going to join it."

The father lifted his leonine head, looked at the son a moment in
silence, and replied: "Well, go, sir, and, whatever may occur, do what
you conceive to be your duty. Virginia, to which you are a traitor, must
get on without you. Should we both live to the end of the war, we will
speak further of the matter. Your mother, as the physician has informed
you, is in a most critical condition; at the best, she cannot be with us
longer than a few weeks, but that time is precious. It would be better
not to disturb her."

So Carter Druse, bowing reverently to his father, who returned the
salute with a stately courtesy which masked a breaking heart, left the
home of his childhood to go soldiering. By conscience and courage, by
deeds of devotion and daring, he soon commended himself to his fellows
and his officers; and it was to these qualities and to some knowledge of
the country that he owed his selection for his present perilous duty
at the extreme outpost. Nevertheless, fatigue had been stronger than
resolution, and he had fallen asleep. What good or bad angel came in
a dream to rouse him from his state of crime, who shall say? Without a
movement, without a sound, in the profound silence and the languor
of the late afternoon, some invisible messenger of fate touched with
unsealing finger the eyes of his consciousness--whispered into the ear
of his spirit the mysterious awakening word which no human lips ever
have spoken, no human memory ever has recalled. He quietly raised
his forehead from his arm and looked between the masking stems of the
laurels, instinctively closing his right hand about the stock of his
rifle.

His first feeling was a keen artistic delight. On a colossal pedestal,
the cliff,--motionless at the extreme edge of the capping rock
and sharply outlined against the sky,--was an equestrian statue of
impressive dignity. The figure of the man sat the figure of the horse,
straight and soldierly, but with the repose of a Grecian god carted in
the marble which limits the suggestion of activity. The gray costume
harmonized with its aerial background; the metal of accoutrement and
caparison was softened and subdued by the shadow; the animal's skin had
no points of high light. A carbine, strikingly foreshortened, lay across
the pommel of the saddle, kept in place by the right hand grasping it
at the "grip"; the left hand, holding the bridle rein, was invisible.
In silhouette against the sky, the profile of the horse was cut with
the sharpness of a cameo; it looked across the heights of air to the
confronting cliffs beyond. The face of the rider, turned slightly away,
showed only an outline of temple and beard; he was looking downward to
the bottom of the valley. Magnified by its lift against the sky and by
the soldier's testifying sense of the formidableness of a near enemy,
the group appeared of heroic, almost colossal, size.

For an instant Druse had a strange, half-defined feeling that he had
slept to the end of the war and was looking upon a noble work of art
reared upon that commanding eminence to commemorate the deeds of an
heroic past of which he had been an inglorious part. The feeling was
dispelled by a slight movement of the group: the horse, without moving
its feet, had drawn its body slightly backward from the verge; the
man remained immobile as before. Broad awake and keenly alive to the
significance of the situation, Druse now brought the butt of his rifle
against his cheek by cautiously pushing the barrel forward through the
bushes, cocked the piece, and, glancing through the sights, covered a
vital spot of the horseman's breast. A touch upon the trigger and all
would have been well with Carter Druse. At that instant the horseman
turned his head and looked in the direction of his concealed
foeman--seemed to look into his very face, into his eyes, into his
brave, compassionate heart.

Is it, then, so terrible to kill an enemy in war--an enemy who has
surprised a secret vital to the safety of one's self and comrades--an
enemy more formidable for his knowledge than all his army for its
numbers? Carter Druse grew pale; he shook in every limb, turned faint,
and saw the statuesque group before him as black figures, rising,
falling, moving unsteadily in arcs of circles in a fiery sky. His hand
fell away from his weapon, his head slowly dropped until his face rested
on the leaves in which he lay. This courageous gentleman and hardy
soldier was near swooning from intensity of emotion.

It was not for long; in another moment his face was raised from earth,
his hands resumed their places on the rifle, his forefinger sought the
trigger; mind, heart and eyes were clear, conscience and reason sound.
He could not hope to capture that enemy; to alarm him would but send
him dashing to his camp with his fatal news. The duty of the soldier was
plain: the man must be shot dead from ambush--without warning, without
a moment's spiritual preparation, with never so much as an unspoken
prayer, he must be sent to his account. But no--there is a hope; he may
have discovered nothing; perhaps he is but admiring the sublimity of
the landscape. If permitted, he may turn and ride carelessly away in
the direction whence he came. Surely it will be possible to judge at
the instant of his withdrawing whether he knows. It may well be that his
fixity of attention---Druse turned his head and looked through the deeps
of air downward as from the surface of the bottom of a translucent sea.
He saw creeping across the green meadow a sinuous line of figures of men
and horses--some foolish commander was permitting the soldiers of his
escort to water their beasts in the open, in plain view from a hundred
summits!

Druse withdrew his eyes from the valley and fixed them again upon the
group of man and horse in the sky, and again it was through the sights
of his rifle. But this time his aim was at the horse. In his memory,
as if they were a divine mandate, rang the words of his father at their
parting: "Whatever may occur, do what you conceive to be your duty." He
was calm now. His teeth were firmly but not rigidly closed; his nerves
were as tranquil as a sleeping babe's--not a tremor affected any muscle
of his body; his breathing, until suspended in the act of taking aim,
was regular and slow. Duty had conquered; the spirit had said to the
body: "Peace, be still." He fired.

An officer of the Federal force, who, in a spirit of adventure or in
quest of knowledge, had left the hidden bivouac in the valley, and, with
aimless feet, had made his way to the lower edge of a small open space
near the foot of the cliff, was considering what he had to gain by
pushing his exploration further. At a distance of a quarter-mile before
him, but apparently at a stone's throw, rose from its fringe of pines
the gigantic face of rock, towering to so great a height above him that
it made him giddy to look up to where its edge cut a sharp, rugged
line against the sky. At some distance away to his right it presented a
clean, vertical profile against a background of blue sky to a point half
the way down, and of distant hills hardly less blue, thence to the tops
of the trees at its base. Lifting his eyes to the dizzy altitude of its
summit, the officer saw an astonishing sight--a man on horseback riding
down into the valley through the air!

Straight upright sat the rider, in military fashion, with a firm seat in
the saddle, a strong clutch upon the rein to hold his charger from too
impetuous a plunge. From his bare head his long hair streamed upward,
waving like a plume. His hands were concealed in the cloud of the
horse's lifted mane. The animal's body was as level as if every
hoof-stroke encountered the resistant earth. Its motions were those of
a wild gallop, but even as the officer looked they ceased, with all the
legs thrown sharply forward as in the act of alighting from a leap. But
this was a flight!

Filled with amazement and terror by this apparition of a horseman in the
sky-half believing himself the chosen scribe of some new apocalypse, the
officer was overcome by the intensity of his emotions; his legs failed
him and he fell. Almost at the same instant he heard a crashing sound in
the trees--a sound that died without an echo--and all was still.

The officer rose to his feet, trembling. The familiar sensation of an
abraded shin recalled his dazed faculties. Pulling himself together,
he ran obliquely away from the cliff to a point distant from its foot;
thereabout he expected to find his man; and thereabout he naturally
failed. In the fleeting instant of his vision his imagination had been
so wrought upon by the apparent grace and ease and intention of the
marvelous performance that it did not occur to him that the line of
march of aerial cavalry is directly downward, and that he could find the
objects of his search at the very foot of the cliff. A half-hour later
he returned to camp.

This officer was a wise man; he knew better than to tell an incredible
truth. He said nothing of what he had seen. But when the commander
asked him if in his scout he had learned anything of advantage to the
expedition, he answered:

"Yes, sir; there is no road leading down into this valley from the
southward."

The commander, knowing better, smiled.

After firing his shot, Private Carter Druse reloaded his rifle and
resumed his watch. Ten minutes had hardly passed when a Federal sergeant
crept cautiously to him on hands and knees. Druse neither turned his
head nor looked at him, but lay without motion or sign of recognition.

"Did you fire?" the sergeant whispered.

"At what?"

"A horse. It was standing on yonder rock-pretty far out. You see it is
no longer there. It went over the cliff."

The man's face was white, but he showed no other sign of emotion. Having
answered, he turned away his eyes and said no more. The sergeant did not
understand.

"See here, Druse," he said, after a moment's silence, "it's no use
making a mystery. I order you to report. Was there anybody on the
horse?"

"Yes."

"Well?"

"My father."

The sergeant rose to his feet and walked away. "Good God!" he said.



Here ends No. Four of the Western Classics containing A Son of the Gods
and A Horseman in the Sky by Ambrose Bierce with an introduction by
W. C. Morrow and a photogravure frontispiece after a painting by Will
Jenkins. Of this first edition one thousand copies have been issued
printed on Frabriano handmade paper the typography designed by J. H.
Nash published by Paul Elder and Company and done into a book for them
at the Tomoye Press in the city of New York MCMVII






IN EXPLANATION


Many of the verses in this book are republished, with considerable
alterations, from various newspapers. The collection includes few not
relating to persons and events more or less familiar to the people of
the Pacific Coast--to whom the volume may be considered as especially
addressed, though, not without a hope that some part of the contents
may be found to have sufficient intrinsic interest to commend it to
others. In that case, doubtless, commentators will be "raised up" to
make exposition of its full meaning, with possibly an added meaning
read into it by themselves.

Of my motives in writing, and in now republishing, I do not care to
make either defense or explanation, except with reference to those
persons who since my first censure of them have passed away. To one
having only a reader's interest in the matter it may easily seem that
the verses relating to those might more properly have been omitted
from this collection. But if these pieces, or, indeed, if any
considerable part of my work in literature, have the intrinsic worth
which by this attempt to preserve some of it I have assumed, their
permanent suppression is impossible, and it is only a question of when
and by whom they shall be republished. Some one will surely search
them out and put them in circulation.

I conceive it the right of an author to have his fugitive work
collected in his lifetime; and this seems to me especially true of one
whose work, necessarily engendering animosities, is peculiarly exposed
to challenge as unjust. That is a charge that can be best examined
before time has effaced the evidence. For the death of a man of whom
I may have written what I venture to think worthy to live I am no way
responsible; and, however sincerely I may regret it, I can hardly be
expected to consent that it shall affect my fortunes. If the satirist
who does not accept the remarkable doctrine that while condemning the
sin he should spare the sinner were bound to let the life of his work
be coterminous with that of his subject his were a lot of peculiar
hardship.

Persuaded of the validity of all this, I have not hesitated to reprint
even certain "epitaphs" which, once of the living, are now of the
dead, as all the others must eventually be. The objection inheres
in all forms of applied satire--my understanding of whose laws and
liberties is at least derived from reverent study of the masters.
That in respect of matters herein mentioned I have but followed their
practice can be shown by abundant instance and example.

AMBROSE BIERCE.




THE KEY NOTE


I dreamed I was dreaming one morn as I lay
  In a garden with flowers teeming.
On an island I lay in a mystical bay,
  In the dream that I dreamed I was dreaming.

The ghost of a scent--had it followed me there
  From the place where I truly was resting?
It filled like an anthem the aisles of the air,
  The presence of roses attesting.

Yet I thought in the dream that I dreamed I dreamed
  That the place was all barren of roses--
That it only seemed; and the place, I deemed,
  Was the Isle of Bewildered Noses.

Full many a seaman had testified
  How all who sailed near were enchanted,
And landed to search (and in searching died)
  For the roses the Sirens had planted.

For the Sirens were dead, and the billows boomed
  In the stead of their singing forever;
But the roses bloomed on the graves of the doomed,
  Though man had discovered them never.

I thought in my dream 'twas an idle tale,
  A delusion that mariners cherished--
That the fragrance loading the conscious gale
  Was the ghost of a rose long perished.

I said, "I will fly from this island of woes."
  And acting on that decision,
By that odor of rose I was led by the nose,
  For 'twas truly, ah! truly, Elysian.

I ran, in my madness, to seek out the source
  Of the redolent river--directed
By some supernatural, sinister force
  To a forest, dark, haunted, infected.

And still as I threaded ('twas all in the dream
  That I dreamed I was dreaming) each turning
There were many a scream and a sudden gleam
  Of eyes all uncannily burning!

The leaves were all wet with a horrible dew
  That mirrored the red moon's crescent,
And all shapes were fringed with a ghostly blue,
  Dim, wavering, phosphorescent.

But the fragrance divine, coming strong and free,
  Led me on, though my blood was clotting,
Till--ah, joy!--I could see, on the limbs of a tree,
  Mine enemies hanging and rotting!




CAIN


Lord, shed thy light upon his desert path,
  And gild his branded brow, that no man spill
  His forfeit life to balk thy holy will
That spares him for the ripening of wrath.

Already, lo! the red sign is descried,
  To trembling jurors visibly revealed:
  The prison doors obediently yield,
The baffled hangman flings the cord aside.

Powell, the brother's blood that marks your trail--
  Hark, how it cries against you from the ground,
  Like the far baying of the tireless hound.
Faith! to your ear it is no nightingale.

What signifies the date upon a stone?
  To-morrow you shall die if not to-day.
  What matter when the Avenger choose to slay
Or soon or late the Devil gets his own.

Thenceforth through all eternity you'll hold
  No one advantage of the later death.
  Though you had granted Ralph another breath
Would _he_ to-day less silent lie and cold?

Earth cares not, curst assassin, when you die;
  You never will be readier than now.
  Wear, in God's name, that mark upon your brow,
And keep the life you purchased with a lie!




AN OBITUARIAN


Death-poet Pickering sat at his desk,
  Wrapped in appropriate gloom;
His posture was pensive and picturesque,
  Like a raven charming a tomb.

Enter a party a-drinking the cup
  Of sorrow--and likewise of woe:
"Some harrowing poetry, Mister, whack up,
  All wrote in the key of O.

"For the angels has called my old woman hence
  From the strife (where she fit mighty free).
It's a nickel a line? Cond--n the expense!
  For wealth is now little to me."

The Bard of Mortality looked him through
  In the piercingest sort of a way:
"It is much to me though it's little to you--
  I've _taken_ a wife to-day."

So he twisted the tail of his mental cow
  And made her give down her flow.
The grief of that bard was long-winded, somehow--
  There was reams and reamses of woe.

The widower man which had buried his wife
  Grew lily-like round each gill,
For she turned in her grave and came back to life--
  Then he cruel ignored the bill!

Then Sorrow she opened her gates a-wide,
  As likewise did also Woe,
And the death-poet's song, as is heard inside,
  Is sang in the key of O.




A COMMUTED SENTENCE


Boruck and Waterman upon their grills
  In Hades lay, with many a sigh and groan,
  Hotly disputing, for each swore his own
Were clearly keener than the other's ills.
  And, truly, each had much to boast of--bone
And sinew, muscle, tallow, nerve and skin,
Blood in the vein and marrow in the shin,
  Teeth, eyes and other organs (for the soul
Has all of these and even a wagging chin)
  Blazing and coruscating like a coal!
For Lower Sacramento, you remember,
Has trying weather, even in mid-December.

Now this occurred in the far future. All
  Mankind had been a million ages dead,
  And each to her reward above had sped,
Each to his punishment below,--I call
  That quite a just arrangement. As I said,
Boruck and Waterman in warmest pain
Crackled and sizzed with all their might and main.
  For, when on earth, they'd freed a scurvy host
Of crooks from the State prison, who again
  Had robbed and ravaged the Pacific Coast
And (such the felon's predatory nature)
Even got themselves into the Legislature.

So Waterman and Boruck lay and roared
  In Hades. It is true all other males
  Felt the like flames and uttered equal wails,
But did not suffer _them_; whereas _they_ bored
  Each one the other. But indeed my tale's
Not getting on at all. They lay and browned
Till Boruck (who long since his teeth had ground
  Away and spoke Gum Arabic and made
Stump speeches even in praying) looked around
  And said to Bob's incinerated shade:
"Your Excellency, this is mighty hard on
The inventors of the unpardonable pardon."

The other soul--his right hand all aflame,
  For 'twas with that he'd chiefly sinned, although
  His tongue, too, like a wick was working woe
To the reserve of tallow in his frame--
  Said, with a sputtering, uncertain flow,
And with a gesture like a shaken torch:
"Yes, but I'm sure we'll not much longer scorch.
  Although this climate is not good for Hope,
Whose joyous wing 'twould singe, I think the porch
  Of Hell we'll quit with a pacific slope.
Last century I signified repentance
And asked for commutation of our sentence."

Even as he spoke, the form of Satan loomed
  In sight, all crimson with reflections's fire,
  Like some tall tower or cathedral spire
Touched by the dawn while all the earth is gloomed
  In mists and shadows of the night time. "Sire,"
Said Waterman, his agitable wick
Still sputtering, "what calls you back so quick?
  It scarcely was a century ago
You left us." "I have come to bring," said Nick,
  "St. Peter's answer (he is never slow
In correspondence) to your application
For pardon--pardon me!--for commutation.

"He says that he's instructed to reply
  (And he has so instructed me) that sin
  Like yours--and this poor gentleman's who's in
For bad advice to you--comes rather high;
  But since, apparently, you both begin
To feel some pious promptings to the right,
And fain would turn your faces to the light,
  Eternity seems all too long a term.
So 'tis commuted to one-half. I'm quite
  Prepared, when that expires, to free the worm
And quench the fire." And, civilly retreating,
He left them holding their protracted meeting.




A LIFTED FINGER

    [The _Chronicle_ did a great public service in whipping
    ---- and his fellow-rascals out of office.--_M.H. de Young's
    Newspaper_.]


What! _you_ whip rascals?--_you_, whose gutter blood
Bears, in its dark, dishonorable flood,
Enough of prison-birds' prolific germs
To serve a whole eternity of terms?
_You_, for whose back the rods and cudgels strove
Ere yet the ax had hewn them from the grove?
_You_, the De Young whose splendor bright and brave
Is phosphorescence from another's grave--
Till now unknown, by any chance or luck,
Even to the hearts at which you, feebly struck?
_You_ whip a rascal out of office?--_you_
Whose leadless weapon once ignobly blew
Its smoke in six directions to assert
Your lack of appetite for others' dirt?

Practice makes perfect: when for fame you thirst,
Then whip a rascal. Whip a cripple first.
Or, if for action you're less free than bold--
Your palms both brimming with dishonest gold--
Entrust the castigation that you've planned,
As once before, to woman's idle hand.
So in your spirit shall two pleasures join
To slake the sacred thirst for blood and coin.
Blood? Souls have blood, even as the body hath,
And, spilled, 'twill fertilize the field of wrath.
Lo! in a purple gorge of yonder hills,
Where o'er a grave a bird its day-song stills,
A woman's blood, through roses ever red,
Mutely appeals for vengeance on your head.
Slandered to death to serve a sordid end,
She called you murderer and called me friend.

Now, mark you, libeler, this course if you
Dare to maintain, or rather to renew;
If one short year's immunity has made
You blink again the perils of your trade--
The ghastly sequence of the maddened "knave,"
The hot encounter and the colder grave;
If the grim, dismal lesson you ignore
While yet the stains are fresh upon your floor,
And calmly march upon the fatal brink
With eyes averted to your trail of ink,
Counting unkind the services of those
Who pull, to hold you back, your stupid nose,
The day for you to die is not so far,
Or, at the least, to live the thing you are!

Pregnant with possibilities of crime,
And full of felons for all coming time,
Your blood's too precious to be lightly spilt
In testimony to a venial guilt.
Live to get whelpage and preserve a name
No praise can sweeten and no lie unshame.
Live to fulfill the vision that I see
Down the dim vistas of the time to be:
A dream of clattering beaks and burning eyes
Of hungry ravens glooming all the skies;
A dream of gleaming teeth and foetid breath
Of jackals wrangling at the feast of death;
A dream of broken necks and swollen tongues--
The whole world's gibbets loaded with De Youngs!

_1881._




TWO STATESMEN


In that fair city by the inland sea,
Where Blaine unhived his Presidential bee,
Frank Pixley's meeting with George Gorham sing,
Celestial muse, and what events did spring
From the encounter of those mighty sons
Of thunder, and of slaughter, and of guns.
Great Gorham first, his yearning tooth to sate
And give him stomach for the day's debate,
Entering a restaurant, with eager mien,
Demands an ounce of bacon and a bean.
The trembling waiter, by the statesman's eye
Smitten with terror, hastens to comply;
Nor chairs nor tables can his speed retard,
For famine's fixed and horrible regard
He takes for menace. As he shaking flew,
Lo! the portentous Pixley heaved in view!
Before him yawned invisible the cell,
Unheard, behind, the warden's footsteps fell.
Thrice in convention rising to his feet,
He thrice had been thrust back into his seat;
Thrice had protested, been reminded thrice
The nation had no need of his advice.
Balked of his will to set the people right,
His soul was gloomy though his hat was white,
So fierce his mien, with provident accord
The waiters swarmed him, thinking him a lord.
He spurned them, roaring grandly to their chief:
"Give me (Fred. Crocker pays) a leg of beef!"
His wandering eye's deluminating flame
Fell upon Gorham and the crisis came!
For Pixley scowled and darkness filled the room
Till Gorham's flashing orbs dispelled the gloom.
The patrons of the place, by fear dismayed,
Sprang to the street and left their scores unpaid.
So, when Jove thunders and his lightnings gleam
To sour the milk and curdle, too, the cream,
And storm-clouds gather on the shadowed hill,
The ass forsakes his hay, the pig his swill.
Hotly the heroes now engaged--their breath
Came short and hard, as in the throes of death.
They clenched their hands, their weapons brandished high,
Cut, stabbed, and hewed, nor uttered any cry,
But gnashed their teeth and struggled on! In brief,
One ate his bacon, t'other one his beef.




MATTER FOR GRATITUDE

    [Especially should we be thankful for having escaped the
    ravages of the yellow scourge by which our neighbors have
    been so sorely afflicted.--_Governor Stoneman's Thanksgiving
    Proclamation._]


Be pleased, O Lord, to take a people's thanks
That Thine avenging sword has spared our ranks--
That Thou hast parted from our lips the cup
And forced our neighbors' lips to drink it up.
Father of Mercies, with a heart contrite
We thank Thee that Thou goest south to smite,
And sparest San Francisco's loins, to crack
Thy lash on Hermosillo's bleeding back--
That o'er our homes Thine awful angel spread
His wings in vain, and Guaymas weeps instead.

We praise Thee, God, that Yellow Fever here
His horrid banner has not dared to rear,
Consumption's jurisdiction to contest,
Her dagger deep in every second breast!
Catarrh and Asthma and Congestive Chill
Attest Thy bounty and perform Thy will.
These native messengers obey Thy call--
They summon singly, but they summon all.
Not, as in Mexico's impested clime,
Can Yellow Jack commit recurring crime.
We thank Thee that Thou killest all the time.

Thy tender mercies, Father, never end:
Upon all heads Thy blessings still descend,
Though their forms vary. Here the sown seeds yield
Abundant grain that whitens all the field--
There the smit corn stands barren on the plain,
Thrift reaps the straw and Famine gleans in vain.
Here the fat priest to the contented king
Points out the contrast and the people sing--
There mothers eat their offspring. Well, at least
Thou hast provided offspring for the feast.
An earthquake here rolls harmless through the land,
And Thou art good because the chimneys stand--
There templed cities sink into the sea,
And damp survivors, howling as they flee,
Skip to the hills and hold a celebration
In honor of Thy wise discrimination.

O God, forgive them all, from Stoneman down,
Thy smile who construe and expound Thy frown,
And fall with saintly grace upon their knees
To render thanks when Thou dost only sneeze.




THREE KINDS OF A ROGUE


I

Sharon, ambitious of immortal shame,
Fame's dead-wall daubed with his illustrious name--
Served in the Senate, for our sins, his time,
Each word a folly and each vote a crime;
Law for our governance well skilled to make
By knowledge gained in study how to break;
Yet still by the presiding eye ignored,
Which only sought him when too loud he snored.
Auspicious thunder!--when he woke to vote
He stilled his own to cut his country's throat;
That rite performed, fell off again to sleep,
While statesmen ages dead awoke to weep!
For sedentary service all unfit,
By lying long disqualified to sit,
Wasting below as he decayed aloft,
His seat grown harder as his brain grew soft,
He left the hall he could not bring away,
And grateful millions blessed the happy day!
Whate'er contention in that hall is heard,
His sovereign State has still the final word:
For disputatious statesmen when they roar
Startle the ancient echoes of his snore,
Which from their dusty nooks expostulate
And close with stormy clamor the debate.
To low melodious thunders then they fade;
Their murmuring lullabies all ears invade;
Peace takes the Chair; the portal Silence keeps;
No motion stirs the dark Lethean deeps--
Washoe has spoken and the Senate sleeps.


II

Lo! the new Sharon with a new intent,
Making no laws, but keen to circumvent
The laws of Nature (since he can't repeal)
That break his failing body on the wheel.
As Tantalus again and yet again
The elusive wave endeavors to restrain
To slake his awful thirst, so Sharon tries
To purchase happiness that age denies;
Obtains the shadow, but the substance goes,
And hugs the thorn, but cannot keep the rose;
For Dead Sea fruits bids prodigally, eats,
And then, with tardy reformation--cheats.
Alert his faculties as three score years
And four score vices will permit, he nears--
Dicing with Death--the finish of the game,
And curses still his candle's wasting flame,
The narrow circle of whose feeble glow
Dims and diminishes at every throw.
Moments his losses, pleasures are his gains,
Which even in his grasp revert to pains.
The joy of grasping them alone remains.


III

Ring up the curtain and the play protract!
Behold our Sharon in his last mad act.
With man long warring, quarreling with God,
He crouches now beneath a woman's rod
Predestined for his back while yet it lay
Closed in an acorn which, one luckless day,
He stole, unconscious of its foetal twig,
From the scant garner of a sightless pig.
With bleeding shoulders pitilessly scored,
He bawls more lustily than once he snored.
The sympathetic Comstocks droop to hear,
And Carson river sheds a viscous tear,
Which sturdy tumble-bugs assail amain,
With ready thrift, and urge along the plain.
The jackass rabbit sorrows as he lopes;
The sage-brush glooms along the mountain slopes;
In rising clouds the poignant alkali,
Tearless itself, makes everybody cry.
Washoe canaries on the Geiger Grade
Subdue the singing of their cavalcade,
And, wiping with their ears the tears unshed,
Grieve for their family's unlucky head.
Virginia City intermits her trade
And well-clad strangers walk her streets unflayed.
Nay, all Nevada ceases work to weep
And the recording angel goes to sleep.
But in his dreams his goose-quill's creaking fount
Augments the debits in the long account.
And still the continents and oceans ring
With royal torments of the Silver King!
Incessant bellowings fill all the earth,
Mingled with inextinguishable mirth.
He roars, men laugh, Nevadans weep, beasts howl,
Plash the affrighted fish, and shriek the fowl!
With monstrous din their blended thunders rise,
Peal upon peal, and brawl along the skies,
Startle in hell the Sharons as they groan,
And shake the splendors of the great white throne!
Still roaring outward through the vast profound,
The spreading circles of receding sound
Pursue each other in a failing race
To the cold confines of eternal space;
There break and die along that awful shore
Which God's own eyes have never dared explore--
Dark, fearful, formless, nameless evermore!

Look to the west! Against yon steely sky
Lone Mountain rears its holy cross on high.
About its base the meek-faced dead are laid
To share the benediction of its shade.
With crossed white hands, shut eyes and formal feet,
Their nights are innocent, their days discreet.
Sharon, some years, perchance, remain of life--
Of vice and greed, vulgarity and strife;
And then--God speed the day if such His will--
You'll lie among the dead you helped to kill,
And be in good society at last,
Your purse unsilvered and your face unbrassed.




A MAN


Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Casting to South his eye across the bourne
Of his dominion (where the Palmiped,
With leathers 'twixt his toes, paddles his marsh,
Amphibious) saw a rising cloud of hats,
And heard a faint, far sound of distant cheers
Below the swell of the horizon. "Lo,"
Cried one, "the President! the President!"
All footed webwise then took up the word--
The hill tribes and the tribes lacustrine and
The folk riparian and littoral,
Cried with one voice: "The President! He comes!"
And some there were who flung their headgear up
In emulation of the Southern mob;
While some, more soberly disposed, stood still
And silently had fits; and others made
Such reverent genuflexions as they could,
Having that climate in their bones. Then spake
The Court Dunce, humbly, as became him: "Sire,
If thou, as heretofore thou hast, wilt deign
To reap advantage of a fool's advice
By action ordered after nature's way,
As in thy people manifest (for still
Stupidity's the only wisdom) thou
Wilt get thee straight unto to the border land
To mark the President's approach with such
Due, decent courtesy as it shall seem
We have in custom the best warrant for."

Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Eyeing the storm of hats which darkened all
The Southern sky, and hearing far hurrahs
Of an exulting people, answered not.
Then some there were who fell upon their knees,
And some upon their Governor, and sought
Each in his way, by blandishment or force,
To gain his action to their end. "Behold,"
They said, "thy brother Governor to South
Met him even at the gateway of his realm,
Crook-kneed, magnetic-handed and agrin,
Backed like a rainbow--all things done in form
Of due observance and respect. Shall we
Alone of all his servitors refuse
Swift welcome to our master and our lord?"

Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Answered them not, but turned his back to them
And as if speaking to himself, the while
He started to retire, said: "He be damned!"

To that High Place o'er Portland's central block,
Where the Recording Angel stands to view
The sinning world, nor thinks to move his feet
Aside and look below, came flocking up
Inferior angels, all aghast, and cried:
"Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Has said, O what an awful word!--too bad
To be by us repeated!" "Yes, I know,"
Said the superior bird--"I heard it too,
And have already booked it. Pray observe."
Splitting the giant tome, whose covers fell
Apart, o'ershadowing to right and left
The Eastern and the Western world, he showed
The newly written entry, black and big,
Upon the credit side of thine account,
Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon.




Y'E FOE TO CATHAYE


O never an oathe sweares he,
  And never a pig-taile jerkes;
  With a brick-batte he ne lurkes
For to buste y'e crust, perdie,
Of y'e man from over sea,
  A-synging as he werkes.
For he knows ful well, y's youth,
  A tricke of exceeding worth:
And he plans withouten ruth
  A conflagration's birth!




SAMUEL SHORTRIDGE


Like a worn mother he attempts in vain
To still the unruly Crier of his brain:
The more he rocks the cradle of his chin
The more uproarious grows the brat within.




SURPRISED


"O son of mine age, these eyes lose their fire:
Be eyes, I pray, to thy dying sire."

"O father, fear not, for mine eyes are bright--
I read through a millstone at dead of night."

"My son, O tell me, who are those men,
Rushing like pigs to the feeding-pen?"

"Welcomers they of a statesman grand.
They'll shake, and then they will pocket; his hand."

"Sagacious youth, with the wondrous eye,
They seem to throw up their headgear. Why?"

"Because they've thrown up their hands until, O,
They're so tired!--and dinners they've none to throw."

"My son, my son, though dull are mine ears,
I hear a great sound like the people's cheers."

"He's thanking them, father, with tears in his eyes,
For giving him lately that fine surprise."

"My memory fails as I near mine end;
How _did_ they astonish their grateful friend?"

"By letting him buy, like apples or oats,
With that which has made him so good, the votes
Which make him so wise and grand and great.
Now, father, please die, for 'tis growing late."




POSTERITY'S AWARD


I'd long been dead, but I returned to earth.
  Some small affairs posterity was making
A mess of, and I came to see that worth
  Received its dues. I'd hardly finished waking,
The grave-mould still upon me, when my eye
Perceived a statue standing straight and high.

'Twas a colossal figure--bronze and gold--
  Nobly designed, in attitude commanding.
A toga from its shoulders, fold on fold,
  Fell to the pedestal on which 'twas standing.
Nobility it had and splendid grace,
And all it should have had--except a face!

It showed no features: not a trace nor sign
  Of any eyes or nose could be detected--
On the smooth oval of its front no line
  Where sites for mouths are commonly selected.
All blank and blind its faulty head it reared.
Let this be said: 'twas generously eared.

Seeing these things, I straight began to guess
  For whom this mighty image was intended.
"The head," I cried, "is Upton's, and the dress
  Is Parson Bartlett's own." True, _his_ cloak ended
Flush with his lowest vertebra, but no
Sane sculptor ever made a toga so.

Then on the pedestal these words I read:
  "_Erected Eighteen Hundred Ninety-seven_"
(Saint Christofer! how fast the time had sped!
  Of course it naturally does in Heaven)
"_To_ ----" (here a blank space for the name began)
"_The Nineteenth Century's Great Foremost Man_!"

"_Completed_" the inscription ended, "_in
  The Year Three Thousand_"--which was just arriving.
By Jove! thought I, 'twould make the founders grin
  To learn whose fame so long has been surviving--
To read the name posterity will place
In that blank void, and view the finished face.

Even as I gazed, the year Three Thousand came,
  And then by acclamation all the people
Decreed whose was our century's best fame;
  Then scaffolded the statue like a steeple,
To make the likeness; and the name was sunk
Deep in the pedestal's metallic trunk.

Whose was it? Gentle reader, pray excuse
  The seeming rudeness, but I can't consent to
Be so forehanded with important news.
  'Twas neither yours nor mine--let that content you.
If not, the name I must surrender, which,
Upon a dead man's word, was George K. Fitch!




AN ART CRITIC


Ira P. Rankin, you've a nasal name--
I'll sound it through "the speaking-trump of fame,"
And wondering nations, hearing from afar
The brazen twang of its resounding jar,
Shall say: "These bards are an uncommon class--
They blow their noses with a tube of brass!"
Rankin! ye gods! if Influenza pick
Our names at christening, and such names stick,
Let's all be born when summer suns withstand
Her prevalence and chase her from the land,
And healing breezes generously help
To shield from death each ailing human whelp!
"What's in a name?" There's much at least in yours
That the pained ear unwillingly endures,
And much to make the suffering soul, I fear,
Envy the lesser anguish of the ear.

So you object to Cytherea! Do,
The picture was not painted, sir, for you!
_Your_ mind to gratify and taste address,
The masking dove had been a dove the less.
Provincial censor! all untaught in art,
With mind indecent and indecent heart,
Do you not know--nay, why should I explain?
Instruction, argument alike were vain--
I'll show you reasons when you show me brain.




THE SPIRIT OF A SPONGE


I dreamed one night that Stephen Massett died,
And for admission up at Heaven applied.
"Who are you?" asked St. Peter. Massett said:
"Jeems Pipes, of Pipesville." Peter bowed his head,
Opened the gates and said: "I'm glad to know you,
And wish we'd something better, sir, to show you."
"Don't mention it," said Stephen, looking bland,
And was about to enter, hat in hand,
When from a cloud below such fumes arose
As tickled tenderly his conscious nose.
He paused, replaced his hat upon his head,
Turned back and to the saintly warden said,
O'er his already sprouting wings: "I swear
I smell some broiling going on down there!"
So Massett's paunch, attracted by the smell,
Followed his nose and found a place in Hell.




ORNITHANTHROPOS


"Let John P. Irish rise!" the edict rang
As when Creation into being sprang!
Nature, not clearly understanding, tried
To make a bird that on the air could ride.
But naught could baffle the creative plan--
Despite her efforts 'twas almost a man.
Yet he had risen--to the bird a twin--
Had she but fixed a wing upon his chin.




TO E.S. SALOMON

    Who in a Memorial Day oration protested bitterly against
    decorating the graves of Confederate dead.


What! Salomon! such words from you,
  Who call yourself a soldier? Well,
  The Southern brother where he fell
Slept all your base oration through.

Alike to him--he cannot know
  Your praise or blame: as little harm
  Your tongue can do him as your arm
A quarter-century ago.

The brave respect the brave. The brave
  Respect the dead; but _you_--you draw
  That ancient blade, the ass's jaw,
And shake it o'er a hero's grave.

Are you not he who makes to-day
  A merchandise of old renown
  Which he persuades this easy town
He won in battle far away?

Nay, those the fallen who revile
  Have ne'er before the living stood
  And stoutly made their battle good
And greeted danger with a smile.

What if the dead whom still you hate
  Were wrong? Are you so surely right?
  We know the issue of the fight--
The sword is but an advocate.

Men live and die, and other men
  Arise with knowledges diverse:
  What seemed a blessing seems a curse,
And Now is still at odds with Then.

The years go on, the old comes back
  To mock the new--beneath the sun.
  Is _nothing_ new; ideas run
Recurrent in an endless track.

What most we censure, men as wise
  Have reverently practiced; nor
  Will future wisdom fail to war
On principles we dearly prize.

We do not know--we can but deem,
  And he is loyalest and best
  Who takes the light full on his breast
And follows it throughout the dream.

The broken light, the shadows wide--
  Behold the battle-field displayed!
  God save the vanquished from the blade,
The victor from the victor's pride!

If, Salomon, the blessed dew
  That falls upon the Blue and Gray
  Is powerless to wash away
The sin of differing from you.


Remember how the flood of years
  Has rolled across the erring slain;
  Remember, too, the cleansing rain
Of widows' and of orphans' tears.

The dead are dead--let that atone:
  And though with equal hand we strew
  The blooms on saint and sinner too,
Yet God will know to choose his own.

The wretch, whate'er his life and lot,
  Who does not love the harmless dead
  With all his heart and all his head--
May God forgive him--_I_ shall not.

When, Salomon, you come to quaff
  The Darker Cup with meeker face,
  I, loving you at last, shall trace
Upon your tomb this epitaph:

"Draw near, ye generous and brave--
  Kneel round this monument and weep:
  It covers one who tried to keep
A flower from a dead man's grave."




DENNIS KEARNEY


Your influence, my friend, has gathered head--
To east and west its tides encroaching spread.
There'll be, on all God's foot-stool, when they meet,
No clean spot left for God to set His feet.




FINIS ÆTERNITATIS


Strolling at sunset in my native land,
With fruits and flowers thick on either hand,
    I crossed a Shadow flung athwart my way,
Emerging on a waste of rock and sand.

"The apples all are gone from here," I said,
"The roses perished and their spirits fled.
    I will go back." A voice cried out: "The man
Is risen who eternally was dead!"

I turned and saw an angel standing there,
Newly descended from the heights of air.
    Sweet-eyed compassion filled his face, his hands
A naked sword and golden trumpet bare.

"Nay, 'twas not death, the shadow that I crossed,"
I said. "Its chill was but a touch of frost.
    It made me gasp, but quickly I came through,
With breath recovered ere it scarce was lost."

'Twas the same land! Remembered mountains thrust
Grayed heads asky, and every dragging gust,
    In ashen valleys where my sons had reaped,
Stirred in familiar river-beds the dust.

Some heights, where once the traveler was shown
The youngest and the proudest city known,
    Lifted smooth ridges in the steely light--
Bleak, desolate acclivities of stone.

Where I had worshiped at my father's tomb,
Within a massive temple's awful gloom,
    A jackal slunk along the naked rock,
Affrighted by some prescience of doom.

Man's vestiges were nowhere to be found,
Save one brass mausoleum on a mound
    (I knew it well) spared by the artist Time
To emphasize the desolation round.

Into the stagnant sea the sullen sun
Sank behind bars of crimson, one by one.
    "Eternity's at hand!" I cried aloud.
"Eternity," the angel said, "is done.

For man is ages dead in every zone;
The angels all are dead but I alone;
    The devils, too, are cold enough at last,
And God lies dead before the great white throne!

'Tis foreordained that I bestride the shore
When all are gone (as Gabriel did before,
    When I had throttled the last man alive)
And swear Eternity shall be no more."

"O Azrael--O Prince of Death, declare
Why conquered I the grave?" I cried. "What rare,
    Conspicuous virtues won this boon for me?"
"You've been revived," he said, "to hear me swear."

"Then let me creep again beneath the grass,
And knock thou at yon pompous tomb of brass.
     If ears are what you want, Charles Crocker's there--
Betwixt the greatest ears, the greatest ass."

He rapped, and while the hollow echoes rang,
Out at the door a curst hyena sprang
     And fled! Said Azrael: "His soul's escaped,"
And closed the brazen portal with a bang.




THE VETERAN


John Jackson, once a soldier bold,
    Hath still a martial feeling;
So, when he sees a foe, behold!
    He charges him--with stealing.

He cares not how much ground to-day
    He gives for men to doubt him;
He's used to giving ground, they say,
    Who lately fought with--out him.

When, for the battle to be won,
    His gallantry was needed,
They say each time a loaded gun
    Went off--so, likewise, he did.

And when discharged (for war's a sport
    So hot he had to leave it)
He made a very loud report,
    But no one did believe it.




AN "EXHIBIT"


Goldenson hanged! Well, Heaven forbid
  That I should smile above him:
Though truth to tell, I never did
  Exactly love him.

It can't be wrong, though, to rejoice
  That his unpleasing capers
Are ended. Silent is his voice
  In all the papers.

No longer he's a show: no more,
  Bear-like, his den he's walking.
No longer can he hold the floor
  When I'd be talking.

The laws that govern jails are bad
  If such displays are lawful.
The fate of the assassin's sad,
  But ours is awful!

What! shall a wretch condemned to die
  In shame upon the gibbet
Be set before the public eye
  As an "exhibit"?--

His looks, his actions noted down,
  His words if light or solemn,
And all this hawked about the town--
  So much a column?

The press, of course, will publish news
  However it may get it;
But blast the sheriff who'll abuse
  His powers to let it!

Nay, this is not ingratitude;
  I'm no reporter, truly,
Nor yet an editor. I'm rude
  Because unruly--

Because I burn with shame and rage
  Beyond my power of telling
To see assassins in a cage
  And keepers yelling.

"Walk up! Walk up!" the showman cries:
  "Observe the lion's poses,
His stormy mane, his glooming eyes.
  His--hold your noses!"

How long, O Lord, shall Law and Right
  Be mocked for gain or glory,
And angels weep as they recite
  The shameful story?




THE TRANSMIGRATIONS OF A SOUL


What! Pixley, must I hear you call the roll
Of all the vices that infest your soul?
Was't not enough that lately you did bawl
Your money-worship in the ears of all?[A]
Still must you crack your brazen cheek to tell
That though a miser you're a sot as well?
Still must I hear how low your taste has sunk--
From getting money down to getting drunk?[B]

Who worships money, damning all beside,
And shows his callous knees with pious pride,
Speaks with half-knowledge, for no man e'er scorns
His own possessions, be they coins or corns.
You've money, neighbor; had you gentle birth
You'd know, as now you never can, its worth.

You've money; learning is beyond your scope,
Deaf to your envy, stubborn to your hope.
But if upon your undeserving head
Science and letters had their glory shed;
If in the cavern of your skull the light
Of knowledge shone where now eternal night
Breeds the blind, poddy, vapor-fatted naughts
Of cerebration that you think are thoughts--
Black bats in cold and dismal corners hung
That squeak and gibber when you move your tongue--
You would not write, in Avarice's defense,
A senseless eulogy on lack of sense,
Nor show your eagerness to sacrifice
All noble virtues to one loathsome vice.

You've money; if you'd manners too you'd shame
To boast your weakness or your baseness name.
Appraise the things you have, but measure not
The things denied to your unhappy lot.
He values manners lighter than a cork
Who combs his beard at table with a fork.
Hare to seek sin and tortoise to forsake,
The laws of taste condemn you to the stake
To expiate, where all the world may see,
The crime of growing old disgracefully.

Religion, learning, birth and manners, too,
All that distinguishes a man from you,
Pray damn at will: all shining virtues gain
An added luster from a rogue's disdain.
But spare the young that proselyting sin,
A toper's apotheosis of gin.
If not our young, at least our pigs may claim
Exemption from the spectacle of shame!

Are you not he who lately out of shape
Blew a brass trumpet to denounce the grape?--
Who led the brave teetotalers afield
And slew your leader underneath your shield?--
Swore that no man should drink unless he flung
Himself across your body at the bung?
Who vowed if you'd the power you would fine
The Son of God for making water wine?

All trails to odium you tread and boast,
Yourself enamored of the dirtiest most.
One day to be a miser you aspire,
The next to wallow drunken in the mire;
The third, lo! you're a meritorious liar![C]
Pray, in the catalogue of all your graces,
Have theft and cowardice no honored places?

Yield thee, great Satan--here's a rival name
With all thy vices and but half thy shame!
Quick to the letter of the precept, quick
To the example of the elder Nick;
With as great talent as was e'er applied
To fool a teacher and to fog a guide;
With slack allegiance and boundless greed,
To paunch the profit of a traitor deed,
He aims to make thy glory all his own,
And crowd his master from the infernal throne!


[Footnote A: We are not writing this paragraph for any other purpose
than to protest against this never ending cant, affectation, and
hypocrisy about money. It is one of the best things in this
world--better than religion, or good birth, or learning, or good
manners.--_The Argonaut_.]

[Footnote B: Now, it just occurs to us that some of our temperance
friends will take issue with us, and say that this is bad doctrine,
and that it is ungentlemanly to get drunk under any circumstances
or under any possible conditions. We do not think so.--_The
same_.]

[Footnote C: The man or woman who, for the sake of benefiting others,
protecting them in their lives, property, or reputation, sparing
their feelings, contributing to their enjoyment, or increasing
their pleasures, will tell a lie, deserves to be rewarded.--_The
same_.]




AN ACTOR


Some one ('tis hardly new) has oddly said
The color of a trumpet's blare is red;
And Joseph Emmett thinks the crimson shame
On woman's cheek a trumpet-note of fame.
The more the red storm rises round her nose--
The more her eyes averted seek her toes,
He fancies all the louder he can hear
The tube resounding in his spacious ear,
And, all his varied talents to exert,
Darkens his dullness to display his dirt.
And when the gallery's indecent crowd,
And gentlemen below, with hisses loud,
In hot contention (these his art to crown,
And those his naked nastiness to drown)
Make such a din that cheeks erewhile aflame
Grow white and in their fear forget their shame,
With impudence imperial, sublime,
Unmoved, the patient actor bides his time,
Till storm and counter-storm are both allayed,
Like donkeys, each by t'other one outbrayed.
When all the place is silent as a mouse
One slow, suggestive gesture clears the house!




FAMINE'S REALM


To him in whom the love of Nature has
Imperfectly supplanted the desire
And dread necessity of food, your shore,
Fair Oakland, is a terror. Over all
Your sunny level, from Tamaletown
To where the Pestuary's fragrant slime,
With dead dogs studded, bears its ailing fleet,
Broods the still menace of starvation. Bones
Of men and women bleach along the ways
And pampered vultures sleep upon the trees.
It is a land of death, and Famine there
Holds sovereignty; though some there be her sway
Who challenge, and intrenched in larders live,
Drawing their sustentation from abroad.
But woe to him, the stranger! He shall die
As die the early righteous in the bud
And promise of their prime. He, venturesome
To penetrate the wilds rectangular
Of grass-grown ways luxuriant of blooms,
Frequented of the bee and of the blithe,
Bold squirrel, strays with heedless feet afar
From human habitation and is lost
In mid-Broadway. There hunger seizes him,
And (careless man! deeming God's providence
Extends so far) he has not wherewithal
To bate its urgency. Then, lo! appears
A mealery--a restaurant--a place
Where poison battles famine, and the two,
Like fish-hawks warring in the upper sky
For that which one has taken from the deep,
Manage between them to dispatch the prey.
He enters and leaves hope behind. There ends
His history. Anon his bones, clean-picked
By buzzards (with the bones himself had picked,
Incautious) line the highway. O, my friends,
Of all felonious and deadlywise
Devices of the Enemy of Souls,
Planted along the ways of life to snare
Man's mortal and immortal part alike,
The Oakland restaurant is chief. It lives
That man may die. It flourishes that life
May wither. Its foundation stones repose
On human hearts and hopes. I've seen in it
Crabs stewed in milk and salad offered up
With dressing so unholily compound
That it included flour and sugar! Yea,
I've eaten dog there!--dog, as I'm a man,
Dog seethed in sewage of the town! No more--
Thy hand, Dyspepsia, assumes the pen
And scrawls a tortured "Finis" on the page.




THE MACKAIAD


Mackay's hot wrath to Bonynge, direful spring
Of blows unnumbered, heavenly goddess, sing--
That wrath which hurled to Hellman's office floor
Two heroes, mutually smeared with gore,
Whose hair in handfuls marked the dire debate,
And riven coat-tails testified their hate.
Sing, muse, what first their indignation fired,
What words augmented it, by whom inspired.

First, the great Bonynge comes upon the scene
And asks the favor of the British Queen.
Suppliant he stands and urges all his claim:
His wealth, his portly person and his name,
His habitation in the setting sun,
As child of nature; and his suit he won.
No more the Sovereign, wearied with his plea,
From slumber's chain her faculties can free.
Low and more low the royal eyelids creep,
She gives the assenting nod and falls asleep.
Straightway the Bonynges all invade the Court
And telegraph the news to every port.
Beneath the seas, red-hot, the tidings fly,
The cables crinkle and the fishes fry!
The world, awaking like a startled bat,
Exclaims: "A Bonynge? What the devil's that?"
Mackay, meanwhile, to envy all attent,
Untaught to spare, unable to relent,
Walks in our town on needles and on pins,
And in a mean, revengeful spirit--grins!

Sing, muse, what next to break the peace occurred--
What act uncivil, what unfriendly word?
The god of Bosh ascending from his pool,
Where since creation he has played the fool,
Clove the blue slush, as other gods the sky,
And, waiting but a moment's space to dry,
Touched Bonynge with his finger-tip. "O son,"
He said, "alike of nature and a gun,
Knowest not Mackay's insufferable sin?
Hast thou not heard that he doth stand and grin?
Arise! assert thy manhood, and attest
The uncommercial spirit in thy breast.
Avenge thine honor, for by Jove I swear
Thou shalt not else be my peculiar care!"
He spake, and ere his worshiper could kneel
Had dived into his slush pool, head and heel.
Full of the god and to revenges nerved,
And conscious of a will that never swerved,
Bonynge set sail: the world beyond the wave
As gladly took him as the other gave.
New York received him, but a shudder ran
Through all the western coast, which knew the man;
And science said that the seismic action
Was owing to an asteroid's impaction.

O goddess, sing what Bonynge next essayed.
Did he unscabbard the avenging blade,
The long spear brandish and porrect the shield,
Havoc the town and devastate the field?
His sacred thirst for blood did he allay
By halving the unfortunate Mackay?
Small were the profit and the joy to him
To hew a base-born person, limb from limb.
Let vulgar souls to low revenge incline,
That of diviner spirits is divine.
Bonynge at noonday stood in public places
And (with regard to the Mackays) made faces!
Before those formidable frowns and scowls
The dogs fled, tail-tucked, with affrighted howls,
And horses, terrified, with flying feet
O'erthrew the apple-stands along the street,
Involving the metropolis in vast
Financial ruin! Man himself, aghast,
Retreated east and west and north and south
Before the menace of that twisted mouth,
Till Jove, in answer to their prayers, sent Night
To veil the dreadful visage from their sight!

Such were the causes of the horrid strife--
The mother-wrongs which nourished it to life.
O, for a quill from an archangel's wing!
O, for a voice that's adequate to sing
The splendor and the terror of the fray,
The scattered hair, the coat-tails all astray,
The parted collars and the gouts of gore
Reeking and smoking on the banker's floor,
The interlocking limbs, embraces dire,
Revolving bodies and deranged attire!

Vain, vain the trial: 'tis vouchsafed to none
To sing two millionaires rolled into one!
My hand and pen their offices refuse,
And hoarse and hoarser grows the weary muse.
Alone remains, to tell of the event,
Abandoned, lost and variously rent,
The Bonynge nethermost habiliment.




A SONG IN PRAISE


Hail, blessed Blunder! golden idol, hail!--
Clay-footed deity of all who fail.
Celestial image, let thy glory shine,
Thy feet concealing, but a lamp to mine.
Let me, at seasons opportune and fit,
By turns adore thee and by turns commit.
In thy high service let me ever be
(Yet never serve thee as my critics me)
Happy and fallible, content to feel
I blunder chiefly when to thee I kneel.
But best felicity is his thy praise
Who utters unaware in works and ways--
Who _laborare est orare_ proves,
And feels thy suasion wheresoe'er he moves,
Serving thy purpose, not thine altar, still,
And working, for he thinks it his, thy will.
If such a life with blessings be not fraught,
I envy Peter Robertson for naught.




A POET'S FATHER


Welcker, I'm told, can boast a father great
And honored in the service of the State.
Public Instruction all his mind employs--
He guides its methods and its wage enjoys.
Prime Pedagogue, imperious and grand,
He waves his ferule o'er a studious land
Where humming youth, intent upon the page,
Thirsting for knowledge with a noble rage,
Drink dry the whole Pierian spring and ask
To slake their fervor at his private flask.
Arrested by the terror of his frown,
The vaulting spit-ball drops untimely down;
The fly impaled on the tormenting pin
Stills in his awful glance its dizzy din;
Beneath that stern regard the chewing-gum
Which writhed and squeaked between the teeth is dumb;
Obedient to his will the dunce-cap flies
To perch upon the brows of the unwise;
The supple switch forsakes the parent wood
To settle where 'twill do the greatest good,
Puissant still, as when of old it strove
With Solomon for spitting on the stove
Learned Professor, variously great,
Guide, guardian, instructor of the State--
Quick to discern and zealous to correct
The faults which mar the public intellect
From where of Siskiyou the northern bound
Is frozen eternal to the sunless ground
To where in San Diego's torrid clime
The swarthy Greaser swelters in his grime--
Beneath your stupid nose can you not see
The dunce whom once you dandled on your knee?
O mighty master of a thousand schools,
Stop teaching wisdom, or stop breeding fools.




A COWARD


When Pickering, distressed by an "attack,"
Has the strange insolence to answer back
He hides behind a name that is a lie,
And out of shadow falters his reply.
God knows him, though--identified alike
By hardihood to rise and fear to strike,
And fitly to rebuke his sins decrees,
That, hide from others with what care he please,
Night sha'n't be black enough nor earth so wide
That from himself himself can ever hide!
Hard fate indeed to feel at every breath
His burden of identity till death!--
No moment's respite from the immortal load,
To think himself a serpent or a toad,
Or dream, with a divine, ecstatic glow,
He's long been dead and canonized a crow!




TO MY LIARS


Attend, mine enemies of all degrees,
From sandlot orators and sandlot fleas
To fallen gentlemen and rising louts
Who babble slander at your drinking bouts,
And, filled with unfamiliar wine, begin
Lies drowned, ere born, in more congenial gin.
But most attend, ye persons of the press
Who live (though why, yourselves alone can guess)
In hope deferred, ambitious still to shine
By hating me at half a cent a line--
Like drones among the bees of brighter wing,
Sunless to shine and impotent to sting.
To estimate in easy verse I'll try
The controversial value of a lie.
So lend your ears--God knows you have enough!--
I mean to teach, and if I can't I'll cuff.

A lie is wicked, so the priests declare;
But that to us is neither here nor there.
'Tis worse than wicked, it is vulgar too;
_N'importe_--with that we've nothing here to do.
If 'twere artistic I would lie till death,
And shape a falsehood with my latest breath.
Parrhasius never more did pity lack,
The while his model writhed upon the rack,
Than I for my collaborator's pain,
Who, stabbed with fibs again and yet again,
Would vainly seek to move my stubborn heart
If slander were, and wit were not, an art.
The ill-bred and illiterate can lie
As fast as you, and faster far than I.
Shall I compete, then, in a strife accurst
Where Allen Forman is an easy first,
And where the second prize is rightly flung
To Charley Shortridge or to Mike de Young?

In mental combat but a single end
Inspires the formidable to contend.
Not by the raw recruit's ambition fired,
By whom foul blows, though harmless, are admired;
Not by the coward's zeal, who, on his knee
Behind the bole of his protecting tree,
So curves his musket that the bark it fits,
And, firing, blows the weapon into bits;
But with the noble aim of one whose heart
Values his foeman for he loves his art
The veteran debater moves afield,
Untaught to libel as untaught to yield.
Dear foeman mine, I've but this end in view--
That to prevent which most you wish to do.
What, then, are you most eager to be at?
To hate me? Nay, I'll help you, sir, at that.
This only passion does your soul inspire:
You wish to scorn me. Well, you shall admire.

'Tis not enough my neighbors that you school
In the belief that I'm a rogue or fool;
That small advantage you would gladly trade
For what one moment would _yourself_ persuade.
Write, then, your largest and your longest lie:
_You_ sha'n't believe it, howsoe'er you try.
No falsehood you can tell, no evil do,
Shall turn me from the truth to injure you.
So all your war is barren of effect;
I find my victory in your respect.
What profit have you if the world you set
Against me? For the world will soon forget
It thought me this or that; but I'll retain
A vivid picture of your moral stain,
And cherish till my memory expire
The sweet, soft consciousness that you're a liar
Is it _your_ triumph, then, to prove that you
Will do the thing that I would scorn to do?
God grant that I forever be exempt
From such advantage as my foe's contempt.




"PHIL" CRIMMINS


Still as he climbed into the public view
His charms of person more apparent grew,
Till the pleased world that watched his airy grace
Saw nothing of him but his nether face--
Forgot his follies with his head's retreat,
And blessed his virtues as it viewed their seat.




CODEX HONORIS


Jacob Jacobs, of Oakland, he swore:
"Dat Solomon Martin--I'll haf his gore!"
Solomon Martin, of Oakland, he said:
"Of Shacob Shacobs der bleed I vill shed!"
So they met, with seconds and surgeon at call,
And fought with pistol and powder and--all
Was done in good faith,--as before I said,
They fought with pistol and powder and--shed
Tears, O my friends, for each other they marred
Fighting with pistol and powder and--lard!
For the lead had been stolen away, every trace,
And Christian hog-product supplied its place.
Then the shade of Moses indignant arose:
"Quvicker dan lighdnings go vosh yer glose!"
Jacob Jacobs, of Oakland, they say,
Applied for a pension the following day.
Solomon Martin, of Oakland, I hear,
Will call himself Colonel for many a year.




TO W.H.L.B.


Refrain, dull orator, from speaking out,
For silence deepens when you raise the shout;
But when you hold your tongue we hear, at least,
Your noise in mastering that little beast.




EMANCIPATION


Behold! the days of miracle at last
Return--if ever they were truly past:
From sinful creditors' unholy greed
The church called Calvary at last is freed--
So called for there the Savior's crucified,
Roberts and Carmany on either side.

The circling contribution-box no more
Provokes the nod and simulated snore;
No more the Lottery, no more the Fair,
Lure the reluctant dollar from its lair,
Nor Ladies' Lunches at a bit a bite
Destroy the health yet spare the appetite,
While thrifty sisters o'er the cauldron stoop
To serve their God with zeal, their friends with soup,
And all the brethren mendicate the earth
With viewless placards: "We've been _so_ from birth!"

Sure of his wage, the pastor now can lend
His whole attention to his latter end,
Remarking with a martyr's prescient thrill
The Hemp maturing on the cheerless Hill.
The holy brethren, lifting pious palms,
Pour out their gratitude in prayer and psalms,
Chant _De Profundis_, meaning "out of debt,"
And dance like mad--or would if they were let.

Deeply disguised (a deacon newly dead
Supplied the means) Jack Satan holds his head
As high as any and as loudly sings
His _jubilate_ till each rafter rings.
"Rejoice, ye ever faithful," bellows he,
"The debt is lifted and the temple free!"
Then says, aside, with gentle cachination:
"I've got a mortgage on the congregation."




JOHNDONKEY

    [There isn't a man living who does not have at least a
    sneaking reverence for a horse-shoe.--_Evening Post_.]


Thus the poor ass whose appetite has ne'er
Known than the thistle any sweeter fare
Thinks all the world eats thistles. Thus the clown,
The wit and Mentor of the country town,
Grins through the collar of a horse and thinks
Others for pleasure do as he for drinks,
Though secretly, because unwilling still
In public to attest their lack of skill.
Each dunce whose life and mind all follies mar
Believes as he is all men living are--
His vices theirs, their understandings his;
Naught that he knows not, all he fancies, _is_.
How odd that any mind such stuff should boast!
How natural to write it in the _Post_!




HELL


The friends who stood about my bed
Looked down upon my face and said:
"God's will be done--the fellow's dead."

When from my body I was free
I straightway felt myself, ah me!
Sink downward to the life to be.

Full twenty centuries I fell,
And then alighted. "Here you dwell
For aye," a Voice cried--"this is Hell!"

A landscape lay about my feet,
Where trees were green and flowers sweet.
The climate was devoid of heat.

The sun looked down with gentle beam
Upon the bosom of the stream,
Nor saw I any sign of steam.

The waters by the sky were tinged,
The hills with light and color fringed.
Birds warbled on the wing unsinged.

"Ah, no, this is not Hell," I cried;
"The preachers ne'er so greatly lied.
This is Earth's spirit glorified!

"Good souls do not in Hades dwell,
And, look, there's John P. Irish!" "Well,"
The Voice said, "that's what makes it Hell."




BY FALSE PRETENSES


John S. Hittell, whose sovereign genius wields
The quill his tributary body yields;
The author of an opera--that is,
All but the music and libretto's his:
A work renowned, whose formidable name,
Linked with his own, repels the assault of fame
From the high vantage of a dusty shelf,
Secure from all the world except himself;--
Who told the tale of "Culture" in a screed
That all might understand if some would read;--
Master of poesy and lord of prose,
Dowered, like a setter, with a double nose;
That one for Erato, for Clio this;
He flushes both--not his fault if we miss;--
Judge of the painter's art, who'll straight proclaim
The hue of any color you can name,
And knows a painting with a canvas back
Distinguished from a duck by the duck's quack;--
This thinker and philosopher, whose work
Is famous from Commercial street to Turk,
Has got a fortune now, his talent's meed.
A woman left it him who could not read,
And so went down to death's eternal night
Sweetly unconscious that the wretch could write.




LUCIFER OF THE TORCH


O Reverend Ravlin, once with sounding lung
You shook the bloody banner of your tongue,
Urged all the fiery boycotters afield
And swore you'd rather follow them than yield,
Alas, how brief the time, how great the change!--
Your dogs of war are ailing all of mange;
The loose leash dangles from your finger-tips,
But the loud "havoc" dies upon your lips.
No spirit animates your feeble clay--
You'd rather yield than even run away.
In vain McGlashan labors to inspire
Your pallid nostril with his breath of fire:
The light of battle's faded from your face--
You keep the peace, John Chinaman his place.
O Ravlin, what cold water, thrown by whom
Upon the kindling Boycott's ruddy bloom,
Has slaked your parching blood-thirst and allayed
The flash and shimmer of your lingual blade?
Your salary--your salary's unpaid!

In the old days, when Christ with scourges drave
The Ravlins headlong from the Temple's nave,
Each bore upon his pelt the mark divine--
The Boycott's red authenticating sign.
Birth-marked forever in surviving hurts,
Glowing and smarting underneath their shirts,
Successive Ravlins have revenged their shame
By blowing every coal and flinging flame.
And you, the latest (may you be the last!)
Endorsed with that hereditary, vast
And monstrous rubric, would the feud prolong,
Save that cupidity forbids the wrong.
In strife you preferably pass your days--
But brawl no moment longer than it pays.
By shouting when no more you can incite
The dogs to put the timid sheep to flight
To load, for you, the brambles with their fleece,
You cackle concord to congenial geese,
Put pinches of goodwill upon their tails
And pluck them with a touch that never fails.




THE "WHIRLIGIG OF TIME"


Dr. Jewell speaks of Balaam
And his vices, to assail 'em.
Ancient enmities how cruel!--
Balaam cudgeled once a Jewell.




A RAILROAD LACKEY


Ben Truman, you're a genius and can write,
  Though one would not suspect it from your looks.
You lack that certain spareness which is quite
  Distinctive of the persons who make books.
  You show the workmanship of Stanford's cooks
About the region of the appetite,
Where geniuses are singularly slight.
Your friends the Chinamen are understood,
Indeed, to speak of you as "belly good."

Still, you can write--spell, too, I understand--
  Though how two such accomplishments can go,
Like sentimental schoolgirls, hand in hand
  Is more than ever I can hope to know.
  To have one talent good enough to show
Has always been sufficient to command
The veneration of the brilliant band
Of railroad scholars, who themselves, indeed,
Although they cannot write, can mostly read.

There's Towne and Fillmore, Goodman and Steve Gage,
  Ned Curtis of Napoleonic face,
Who used to dash his name on glory's page
  "A.M." appended to denote his place
  Among the learned. Now the last faint trace
Of Nap. is all obliterate with age,
And Ned's degree less precious than his wage.
He says: "I done it," with his every breath.
"Thou canst not say I did it," says Macbeth.

Good land! how I run on! I quite forgot
  Whom this was meant to be about; for when
I think upon that odd, unearthly lot--
  Not quite Creedhaymonds, yet not wholly men--
  I'm dominated by my rebel pen
That, like the stubborn bird from which 'twas got,
Goes waddling forward if I will or not.
To leave your comrades, Ben, I'm now content:
I'll meet them later if I don't repent.

You've writ a letter, I observe--nay, more,
  You've published it--to say how good you think
The coolies, and invite them to come o'er
  In thicker quantity. Perhaps you drink
No corporation's wine, but love its ink;
Or when you signed away your soul and swore
On railrogue battle-fields to shed your gore
You mentally reserved the right to shed
The raiment of your character instead.

You're naked, anyhow: unragged you stand
  In frank and stark simplicity of shame.
And here upon your flank, in letters grand,
  The iron has marked you with your owner's name.
  Needless, for none would steal and none reclaim.
  But "£eland $tanford" is a pretty brand,
Wrought by an artist with a cunning hand
But come--this naked unreserve is flat:
Don your habiliment--you're fat, you're fat!




THE LEGATEE


In fair San Francisco a good man did dwell,
And he wrote out a will, for he didn't feel well,
Said he: "It is proper, when making a gift,
To stimulate virtue by comforting thrift."

So he left all his property, legal and straight,
To "the cursedest rascal in all of the State."
But the name he refused to insert, for, said he;
"Let each man consider himself legatee."

In due course of time that philanthropist died,
And all San Francisco, and Oakland beside--
Save only the lawyers--came each with his claim
The lawyers preferring to manage the same.

The cases were tried in Department Thirteen,
Judge Murphy presided, sedate and serene,
But couldn't quite specify, legal and straight,
The cursedest rascal in all of the State.

And so he remarked to them, little and big--
To claimants: "You skip!" and to lawyers: "You dig!"
They tumbled, tumultuous, out of his court
And left him victorious, holding the fort.

'Twas then that he said: "It is plain to my mind
This property's ownerless--how can I find
The cursedest rascal in all of the State?"
So he took it himself, which was legal and straight.




"DIED OF A ROSE"


A reporter he was, and he wrote, wrote he:
  "The grave was covered as thick as could be
  With floral tributes"--which reading,
The editor man he said, he did so:
  "For 'floral tributes' he's got for to go,
  For I hold the same misleading."
Then he called him in and he pointed sweet
To a blooming garden across the street,
  Inquiring: "What's them a-growing?"
The reporter chap said: "Why, where's your eyes?
Them's floral tributes!" "Arise, arise,"
  The editor said, "and be going."




A LITERARY HANGMAN


Beneath his coat of dirt great Neilson loves
  To hide the avenging rope.
He handles all he touches without gloves,
  Excepting soap.




AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR


As through the blue expanse he skims
  On joyous wings, the late
Frank Hutchings overtakes Miss Sims,
  Both bound for Heaven's high gate.

In life they loved and (God knows why
  A lover so should sue)
He slew her, on the gallows high
  Died pious--and they flew.

Her pinions were bedraggled, soiled
  And torn as by a gale,
While his were bright--all freshly oiled
  The feathers of his tail.

Her visage, too, was stained and worn
  And menacing and grim;
His sweet and mild--you would have sworn
  That _she_ had murdered _him_.

When they'd arrived before the gate
  He said to her: "My dear,
'Tis hard once more to separate,
  But _you_ can't enter here.

"For you, unluckily, were sent
  So quickly to the grave
You had no notice to repent,
  Nor time your soul to save."

"'Tis true," said she, "and I should wail
  In Hell even now, but I
Have lingered round the county jail
  To see a Christian die."




A CONTROVERSIALIST


I've sometimes wished that Ingersoll were wise
To hold his tongue, nor rail against the skies;
  For when he's made a point some pious dunce
Like Bartlett of the _Bulletin_ "replies."

I brandish no iconoclastic fist,
Nor enter the debate an atheist;
  But when they say there is a God I ask
Why Bartlett, then, is suffered to exist.

Even infidels that logic might resent,
Saying: "There's no place for his punishment
  That's worse than earth." But humbly I submit
That he would make a hell wherever sent.




MENDAX


High Lord of Liars, Pickering, to thee
Let meaner mortals bend the subject knee!
Thine is mendacity's imperial crown,
Alike by genius, action and renown.
No man, since words could set a cheek aflame
E'er lied so greatly with so little shame!
O bad old man, must thy remaining years
Be passed in leading idiots by their ears--
Thine own (which Justice, if she ruled the roast
Would fasten to the penitential post)
Still wagging sympathetically--hung
the same rocking-bar that bears thy tongue?

Thou dog of darkness, dost thou hope to stay
Time's dread advance till thou hast had thy day?
Dost think the Strangler will release his hold
Because, forsooth, some fibs remain untold?
No, no--beneath thy multiplying load
Of years thou canst not tarry on the road
To dabble in the blood thy leaden feet
Have pressed from bosoms that have ceased to beat
Of reputations margining thy way,
Nor wander from the path new truth to slay.
Tell to thyself whatever lies thou wilt,
Catch as thou canst at pennies got by guilt--
Straight down to death this blessed year thou'lt sink,
Thy life washed out as with a wave of ink.
But if this prophecy be not fulfilled,
And thou who killest patience be not killed;
If age assail in vain and vice attack
Only by folly to be beaten back;
Yet Nature can this consolation give:
The rogues who die not are condemned to live!




THE RETROSPECTIVE BIRD


His caw is a cackle, his eye is dim,
And he mopes all day on the lowest limb;
Not a word says he, but he snaps his bill
And twitches his palsied head, as a quill,
The ultimate plume of his pride and hope,
Quits his now featherless nose-of-the-Pope,
Leaving that eminence brown and bare
Exposed to the Prince of the Power of the Air.
And he sits and he thinks: "I'm an old, old man,
Mateless and chickless, the last of my clan,
But I'd give the half of the days gone by
To perch once more on the branches high,
And hear my great-grand-daddy's comical croaks
In authorized versions of _Bulletin_ jokes."




THE OAKLAND DOG


I lay one happy night in bed
And dreamed that all the dogs were dead.
They'd all been taken out and shot--
Their bodies strewed each vacant lot.

O'er all the earth, from Berkeley down
To San Leandro's ancient town,
And out in space as far as Niles--
I saw their mortal parts in piles.

One stack upreared its ridge so high
Against the azure of the sky
That some good soul, with pious views,
Put up a steeple and sold pews.

No wagging tail the scene relieved:
I never in my life conceived
(I swear it on the Decalogue!)
Such penury of living dog.

The barking and the howling stilled,
The snarling with the snarler killed,
All nature seemed to hold its breath:
The silence was as deep as death.

True, candidates were all in roar
On every platform, as before;
And villains, as before, felt free
To finger the calliope.

True, the Salvationist by night,
And milkman in the early light,
The lonely flutist and the mill
Performed their functions with a will.

True, church bells on a Sunday rang
The sick man's curtain down--the bang
Of trains, contesting for the track,
Out of the shadow called him back.

True, cocks, at all unheavenly hours,
Crew with excruciating powers,
Cats on the woodshed rang and roared,
Fat citizens and fog-horns snored.

But this was all too fine for ears
Accustomed, through the awful years,
To the nocturnal monologues
And day debates of Oakland dogs.

And so the world was silent. Now
What else befell--to whom and how?
_Imprimis_, then, there were no fleas,
And days of worth brought nights of ease.

Men walked about without the dread
Of being torn to many a shred,
Each fragment holding half a cruse
Of hydrophobia's quickening juice.

They had not to propitiate
Some curst kioodle at each gate,
But entered one another's grounds,
Unscared, and were not fed to hounds.

Women could drive and not a pup
Would lift the horse's tendons up
And let them go--to interject
A certain musical effect.

Even children's ponies went about,
All grave and sober-paced, without
A bulldog hanging to each nose--
Proud of his fragrance, I suppose.

Dog being dead, Man's lawless flame
Burned out: he granted Woman's claim,
Children's and those of country, art--
all took lodgings in his heart.

When memories of his former shame
Crimsoned his cheeks with sudden flame
He said; "I know my fault too well--
They fawned upon me and I fell."

Ah! 'twas a lovely world!--no more
I met that indisposing bore,
The unseraphic cynogogue--
The man who's proud to love a dog.

Thus in my dream the golden reign
Of Reason filled the world again,
And all mankind confessed her sway,
From Walnut Creek to San Jose.




THE UNFALLEN BRAVE


Not all in sorrow and in tears,
To pay of gratitude's arrears
  The yearly sum--
Not prompted, wholly by the pride
Of those for whom their friends have died,
  To-day we come.

Another aim we have in view
Than for the buried boys in blue
  To drop a tear:
Memorial Day revives the chin
Of Barnes, and Salomon chimes in--
  That's why we're here.

And when in after-ages they
Shall pass, like mortal men, away,
  Their war-song sung,
Then fame will tell the tale anew
Of how intrepidly they drew
  The deadly tongue.

Then cull white lilies for the graves
Of Liberty's loquacious braves,
  And roses red.
Those represent their livers, these
The blood that in unmeasured seas
  They did not shed.




A CELEBRATED CASE


Way down in the Boom Belt lived Mrs. Roselle;
A person named Petrie, he lived there as well;
But Mr. Roselle he resided away--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iay.

Once Mrs. Roselle in her room was alone:
The flesh of her flesh and the bone of her bone
Neglected the wife of his bosom to woo--
Sing tooral iooral iooral ioo.

Then Petrie, her lover, appeared at the door,
Remarking: "My dear; I don't love you no more."
"That's awfully rough," said the lady, "on me--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iee."

"Come in, Mr. Petrie," she added, "pray do:
Although you don't love me no more, I love you.
Sit down while I spray you with vitriol now--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iow."

Said Petrie: "That liquid I know won't agree
With my beauty, and then you'll no longer love me;
So spray and be "--O, what a word he did say!--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iay.

She deluged his head and continued to pour
Till his bonny blue eyes, like his love, were no more.
It was seldom he got such a hearty shampoo--
Sing tooral iooral iooral ioo.

Then Petrie he rose and said: "Mrs. Roselle,
I have an engagement and bid you farewell."
"You see," she began to explain--but not he!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iee.

The Sheriff he came and he offered his arm,
Saying, "Sorry I am for disturbin' you, marm,
But business is business." Said she, "So they say--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iay."

The Judge on the bench he looked awfully stern;
The District Attorney began to attorn;
The witnesses lied and the lawyers--O my!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iyi.

The chap that defended her said: "It's our claim
That he loved us no longer and told us the same.
What else than we did could we decently do?--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral ioo."

The District Attorney, sarcastic, replied:
"We loved you no longer--that can't be denied.
Not having no eyes we may dote on you now--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iow."

The prisoner wept to entoken her fears;
The sockets of Petrie were flooded with tears.
O heaven-born Sympathy, bully for you!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral ioo.

Four jurors considered the prisoner mad,
And four thought her victim uncommonly bad,
And four that the acid was all in his eye--
Sing rum tiddy iddity iddity hi.




COUPLETS

    Intended for Inscription on a Sword Presented to Colonel
    Cutting of the National Guard of California.


I am for Cutting. I'm a blade
Designed for use at dress parade.
My gleaming length, when I display
Peace rules the land with gentle sway;
But when the war-dogs bare their teeth
Go seek me in the modest sheath.
I am for Cutting. Not for me
The task of setting nations free.
Let soulless blades take human life,
My softer metal shuns the strife.
The annual review is mine,
When gorgeous shopmen sweat and shine,
And Biddy, tip-toe on the pave,
Adores the cobble-trotting brave.
I am for Cutting. 'Tis not mine
To hew amain the hostile line;
Not mine all pitiless to spread
The plain with tumuli of dead.
My grander duty lies afar
From haunts of the insane hussar,
Where charging horse and struggling foot
Are grimed alike with cannon-soot.
When Loveliness and Valor meet
Beneath the trees to dance, and eat,
And sing, and much beside, behold
My golden glories all unfold!
There formidably are displayed
The useful horrors of my blade
In time of feast and dance and ballad,
I am for cutting chicken salad.




A RETORT


As vicious women think all men are knaves,
And shrew-bound gentlemen discourse of slaves;
As reeling drunkards judge the world unsteady
And idlers swear employers ne'er get ready--
Thieves that the constable stole all they had,
The mad that all except themselves are mad;
So, in another's clear escutcheon shown,
Barnes rails at stains reflected from his own;
Prates of "docility," nor feels the dark
Ring round his neck--the Ralston collar mark.
Back, man, to studies interrupted once,
Ere yet the rogue had merged into the dunce.
Back, back to Yale! and, grown with years discreet,
The course a virgin's lust cut short, complete.
Go drink again at the Pierian pool,
And learn--at least to better play the fool.
No longer scorn the draught, although the font,
Unlike Pactolus, waters not Belmont.




A VISION OF RESURRECTION


I had a dream. The habitable earth--
Its continents and islands, all were bare
Of cities and of forests. Naught remained
Of its old aspect, and I only knew
(As men know things in dreams, unknowing how)
That this was earth and that all men were dead.
On every side I saw the barren land,
Even to the distant sky's inclosing blue,
Thick-pitted all with graves; and all the graves
Save one were open--not as newly dug,
But rather as by some internal force
Riven for egress. Tombs of stone were split
And wide agape, and in their iron decay
The massive mausoleums stood in halves.
With mildewed linen all the ground was white.
Discarded shrouds upon memorial stones
Hung without motion in the soulless air.
While greatly marveling how this should be
I heard, or fancied that I heard, a voice,
Low like an angel's, delicately strong,
And sweet as music.

                    --"Spirit," it said, "behold
The burial place of universal Man!
A million years have rolled away since here
His sheeted multitudes (save only some
Whose dark misdeeds required a separate
And individual arraignment) rose
To judgment at the trumpet's summoning
And passed into the sky for their award,
Leaving behind these perishable things
Which yet, preserved by miracle, endure
Till all are up. Then they and all of earth,
Rock-hearted mountain and storm-breasted sea,
River and wilderness and sites of dead
And vanished capitals of men, shall spring
To flame, and naught shall be for evermore!
When all are risen that wonder will occur.
'Twas but ten centuries ago the last
But one came forth--a soul so black with sin,
Against whose name so many crimes were set
That only now his trial is at end.
But one remains."

Straight, as the voice was stilled--
That single rounded mound cracked lengthliwise
And one came forth in grave-clothes. For a space
He stood and gazed about him with a smile
Superior; then laying off his shroud
Disclosed his two attenuated legs
Which, like parentheses, bent outwardly
As by the weight of saintliness above,
And so sprang upward and was lost to view
Noting his headstone overthrown, I read:
"Sacred to memory of George K. Fitch,
Deacon and Editor--a holy man
Who fell asleep in Jesus, full of years
And blessedness. The dead in Christ rise first."




MASTER OF THREE ARTS


Your various talents, Goldenson, command
  Respect: you are a poet and can draw.
It is a pity that your gifted hand
  Should ever have been raised against the law.
If you had drawn no pistol, but a picture,
You would have saved your throttle from a stricture.

About your poetry I'm not so sure:
  'Tis certain we have much that's quite as bad,
Whose hardy writers have not to endure
  The hangman's fondling. It is said they're mad:
Though lately Mr. Brooks (I mean the poet)
Looked well, and if demented didn't show it.

Well, Goldenson, I am a poet, too--
  Taught by the muses how to smite the harp
And lift the tuneful voice, although, like you
  And Brooks, I sometimes flat and sometimes sharp.
But let me say, with no desire to taunt you,
I never murder even the girls I want to.

I hold it one of the poetic laws
  To sing of life, not take. I've ever shown
A high regard for human life because
  I have such trouble to support my own.
And you--well, you'll find trouble soon in blowing
Your private coal to keep it red and glowing.

I fancy now I see you at the Gate
  Approach St. Peter, crawling on your belly,
You cry: "Good sir, take pity on my state--
  Forgive the murderer of Mamie Kelly!"
And Peter says: "O, that's all right--but, mister,
You scribbled rhymes. In Hell I'll make you
     blister!"




THERSITES


So, in the Sunday papers _you_, Del Mar,
    Damn, all great Englishmen in English speech?
    I am no Englishman, but in my reach
A rogue shall never rail where heroes are.

You are the man, if I mistake you not,
    Who lately with a supplicating twitch
    Plucked at the pockets of the London rich
And paid your share-engraver all you got.

Because that you have greatly lied, because
    You libel nations, and because no hand
    Of officer is raised to bid you stand,
And falsehood is unpunished of the laws,

I stand here in a public place to mark
    With level finger where you part the crowd--
    I stand to name you and to cry aloud:
"Behold mendacity's great hierarch!"




A SOCIETY LEADER


"The Social World"! O what a world it is--
  Where full-grown men cut capers in the German,
Cotillion, waltz, or what you will, and whizz
  And spin and hop and sprawl about like mermen!
  I wonder if our future Grant or Sherman,
As these youths pass their time, is passing his--
  If eagles ever come from painted eggs,
  Or deeds of arms succeed to deeds of legs.

I know they tell us about Waterloo:
  How, "foremost fighting," fell the evening's
    dancers.
I don't believe it: I regard it true
  That soldiers who are skillful in "the Lancers"
  Less often die of cannon than of cancers.
Moreover, I am half-persuaded, too,
  That David when he danced before the Ark
  Had the reporter's word to keep it dark.

Ed. Greenway, you fatigue. Your hateful name
  Like maiden's curls, is in the papers daily.
You think it, doubtless, honorable fame,
  And contemplate the cheap distinction gaily,
  As does the monkey the blue-painted tail he
Believes becoming to him. 'Tis the same
  With men as other monkeys: all their souls
  Crave eminence on any kind of poles.
But cynics (barking tribe!) are all agreed
  That monkeys upon poles performing capers
Are not exalted, they are only "treed."
  A glory that is kindled by the papers
  Is transient as the phosphorescent vapors
That shine in graveyards and are seen, indeed,
  But while the bodies that supply the gas
  Are turning into weeds to feed an ass.

One can but wonder sometimes how it feels
  To _be_ an ass--a beast we beat condignly
Because, like yours, his life is in his heels
  And he is prone to use them unbenignly.
  The ladies (bless them!) say you dance divinely.
I like St. Vitus better, though, who deals
  His feet about him with a grace more just,
  And hops, not for he will, but for he must.

Doubtless it gratifies you to observe
  Elbowy girls and adipose mamas
All looking adoration as you swerve
  This way and that; but prosperous papas
  Laugh in their sleeves at you, and their ha-has,
If heard, would somewhat agitate your nerve.
  And dames and maids who keep you on their
    shelves
Don't seem to want a closer tie themselves.

Gods! what a life you live!--by day a slave
  To your exacting back and urgent belly;
Intent to earn and vigilant to save--
  By night, attired so sightly and so smelly,
  With countenance as luminous as jelly,
Bobbing and bowing! King of hearts and knave
  Of diamonds, I'd bet a silver brick
  If brains were trumps you'd never take a trick.




EXPOSITOR VERITATIS


I Slept, and, waking in the years to be,
  Heard voices, and approaching whence they came,
Listened indifferently where a key
  Had lately been removed. An ancient dame
Said to her daughter: "Go to yonder caddy
And get some emery to scour your daddy."

And then I knew--some intuition said--
  That tombs were not and men had cleared their shelves
Of urns; and the electro-plated dead
  Stood pedestaled as statues of themselves.
With famous dead men all the public places
Were thronged, and some in piles awaited bases.

One mighty structure's high façade alone
Contained a single monumental niche,
Where, central in that steep expanse of stone,
Gleamed the familiar form of Thomas Fitch.
A man cried: "Lo! Truth's temple and its founder!"
Then gravely added: "I'm her chief expounder."




TO "COLONEL" DAN. BURNS


They say, my lord, that you're a Warwick. Well,
  The title's an absurd one, I believe:
You make no kings, you have no kings to sell,
  Though really 'twere easy to conceive
  You stuffing half-a-dozen up your sleeve.
No, you're no Warwick, skillful from the shell
To hatch out sovereigns. On a mare's nest, maybe,
You'd incubate a little jackass baby.

I fancy, too, that it is naught but stuff,
  This "power" that you're said to be "behind
The throne." I'm sure 'twere accurate enough
  To represent you simply as inclined
  To push poor Markham (ailing in his mind
And body, which were never very tough)
Round in an invalid's wheeled chair. Such menial
Employment to low natures is congenial.

No, Dan, you're an impostor every way:
  A human bubble, for "the earth," you know,
"Hath bubbles, as the water hath." Some day
  Some careless hand will prick your film, and O,
  How utterly you'll vanish! Daniel, throw
(As fallen Woolsey might to Cromwell say)
Your curst ambition to the pigs--though truly
'Twould make them greater pigs, and more unruly.




GEORGE A. KNIGHT


Attorney Knight, it happens so sometimes
That lawyers, justifying cut-throats' crimes
For hire--calumniating, too, for gold,
The dead, dumb victims cruelly unsouled--
Speak, through the press, to a tribunal far
More honorable than their Honors are,--
A court that sits not with assenting smile
While living rogues dead gentleman revile,--
A court where scoundrel ethics of your trade
Confuse no judgment and no cheating aid,--
The Court of Honest Souls, where you in vain
May plead your right to falsify for gain,
Sternly reminded if a man engage
To serve assassins for the liar's wage,
His mouth with vilifying falsehoods crammed,
He's twice detestable and doubly damned!

Attorney Knight, defending Powell, you,
To earn your fee, so energetic grew
(So like a hound, the pride of all the pack,
Clapping your nose upon the dead man's track
To run his faults to earth--at least proclaim
At vacant holes the overtaken game)
That men who marked you nourishing the tongue,
And saw your arms so vigorously swung,
All marveled how so light a breeze could stir
So great a windmill to so great a whirr!
Little they knew, or surely they had grinned,
The mill was laboring to raise the wind.

Ralph Smith a "shoulder-striker"! God, O hear
This hardy man's description of thy dear
Dead child, the gentlest soul, save only One,
E'er born in any land beneath the sun.
All silent benefactions still he wrought:
High deed and gracious speech and noble thought,
Kept all thy law, and, seeking still the right,
Upon his blameless breast received the light.

"Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints," he cried
Whose wrath was deep as his comparison wide--
Milton, thy servant. Nay, thy will be done:
To smite or spare--to me it all is one.
Can vengeance bring my sorrow to an end,
Or justice give me back my buried friend?
But if some Milton vainly now implore,
And Powell prosper as he did before,
Yet 'twere too much that, making no ado,
Thy saints be slaughtered and be slandered too.
So, Lord, make Knight his weapon keep in sheath,
Or do Thou wrest it from between his teeth!




UNARMED


Saint Peter sat at the jasper gate,
When Stephen M. White arrived in state.

"Admit me." "With pleasure," Peter said,
Pleased to observe that the man was dead;

"That's what I'm here for. Kindly show
Your ticket, my lord, and in you go."

White stared in blank surprise. Said he
"I _run_ this place--just turn that key."

"Yes?" said the Saint; and Stephen heard
With pain the inflection of that word.

But, mastering his emotion, he
Remarked: "My friend, you're too d---- free;

"I'm Stephen M., by thunder, White!"
And, "Yes?" the guardian said, with quite

The self-same irritating stress
Distinguishing his former yes.

And still demurely as a mouse
He twirled the key to that Upper House.

Then Stephen, seeing his bluster vain
Admittance to those halls to gain,

Said, neighborly: "Pray tell me. Pete,
Does any one contest my seat?"

The Saint replied: "Nay, nay, not so;
But you voted always wrong below:

"Whate'er the question, clear and high
You're voice rang: '_I_,' '_I_,' ever '_I_.'"

Now indignation fired the heart
Of that insulted immortal part.

"Die, wretch!" he cried, with blanching lip,
And made a motion to his hip,

With purpose murderous and hearty,
To draw the Democratic party!

He felt his fingers vainly slide
Upon his unappareled hide

(The dead arise from their "silent tents"
But not their late habiliments)

Then wailed--the briefest of his speeches:
"I've left it in my other breeches!"




A POLITICAL VIOLET


Come, Stanford, let us sit at ease
  And talk as old friends do.
You talk of anything you please,
  And I will talk of you.

You recently have said, I hear,
  That you would like to go
To serve as Senator. That's queer!
  Have you told William Stow?

Once when the Legislature said:
  "Go, Stanford, and be great!"
You lifted up your Jovian head
  And everlooked the State.

As one made leisurely awake,
  You lightly rubbed your eyes
And answered: "Thank you--please to make
  A note of my surprise.

"But who are they who skulk aside,
  As to get out of reach,
And in their clothing strive to hide
  Three thousand dollars each?

"Not members of your body, sure?
  No, that can hardly be:
All statesmen, I suppose, are pure.
  What! there are rogues? Dear me!"

You added, you'll recall, that though
  You were surprised and pained,
You thought, upon the whole, you'd go,
  And in that mind remained.

Now, what so great a change has wrought
  That you so frankly speak
Of "seeking" honors once unsought
  Because you "scorned to seek"?

Do you not fear the grave reproof
  In good Creed Haymond's eye?
Will Stephen Gage not stand aloof
  And pass you coldly by?

O, fear you not that Vrooman's lich
  Will rise from earth and point
At you a scornful finger which
  May lack, perchance, a joint?

Go, Stanford, where the violets grow,
  And join their modest train.
Await the work of William Stow
  And be surprised again.




THE SUBDUED EDITOR


Pope-choker Pixley sat in his den
    A-chewin' upon his quid.
He thought it was Leo Thirteen, and then
    He bit it intenser, he did.

The amber which overflew from the cud
    Like rivers which burst out of bounds--
'Twas peculiar grateful to think it blood
    A-gushin' from Papal wounds.

A knockin' was heard uponto the door
    Where some one a-waitin' was.
"Come in," said the shedder of priestly gore,
    Arrestin' to once his jaws.

The person which entered was curly of hair
    And smilin' as ever you see;
His eyes was blue, and uncommon fair
    Was his physiognomee.

And yet there was some'at remarkable grand--
    And the editor says as he looks:
"Your Height" (it was Highness, you understand,
    That he meant, but he spoke like books)--

"Your Height, I am in. I'm the editor man
    Of this paper--which is to say,
I'm the owner, too, and it's alway ran
    In the independentest way!

"Not a damgaloot can interfere,
    A-shapin' my course for me:
This paper's (and nothing can make it veer)
    Pixleian in policee!"

"It's little to me," said the sunny youth,
    "If journals is better or worse
Where I am to home they won't keep, in truth,
    The climate is that perverse.

"I've come, howsomever, your mind to light
    With a more superior fire:
You'll have naught hencefor'ard to do but write,
    While I sets by and inspire.

"We'll make it hot all round, bedad!"
    And his laughture was loud and free.
"The devil!" cried Pixley, surpassin' mad.
    "Exactly, my friend--that's me."

So he took a chair and a feather fan,
    And he sets and sets and sets,
Inspirin' that humbled editor man,
    Which sweats and sweats and sweats!

All unavailin' his struggles be,
    And it's, O, a weepin' sight
To see a great editor bold and free
    Reducted to sech a plight!




"BLACK BART, Po8"


Welcome, good friend; as you have served your term,
  And found the joy of crime to be a fiction,
I hope you'll hold your present faith, stand firm
  And not again be open to conviction.

Your sins, though scarlet once, are now as wool:
  You've made atonement for all past offenses,
And conjugated--'twas an awful pull!--
  The verb "to pay" in all its moods and tenses.

You were a dreadful criminal--by Heaven,
  I think there never was a man so sinful!
We've all a pinch or two of Satan's leaven,
  But you appeared to have an even skinful.

Earth shuddered with aversion at your name;
  Rivers fled backward, gravitation scorning;
The sea and sky, from thinking on your shame,
  Grew lobster-red at eve and in the morning.

But still red-handed at your horrid trade
  You wrought, to reason deaf, and to compassion.
But now with gods and men your peace is made
  I beg you to be good and in the fashion.

What's that?--you "ne'er again will rob a stage"?
  What! did you do so? Faith, I didn't know it.
Was _that_ what threw poor Themis in a rage?
  I thought you were convicted as a poet!

I own it was a comfort to my soul,
  And soothed it better than the deepest curses,
To think they'd got one poet in a hole
  Where, though he wrote, he could not print, his verses.

I thought that Welcker, Plunkett, Brooks, and all
  The ghastly crew who always are begriming
With villain couplets every page and wall,
  Might be arrested and "run in" for rhyming.

And then Parnassus would be left to me,
  And Pegasus should bear me up it gaily,
Nor down a steep place run into the sea,
  As now he must be tempted to do daily.

Well, grab the lyre-strings, hearties, and begin:
  Bawl your harsh souls all out upon the gravel.
I must endure you, for you'll never sin
  By robbing coaches, until dead men travel.




A "SCION OF NOBILITY"


Come, sisters, weep!--our Baron dear,
  Alas! has run away.
If always we had kept him here
  He had not gone astray.

Painter and grainer it were vain
  To say he was, before;
And if he were, yet ne'er again
  He'll darken here a door.

We mourn each matrimonial plan--
  Even tradesmen join the cry:
He was so promising a man
  Whenever he did buy.

He was a fascinating lad,
  Deny it all who may;
Even moneyed men confess he had
  A very taking way.

So from our tables he is gone--
  Our tears descend in showers;
We loved the very fat upon.
  His kidneys, for 'twas ours.

To women he was all respect
  To duns as cold as ice;
No lady could his suit reject,
  No tailor get its price.

He raised our hope above the sky;
  Alas! alack! and O!
That one who worked it up so high
  Should play it down so low!




THE NIGHT OF ELECTION


"O venerable patriot, I pray
Stand not here coatless; at the break of day
  We'll know the grand result--and even now
The eastern sky is faintly touched with gray.

"It ill befits thine age's hoary crown--
This rude environment of rogue and clown,
  Who, as the lying bulletins appear,
With drunken cries incarnadine the town.

"But if with noble zeal you stay to note
The outcome of your patriotic vote
  For Blaine, or Cleveland, and your native land,
Take--and God bless you!--take my overcoat."

"Done, pard--and mighty white of you. And now
  guess the country'll keep the trail somehow.
  I aint allowed to vote, the Warden said,
But whacked my coat up on old Stanislow."




THE CONVICTS' BALL


San Quentin was brilliant. Within the halls
Of the noble pile with the frowning walls
(God knows they've enough to make them frown,
With a Governor trying to break them down!)
Was a blaze of light. 'Twas the natal day
Of his nibs the popular John S. Gray,
And many observers considered his birth
The primary cause of his moral worth.
"The ball is free!" cried Black Bart, and they all
Said a ball with no chain was a novel ball;
"And I never have seed," said Jimmy Hope,
"Sech a lightsome dance withouten a rope."
Chinamen, Indians, Portuguese, Blacks,
Russians, Italians, Kanucks and Kanaks,
Chilenos, Peruvians, Mexicans--all
Greased with their presence that notable ball.
None were excluded excepting, perhaps,
The Rev. Morrison's churchly chaps,
Whom, to prevent a religious debate,
The Warden had banished outside of the gate.
The fiddler, fiddling his hardest the while,
"Called off" in the regular foot-hill style:
"Circle to the left!" and "Forward and back!"
And "Hellum to port for the stabbard tack!"
(This great _virtuoso_, it would appear,
Was Mate of the _Gatherer_ many a year.)
"_Ally man_ left!"--to a painful degree
His French was unlike to the French of Paree,
As heard from our countrymen lately abroad,
And his "_doe cee doe_" was the gem of the fraud.
But what can you hope from a gentleman barred
From circles of culture by dogs in the yard?
'Twas a glorious dance, though, all the same,
The Jardin Mabille in the days of its fame
Never saw legs perform such springs--
The cold-chisel's magic had given them wings.
They footed it featly, those lades and gents:
Dull care (said Long Moll) had a helly go-hence!

'Twas a very aristocratic affair:
The _crême de la crême_ and _élite_ were there--
Rank, beauty and wealth from the highest sets,
And Hubert Howe Bancroft sent his regrets.




A PRAYER


Sweet Spirit of Cesspool, hear a mother's prayer:
Her terrors pacify and offspring spare!
Upon Silurians alone let fall
(And God in Heaven have mercy on them all!)
The red revenges of your fragrant breath,
Hot with the flames invisible of death.
Sing in each nose a melody of smells,
And lead them snoutwise to their several hells!




TO ONE DETESTED


Sir, you're a veteran, revealed
  In history and fable
As warrior since you took the field,
    Defeating Abel.

As Commissary later (or
  If not, in every cottage
The tale is) you contracted for
    A mess of pottage.

In civil life you were, we read
  (And our respect increases)
A man of peace--a man, indeed,
    Of thirty pieces.

To paying taxes when you turned
  Your mind, or what you call so,
A wide celebrity you earned--
    Saphira also.

In every age, by various names,
  You've won renown in story,
But on your present record flames
    A greater glory.

Cain, Esau, and Iscariot, too,
  And Ananias, likewise,
Each had peculiar powers, but who
    Could lie as Mike lies?




THE BOSS'S CHOICE


Listen to his wild romances:
He advances foolish fancies,
Each expounded as his "view"--
                  Gu.

In his brain's opacous clot, ah
He has got a maggot! What a
Man with "views" to overwhelm us!--
           Gulielmus.

Hear his demagogic clamor--
Hear him stammer in his grammar!
Teaching, he will learn to spell--
      Gulielmus L.

Slave who paid the price demanded--
With two-handed iron branded
By the boss--pray cease to dose us,
Gulielmus L. Jocosus.




A MERCIFUL GOVERNOR


Standing within the triple wall of Hell,
  And flattening his nose against a grate
Behind whose brazen bars he'd had to dwell
  A thousand million ages to that date,
  Stoneman bewailed his melancholy fate,
And his big tear-drops, boiling as they fell,
Had worn between his feet, the record mentions,
A deep depression in the "good intentions."

Imperfectly by memory taught how--
  For prayer in Hell is a lost art--he prayed,
Uplifting his incinerated brow
  And flaming hands in supplication's aid.
"O grant," he cried, "my torment may be stayed--
In mercy, some short breathing spell allow!
If one good deed I did before my ghosting,
Spare me and give Delmas a double roasting."

Breathing a holy harmony in Hell,
  Down through the appalling clamors of the place,
Charming them all to willing concord, fell
  A Voice ineffable and full of grace:
"Because of all the law-defying race
One single malefactor of the cell
Thou didst not free from his incarceration,
Take thou ten thousand years of condonation."

Back from their fastenings began to shoot
  The rusted bolts; with dreadful roar, the gate
Laboriously turned; and, black with soot,
  The extinguished spirit passed that awful strait,
  And as he legged it into space, elate,
Muttered: "Yes, I remember that galoot--
I'd signed his pardon, ready to allot it,
But stuck it in my desk and quite forgot it."




AN INTERPRETATION


Now Lonergan appears upon the boards,
And Truth and Error sheathe their lingual swords.
No more in wordy warfare to engage,
The commentators bow before the stage,
And bookworms, militant for ages past,
Confess their equal foolishness at last,
Reread their Shakspeare in the newer light
And swear the meaning's obvious to sight.
For centuries the question has been hot:
Was Hamlet crazy, or was Hamlet not?
Now, Lonergan's illuminating art
Reveals the truth of the disputed "part,"
And shows to all the critics of the earth
That Hamlet was an idiot from birth!




A SOARING TOAD


So, Governor, you would not serve again
  Although we'd all agree to pay you double.
You find it all is vanity and pain--
  One clump of clover in a field of stubble--
  One grain of pleasure in a peck of trouble.
'Tis sad, at your age, having to complain
Of disillusion; but the fault is whose
When pigmies stumble, wearing giants' shoes?

I humbly told you many moons ago
  For high preferment you were all unfit.
A clumsy bear makes but a sorry show
  Climbing a pole. Let him, judicious, sit
  With dignity at bottom of his pit,
And none his awkwardness will ever know.
Some beasts look better, and feel better, too,
Seen from above; and so, I think, would you.

Why, you were mad! Did you suppose because
  Our foolish system suffers foolish men
To climb to power, make, enforce the laws,
  And, it is whispered, break them now and then,
  We love the fellows and respect them when
We've stilled the volume of our loud hurrahs?
When folly blooms we trample it the more
For having fertilized it heretofore.

Behold yon laborer! His garb is mean,
  His face is grimy, but who thinks to ask
The measure of his brains? 'Tis only seen
  He's fitted for his honorable task,
  And so delights the mind. But let him bask
In droll prosperity, absurdly clean--
Is that the man whom we admired before?
Good Lord, how ignorant, and what a bore!

Better for you that thoughtless men had said
  (Noting your fitness in the humbler sphere):
"Why don't they make him Governor?" instead
  Of, "Why the devil did they?" But I fear
  My words on your inhospitable ear
Are wasted like a sermon to the dead.
Still, they may profit you if studied well:
You can't be taught to think, but may to spell.




AN UNDRESS UNIFORM


The apparel does _not_ proclaim the man--
Polonius lied like a partisan,
And Salomon still would a hero seem
If (Heaven dispel the impossible dream!)
He stood in a shroud on the hangman's trap,
His eye burning holes in the black, black cap.
And the crowd below would exclaim amain:
"He's ready to fall for his country again!"




THE PERVERTED VILLAGE

AFTER GOLDSMITH


Sweet Auburn! liveliest village of the plain,
Where Health and Slander welcome every train,
Whence smiling innocence, its tribute paid,
Retires in terror, wounded and dismayed--
Dear lovely bowers of gossip and disease,
Whose climate cures us that thy dames may tease,
How often have I knelt upon thy green
And prayed for death, to mitigate their spleen!
How often have I paused on every charm
With mingled admiration and alarm--
The brook that runs by many a scandal-mill,
The church whose pastor groans upon the grill,
The cowthorn bush with seats beneath the shade,
Where hearts are struck and reputations flayed;
How often wished thine idle wives, some day,
Might more at whist, less at the devil, play.

Unblest retirement! ere my life's decline
(Killed by detraction) may I witness thine.
How happy she who, shunning shades like these,
Finds in a wolf-den greater peace and ease;
Who quits the place whence truth did earlier fly,
And rather than come back prefers to die!
For her no jealous maids renounce their sleep,
Contriving malices to make her weep;
No iron-faced dames her character debate
And spurn imploring mercy from the gate;
But down she lies to a more peaceful end,
For wolves do not calumniate, but rend--
Sinks piecemeal to their maws, a willing prey,
While resignation lubricates the way,
And all her prospects brighten at the last:
To wolves, not women, an approved repast.

_1884_.




MR. SHEETS


The Devil stood before the gate
Of Heaven. He had a single mate:
Behind him, in his shadow, slunk
Clay Sheets in a perspiring funk.
"Saint Peter, see this season ticket,"
Said Satan; "pray undo the wicket."
The sleepy Saint threw slight regard
Upon the proffered bit of card,
Signed by some clerical dead-beats:
"Admit the bearer and Clay Sheets."
Peter expanded all his eyes:
"'Clay Sheets?'--well, I'll be damned!" he cries.
"Our couches are of golden cloud;
Nothing of earth is here allowed.
I'll let you in," he added, shedding
On Nick a smile--"but not your bedding."




A JACK-AT-ALL-VIEWS


So, Estee, you are still alive! I thought
  That you had died and were a blessed ghost
I know at least your coffin once was bought
  With Railroad money; and 'twas said by most
  Historians that Stanford made a boast
The seller "threw you in." That goes for naught--
Man takes delight in fancy's fine inventions,
And woman too, 'tis said, if they are French ones.

Do you remember, Estee--ah, 'twas long
  And long ago!--how fierce you grew and hot
When anything impeded the straight, strong,
  Wild sweep of the great billow you had got
  Atop of, like a swimmer bold? Great Scott!
How fine your wavemanship! How loud your song
Of "Down with railroads!" When the wave subsided
And left you stranded you were much divided.

Then for a time you were content to wade
  The waters of the "robber barons'" moat.
To fetch, and carry was your humble trade,
  And ferry Stanford over in a boat,
  Well paid if he bestowed the kindly groat
And spoke you fair and called you pretty maid.
And when his stomach seemed a bit unsteady
You got your serviceable basin ready.

Strange man! how odd to see you, smug and spruce,
  There at Chicago, burrowed in a Chair,
Not made to measure and a deal too loose,
  And see you lift your little arm and swear
  Democracy shall be no more! If it's a fair
And civil question, and not too abstruse,
Were you elected as a "robber baron,"
Or as a Communist whose teeth had hair on?




MY LORD POET


"Who drives fat oxen should himself be fat;"
  Who sings for nobles, he should noble be.
There's no _non sequitur_, I think, in that,
  And this is logic plain as a, b, c.
Now, Hector Stuart, you're a Scottish prince,
  If right you fathom your descent--that fall
From grace; and since you have no peers, and since
  You have no kind of nobleness at all,
'Twere better to sing little, lest you wince
  When made by heartless critics to sing small.
And yet, my liege, I bid you not despair--
  Ambition conquers but a realm at once:
For European bays arrange your hair--
  Two continents, in time, shall crown you Dunce!




TO THE FOOL-KILLER


Ah, welcome, welcome! Sit you down, old friend;
Your pipe I'll serve, your bottle I'll attend.
'Tis many a year since you and I have known
Society more pleasant than our own
In our brief respites from excessive work--
I pointing out the hearts for you to dirk.
What have you done since lately at this board
We canvassed the deserts of all the horde
And chose what names would please the people best,
Engraved on coffin-plates--what bounding breast
Would give more satisfaction if at rest?
But never mind--the record cannot fail:
The loftiest monuments will tell the tale.

I trust ere next we meet you'll slay the chap
Who calls old Tyler "Judge" and Merry "Cap"--
Calls John P. Irish "Colonel" and John P.,
Whose surname Jack-son speaks his pedigree,
By the same title--men of equal rank
Though one is belly all, and one all shank,
Showing their several service in the fray:
One fought for food and one to get away.
I hope, I say, you'll kill the "title" man
Who saddles one on every back he can,
Then rides it from Beërsheba to Dan!
Another fool, I trust, you will perform
Your office on while my resentment's warm:
He shakes my hand a dozen times a day
If, luckless, I so often cross his way,
Though I've three senses besides that of touch,
To make me conscious of a fool too much.
Seek him, friend Killer, and your purpose make
Apparent as his guilty hand you take,
And set him trembling with a solemn: "Shake!"

But chief of all the addle-witted crew
Conceded by the Hangman's League to you,
The fool (his dam's acquainted with a knave)
Whose fluent pen, of his no-brain the slave,
Strews notes of introduction o'er the land
And calls it hospitality--his hand
May palsy seize ere he again consign
To me his friend, as I to Hades mine!
Pity the wretch, his faults howe'er you see,
Whom A accredits to his victim, B.
Like shuttlecock which battledores attack
(One speeds it forward, one would drive it back)
The trustful simpleton is twice unblest--
A rare good riddance, an unwelcome guest.
The glad consignor rubs his hands to think
How duty is commuted into ink;
The consignee (his hands he cannot rub--
He has the man upon them) mutters: "Cub!"
And straightway plans to lose him at the Club.
You know, good Killer, where this dunce abides--
The secret jungle where he writes and hides--
Though no exploring foot has e'er upstirred
His human elephant's exhaustless herd.
Go, bring his blood! We'll drink it--letting fall
A due libation to the gods of Gall.
On second thought, the gods may have it all.




ONE AND ONE ARE TWO


The trumpet sounded and the dead
  Came forth from earth and ocean,
And Pickering arose and sped
  Aloft with wobbling motion.

"What makes him fly lop-sided?" cried
  A soul of the elected.
"One ear was wax," a rogue replied,
  "And isn't resurrected."

Below him on the pitted plain,
  By his abandoned hollow,
His hair and teeth tried all in vain
  The rest of him to follow.

Saint Peter, seeing him ascend,
  Came forward to the wicket,
And said: "My mutilated friend,
  I'll thank you for your ticket."

"The _Call_," said Pickering, his hand
  To reach the latch extended.
Said Peter, affable and bland:
  "The free-list is suspended--

"What claim have you that's valid here?"
  That ancient vilifier
Reflected; then, with look austere,
  Replied: "I am a liar."

Said Peter: "That is simple, neat
  And candid Anglo-Saxon,
But--well, come in, and take a seat
  Up there by Colonel Jackson."




MONTAGUE LEVERSON


As some enormous violet that towers
Colossal o'er the heads of lowlier flowers--
Its giant petals royally displayed,
And casting half the landscape into shade;
Delivering its odors, like the blows
Of some strong slugger, at the public nose;
Pride of two Nations--for a single State
Would scarce suffice to sprout a plant so great;
So Leverson's humility, outgrown
The meaner virtues that he deigns to own,
To the high skies its great corolla rears,
O'ertopping all he has except his ears.




THE WOFUL TALE OF MR. PETERS


I should like, good friends, to mention the disaster which befell
Mr. William Perry Peters, of the town of Muscatel,
Whose fate is full of meaning, if correctly understood--
Admonition to the haughty, consolation to the good.

It happened in the hot snap which we recently incurred,
When 'twas warm enough to carbonize the feathers of a bird,
And men exclaimed: "By Hunky!" who were bad enough to swear,
And pious persons supervised their adjectives with care.

Mr. Peters was a pedagogue of honor and repute,
His learning comprehensive, multifarious, minute.
It was commonly conceded in the section whence he came
That the man who played against him needed knowledge of the game.

And some there were who whispered, in the town of Muscatel,
That besides the game of Draw he knew Orthography as well;
Though, the school directors, frigidly contemning that as stuff,
Thought that Draw (and maybe Spelling, if it pleased him) was enough.

Withal, he was a haughty man--indubitably great,
But too vain of his attainments and his power in debate.
His mien was contumelious to men of lesser gift:
"It's only _me_," he said, "can give the human mind a lift.

"Before a proper audience, if ever I've a chance,
You'll see me chipping in, the cause of Learning to advance.
Just let me have a decent chance to back my mental hand
And I'll come to center lightly in a way they'll understand."

Such was William Perry Peters, and I feel a poignant sense
Of grief that I'm unable to employ the present tense;
But Providence disposes, be our scheming what it may,
And disposed of Mr. Peters in a cold, regardless way.

It occurred in San Francisco, whither Mr. Peters came
In the cause of Education, feeling still the holy flame
Of ambition to assist in lifting up the human mind
To a higher plane of knowledge than its Architect designed.

He attended the convention of the pedagogic host;
He was first in the Pavilion, he was last to leave his post.
For days and days he narrowly observed the Chairman's eye,
His efforts ineffectual to catch it on the fly.

The blessed moment came at last: the Chairman tipped his head.
"The gentleman from ah--um--er," that functionary said.
The gentleman from ah--um--er reflected with a grin:
"They'll know me better by-and-by, when I'm a-chipping in."

So William Perry Peters mounted cheerfully his feet--
And straightway was aglow with an incalculable heat!
His face was as effulgent as a human face could be,
And caloric emanated from his whole periphery;

For he felt himself the focus of non-Muscatelish eyes,
And the pain of their convergence was a terror and surprise.
As with pitiless impaction all their heat-waves on him broke
He was seen to be evolving awful quantities of smoke!

"Put him out!" cried all in chorus; but the meaning wasn't clear
Of that succoring suggestion to his obfuscated ear;
And it notably augmented his incinerating glow
To regard himself excessive, or in any way _de trop_.

Gone was all his wild ambition to lift up the human mind!--
Gone the words he would have uttered!--gone the thought that lay behind!
For "words that burn" may be consumed in a superior flame,
And "thoughts that breathe" may breathe their last, and die a death of shame.

He'd known himself a shining light, but never had he known
Himself so very luminous as now he knew he shone.
"A pillar, I, of fire," he'd said, "to guide my race will be;"
And now that very inconvenient thing to him was he.

He stood there all irresolute; the seconds went and came;
The minutes passed and did but add fresh fuel to his flame.
How long he stood he knew not--'twas a century or more--
And then that incandescent man levanted for the door!

He darted like a comet from the building to the street,
Where Fahrenheit attested ninety-five degrees of heat.
Vicissitudes of climate make the tenure of the breath
Precarious, and William Perry Peters froze to death!




TWIN UNWORTHIES


Ye parasites that to the rich men stick,
As to the fattest sheep the thrifty tick--
Ed'ard to Stanford and to Crocker Ben
(To Ben and Ed'ard many meaner men,
And lice to these)--who do the kind of work
That thieves would have the honesty to shirk--
Whose wages are that your employers own
The fat that reeks upon your every bone
And deigns to ask (the flattery how sweet!)
About its health and how it stands the heat,--
Hail and farewell! I meant to write about you,
But, no, my page is cleaner far without you.




ANOTHER PLAN


Editor Owen, of San Jose,
Commonly known as "our friend J.J."
Weary of scribbling for daily bread,
Weary of writing what nobody read,
Slept one day at his desk and dreamed
That an angel before him stood and beamed
With compassionate eyes upon him there.

Editor Owen is not so fair
In feature, expression, form or limb
But glances like that are familiar to him;
And so, to arrive by the shortest route
At his visitor's will he said, simply: "Toot."
"Editor Owen," the angel said,
"Scribble no more for your daily bread.
Your intellect staggers and falls and bleeds,
Weary of writing what nobody reads.
Eschew now the quill--in the coming years
Homilize man through his idle ears.
Go lecture!" "Just what I intended to do,"
Said Owen. The angel looked pained and flew.

Editor Owen, of San Jose,
Commonly known as "our friend J.J."
Scribbling no more to supply his needs,
Weary of writing what nobody reads,
Passes of life each golden year
Speaking what nobody comes to hear.




A POLITICAL APOSTATE


Good friend, it is with deep regret I note
The latest, strangest turning of your coat;
Though any way you wear that mental clout
The seamy side seems always to be out.
Who could have thought that you would e'er sustain
The Southern shotgun's arbitrary reign!--
Your sturdy hand assisting to replace
The broken yoke on a delivered race;
The ballot's purity no more your care,
With equal privilege to dark and fair.
To Yesterday a traitor, to To-day
You're constant but the better to betray
To-morrow. Your convictions all are naught
But the wild asses of the world of thought,
Which, flying mindless o'er the barren plain,
Perceive at last they've nothing so to gain,
And, turning penitent upon their track,
Economize their strength by flying back.

Ex-champion of Freedom, battle-lunged,
No more, red-handed, or at least red-tongued,
Brandish the javelin which by others thrown
Clove Sambo's heart to quiver in your own!
Confess no more that when his blood was shed,
And you so sympathetically bled,
The bow that spanned the mutual cascade
Was but the promise of a roaring trade
In offices. Your fingering now the trigger
Shows that you _knew_ your Negro was a nigger!
_Ad hominem_ this _argumentum_ runs:
Peace!--let us fire another kind of guns.

I grant you, friend, that it is very true
The Blacks are ignorant--and sable, too.
What then? One way of two a fool must vote,
And either way with gentlemen of note
Whose villain feuds the fact attest too well
That pedagogues nor vice nor error quell.
The fiercest controversies ever rage
When Miltons and Salmasii engage.
No project wide attention ever drew
But it disparted all the learned crew.
As through their group the cleaving line's prolonged
With fiery combatants each field is thronged.
In battle-royal they engage at once
For guidance of the hesitating dunce.
The Titans on the heights contend full soon--
On this side Webster and on that Calhoun,
The monstrous conflagration of their fight
Startling the day and splendoring the night!
Both are unconquerable--_one_ is right.
Will't keep the pigmy, if we make him strong,
From siding with a giant in the wrong?
When Genius strikes for error, who's afraid
To arm poor Folly with a wooden blade?
O Rabelais, you knew it all!--your good
And honest judge (by men misunderstood)
Knew to be right there was but one device
Less fallible than ignorance--the dice.
The time must come--Heaven expedite the day!--
When all mankind shall their decrees obey,
And nations prosper in their peaceful sway.




TINKER DICK


Good Parson Dickson preached, I'm told,
A sermon--ah, 'twas very old
  And very, very, bald!
'Twas all about--I know not what
It was about, nor what 'twas not.
  "A Screw Loose" it was called.

Whatever, Parson Dick, you say,
The world will get each blessed day
  Still more and more askew,
And fall apart at last. Great snakes!
What skillful tinker ever takes
  His tongue to turn a screw?




BATS IN SUNSHINE


Well, Mr. Kemble, you are called, I think,
  A great divine, and I'm a great profane.
You as a Congregationalist blink
  Some certain truths that I esteem a gain,
  And drop them in the coffers of my brain,
Pleased with the pretty music of their chink.
Perhaps your spiritual wealth is such
A golden truth or two don't count for much.

You say that you've no patience with such stuff
  As by Rénan is writ, and when you read
(Why _do_ you read?) have hardly strength enough
  To hold your hand from flinging the vile screed
  Into the fire. That were a wasteful deed
Which you'd repent in sackcloth extra rough;
For books cost money, and I'm told you care
To lay up treasures Here as well as There.

I fear, good, pious soul, that you mistake
  Your thrift for toleration. Never mind:
Rénan in any case would hardly break
  His great, strong, charitable heart to find
  The bats and owls of your myopic kind
Pained by the light that his ideas make.
'Tis Truth's best purpose to shine in at holes
Where cower the Kembles, to confound their souls!




A WORD TO THE UNWISE

    [Charles Main, of the firm of Main & Winchester, has ordered a
    grand mausoleum for his plot in Mountain View Cemetery.--_City
    Newspaper_.]


Charles Main, of Main & Winchester, attend
With friendly ear the chit-chat of a friend
  Who knows you not, yet knows that you and he
Travel two roads that have a common end.

We journey forward through the time allowed,
I humbly bending, you erect and proud.
  Our heads alike will stable soon the worm--
The one that's lifted, and the one that's bowed.

You in your mausoleum shall repose,
I where it pleases Him who sleep bestows;
  What matter whether one so little worth
Shall stain the marble or shall feed the rose?

Charles Main, I had a friend who died one day.
A metal casket held his honored clay.
  Of cyclopean architecture stood
The splendid vault where he was laid away.

A dozen years, and lo! the roots of grass
Had burst asunder all the joints; the brass,
  The gilded ornaments, the carven stones
Lay tumbled all together in a mass.

A dozen years! That taxes your belief.
Make it a thousand if the time's too brief.
  'Twill be the same to you; when you are dead
You cannot even count your days of grief.

Suppose a pompous monument you raise
Till on its peak the solar splendor blaze
  While yet about its base the night is black;
But will it give your glory length of days?

Say, when beneath your rubbish has been thrown,
Some rogue to reputation all unknown--
  Men's backs being turned--should lift his thieving hand,
Efface your name and substitute his own.

Whose then would be the monument? To whom
Would be the fame? Forgotten in your gloom,
  Your very name forgotten--ah, my friend,
The name is all that's rescued by the tomb.

For memory of worth and work we go
To other records than a stone can show.
  These lacking, naught remains; with these
The stone is needless for the world will know.

Then build your mausoleum if you must,
And creep into it with a perfect trust;
  But in the twinkling of an eye the plow
Shall pass without obstruction through your dust.

Another movement of the pendulum,
And, lo! the desert-haunting wolf shall come,
  And, seated on the spot, shall howl by night
O'er rotting cities, desolate and dumb.




ON THE PLATFORM


When Dr. Bill Bartlett stepped out of the hum
  Of Mammon's distracting and wearisome strife
To stand and deliver a lecture on "Some
  Conditions of Intellectual Life,"
I cursed the offender who gave him the hall
To lecture on any conditions at all!

But he rose with a fire divine in his eye,
  Haranguing with endless abundance of breath,
Till I slept; and I dreamed of a gibbet reared high,
  And Dr. Bill Bartlett was dressing for death.
And I thought in my dream: "These conditions, no doubt,
Are bad for the life he was talking about."

So I cried (pray remember this all was a dream):
  "Get off of the platform!--it isn't the kind!"
But he fell through the trap, with a jerk at the beam,
  And wiggled his toes to unburden his mind.
And, O, so bewitching the thoughts he advanced,
That I clung to his ankles, attentive, entranced!




A DAMPENED ARDOR


The Chinatown at Bakersfield
  Was blazing bright and high;
The flames to water would not yield,
  Though torrents drenched the sky
And drowned the ground for miles around--
  The houses were so dry.

Then rose an aged preacher man
  Whom all did much admire,
Who said: "To force on you my plan
  I truly don't aspire,
But streams, it seems, might quench these beams
  If turned upon the fire."

The fireman said: "This hoary wight
  His folly dares to thrust
On _us_! 'Twere well he felt our might--
  Nay, he shall feel our must!"
With jet of wet and small regret
  They laid that old man's dust.




ADAIR WELCKER, POET


The Swan of Avon died--the Swan
Of Sacramento'll soon be gone;
And when his death-song he shall coo,
Stand back, or it will kill you too.




TO A WORD-WARRIOR


Frank Pixley, you, who kiss the hand
  That strove to cut the country's throat,
  Cannot forgive the hands that smote
Applauding in a distant land,--

Applauding carelessly, as one
  The weaker willing to befriend
  Until the quarrel's at an end,
Then learn by whom it was begun.

When North was pitted against South
  Non-combatants on either side
  In calculating fury vied,
And fought their foes by word of mouth.

That devil's-camisade you led
  With formidable feats of tongue.
  Upon the battle's rear you hung--
With Samson's weapon slew the dead!

So hot the ardor of your soul
  That every fierce civilian came,
  His torch to kindle at your name,
Or have you blow his cooling coal.

Men prematurely left their beds
  And sought the gelid bath--so great
  The heat and splendor of your hate
Of Englishmen and "Copperheads."

King Liar of deceitful men,
  For imposition doubly armed!
  The patriots whom your speaking charmed
You stung to madness with your pen.

There was a certain journal here,
  Its English owner growing rich--
  Your hand the treason wrote for which
A mob cut short its curst career.

If, Pixley, you had not the brain
  To know the true from false, or you
  To Truth had courage to be true,
And loyal to her perfect reign;

If you had not your powers arrayed
  To serve the wrong by tricksy speech,
  Nor pushed yourself within the reach
Of retribution's accolade,

I had not had the will to go
  Outside the olive-bordered path
  Of peace to cut the birch of wrath,
And strip your body for the blow.

Behold how dark the war-clouds rise
  About the mother of our race!
  The lightnings gild her tranquil face
And glitter in her patient eyes.

Her children throng the hither flood
  And lean intent above the beach.
  Their beating hearts inhibit speech
With stifling tides of English blood.

"Their skies, but not their hearts, they change
  Who go in ships across the sea"--
  Through all centuries to be
The strange new land will still be strange.

The Island Mother holds in gage
  The souls of sons she never saw;
  Superior to law, the law
Of sympathetic heritage.

Forgotten now the foolish reign
  Of wrath which sundered trivial ties.
  A soldier's sabre vainly tries
To cleave a spiritual chain.

The iron in our blood affines,
  Though fratricidal hands may spill.
  Shall Hate be throned on Bunker Hill,
Yet Love abide at Seven Pines?




A CULINARY CANDIDATE


A cook adorned with paper cap,
  Or waiter with a tray,
May be a worthy kind of chap
      In his way,
But when we want one for Recorder,
Then, Mr. Walton, take our order.




THE OLEOMARGARINE MAN


Once--in the county of Marin,
Where milk is sold to purchase gin--
Renowned for butter and renowned
For fourteen ounces to the pound--
A bull stood watching every turn
Of Mr. Wilson with a churn,
As that deigning worthy stalked
About him, eying as he walked,
El Toro's sleek and silken hide,
His neck, his flank and all beside;
Thinking with secret joy: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

Soon Mr. Wilson's keen concern
To get the creature in his churn
Unhorsed his caution--made him blind
To the fell vigor of bullkind,
Till, filled with valor to the teeth,
He drew his dasher from its sheath
And bravely brandished it; the while
He smiled a dark, portentous smile;
A deep, sepulchral smile; a wide
And open smile, which, at his side,
The churn to copy vainly tried;
A smile so like the dawn of doom
That all the field was palled in gloom,
And all the trees within a mile,
As tribute to that awful smile,
Made haste, with loyalty discreet,
To fling their shadows at his feet.
Then rose his battle-cry: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

To such a night the day had turned
That Taurus dimly was discerned.
He wore so meek and grave an air
It seemed as if, engaged in prayer
This thunderbolt incarnate had
No thought of anything that's bad:
This concentrated earthquake stood
And gave his mind to being good.
Lightly and low he drew his breath--
This magazine of sudden death!
All this the thrifty Wilson's glance
Took in, and, crying, "Now's my chance!"
Upon the bull he sprang amain
To put him in his churn. Again
Rang out his battle-yell: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

Sing, Muse, that battle-royal--sing
The deeds that made the region ring,
The blows, the bellowing, the cries,
The dust that darkened all the skies,
The thunders of the contest, all--
Nay, none of these things did befall.
A yell there was--a rush--no more:
El Toro, tranquil as before,
Still stood there basking in the sun,
Nor of his legs had shifted one--
Stood there and conjured up his cud
And meekly munched it. Scenes of blood
Had little charm for him. His head
He merely nodded as he said:
"I've spread that butterman upon
A slice of Southern Oregon."




GENESIS


God said, "Let there be Crime," and the command
Brought Satan, leading Stoneman by the hand.
"Why, that's Stupidity, not Crime," said God--
"Bring what I ordered." Satan with a nod
Replied, "This is _one_ element--when I
The _other_--Opportunity--supply
In just equivalent, the two'll affine
And in a chemical embrace combine
And Crime result--for Crime can only be
Stupiditate of Opportunity."
So leaving Stoneman (not as yet endowed
With soul) in special session on a cloud,
Nick to his sooty laboratory went,
Returning soon with t'other element.
"Here's Opportunity," he said, and put
Pen, ink, and paper down at Stoneman's foot.
He seized them--Heaven was filled with fires and thunders,
And Crime was added to Creation's wonders!




LLEWELLEN POWELL


Villain, when the word is spoken,
And your chains at last are broken
  When the gibbet's chilling shade
Ceases darkly to enfold you,
And the angel who enrolled you
  As a master of the trade
Of assassination sadly
  Blots the record he has made,
And your name and title paints
In the calendar of saints;
When the devils, dancing madly
In the midmost Hell, are very
Multitudinously merry--
Then beware, beware, beware!---
Nemesis is everywhere!
You shall hear her at your back,
  And, your hunted visage turning,
  Fancy that her eyes are burning
Like a tiger's on your track!
You shall hear her in the breeze
Whispering to summer trees.
You shall hear her calling, calling
  To your spirit through the storm
  When the giant billows form
And the splintered lightning, falling
Down the heights of Heaven, appalling,
Splendors all the tossing seas!
On your bed at night reclining,
Stars into your chamber shining
  As they roll around the Pole,
None their purposes divining,
  Shall appear to search your soul,
And to gild the mark of Cain
That burns into your tortured brain!
And the dead man's eyes shall ever
  Meet your own wherever you,
  Desperate, shall turn you to,
And you shall escape them never!

By your heritage of guilt;
By the blood that you have spilt;
By the Law that you have broken;
By the terrible red token
  That you bear upon your brow;
By the awful sentence spoken
  And irrevocable vow
Which consigns you to a living
Death and to the unforgiving
Furies who avenge your crime
Through the periods of time;
By that dread eternal doom
Hinted in your future's gloom,
  As the flames infernal tell
Of their power and perfection
In their wavering reflection
  On the battlements of Hell;
By the mercy you denied,
  I condemn your guilty soul
In your body to abide,
  Like a serpent in a hole!




THE SUNSET GUN.


Off Santa Cruz the western wave
  Was crimson as with blood:
The sun was sinking to his grave
  Beneath that angry flood.

Sir Walter Turnbull, brave and stout,
  Then shouted, "Ho! lads; run--
The powder and the ball bring out
  To fire the sunset gun.

"That punctual orb did ne'er omit
  To keep, by land or sea,
Its every engagement; it
  Shall never wait for me."

Behold the black-mouthed cannon stand,
  Ready with charge and prime,
The lanyard in the gunner's hand.
  Sir Walter waits the time.

The glowing orb sinks in the sea,
  And clouds of steam aspire,
Then fade, and the horizon's free.
  Sir Walter thunders: "Fire!"

The gunner pulls--the lanyard parts
  And not a sound ensues.
The beating of ten thousand hearts
  Was heard at Santa Cruz!

Off Santa Cruz the western wave
  Was crimson as with blood;
The sun, with visage stern and grave,
  Came back from out the flood.




THE "VIDUATE DAME"


'Tis the widow of Thomas Blythe,
  And she goeth upon the spree,
And red are cheeks of the bystanders
  For her acts are light and free.

In a seven-ounce costume
  The widow of Thomas Blythe,
Y-perched high on the window ledge,
  The difficult can-can tryeth.

Ten constables they essay
  To bate the dame's halloing.
With the widow of Thomas Blythe
  Their hands are overflowing,

And they cry: "Call the National Guard
  To quell this parlous muss--
For all of the widows of Thomas Blythe
  Are upon the spree and us!"

O long shall the eerie tale be told
  By that posse's surviving tithe;
And with tears bedewed he'll sing this rude
  Ballàd of the widow of Thomas Blythe.




FOUR OF A KIND


ROBERT F. MORROW

Dear man! although a stranger and a foe
To soft affection's humanizing glow;
Although untaught how manly hearts may throb
With more desires than the desire to rob;
Although as void of tenderness as wit,
And owning nothing soft but Maurice Schmitt;
Although polluted, shunned and in disgrace,
You fill me with a passion to embrace!
Attentive to your look, your smile, your beck,
I watch and wait to fall upon your neck.
Lord of my love, and idol of my hope,
You are my Valentine, and I'm
                                         A ROPE.


ALFRED CLARKE JR.

Illustrious son of an illustrious sire--
Entrusted with the duty to cry "Fire!"
And call the engines out, exert your power
With care. When, looking from your lofty tower,
You see a ruddy light on every wall,
Pause for a moment ere you sound the call:
It may be from a fire, it may be, too,
From good men's blushes when they think of you.


JUDGE RUTLEDGE

Sultan of Stupids! with enough of brains
To go indoors in all uncommon rains,
But not enough to stay there when the storm
Is past. When all the world is dry and warm,
In irking comfort, lamentably gay,
Keeping the evil tenor of your way,
You walk abroad, sweet, beautiful and smug,
And Justice hears you with her wonted shrug,
Lifts her broad bandage half-an-inch and keeps
One eye upon you while the other weeps.


W.H.L. BARNES

Happy the man who sin's proverbial wage
Receives on the instalment plan--in age.
For him the bulldog pistol's honest bark
Has naught of terror in its blunt remark.
He looks with calmness on the gleaming steel--
If e'er it touched his heart he did not feel:
Superior hardness turned its point away,
Though urged by fond affinity to stay;
His bloodless veins ignored the futile stroke,
And moral mildew kept the cut in cloak.
Happy the man, I say, to whom the wage
Of sin has been commuted into age.
Yet not _quite_ happy--hark, that horrid cry!--
His cruel mirror wounds him in the eye!




RECONCILIATION


Stanford and Huntington, so long at outs,
Kissed and made up. If you have any doubts
Dismiss them, for I saw them do it, man;
And then--why, then I clutched my purse and ran.




A VISION OF CLIMATE


I dreamed that I was poor and sick and sad,
  Broken in hope and weary of my life;
My ventures all miscarrying--naught had
  For all my labor in the heat and strife.
  And in my heart some certain thoughts were rife
Of an unsummoned exit. As I lay
  Considering my bitter state, I cried:
"Alas! that hither I did ever stray.
  Better in some fair country to have died
Than live in such a land, where Fortune never
(Unless he be successful) crowns Endeavor."

Then, even as I lamented, lo! there came
  A troop of Presences--I knew not whence
Nor what they were: thought cannot rightly name
  What's known through spiritual evidence,
  Reported not by gross material sense.
"Why come ye here?" I seemed to cry (though naught
  My sleeping tongue did utter) to the first--
"What are ye?--with what woful message fraught?
  Ye have a ghastly look, as ye had burst
Some sepulcher in memory. Weird creatures,
I'm sure I'd know you if ye had but features."

Some subtle organ noted the reply
  (Inaudible to ear of flesh the tone):
"The Finest Climate in the World am I,
  From Siskiyou to San Diego known--
  From the Sierra to the sea. The zone
Called semi-tropical I've pulled about
  And placed it where it does most good, I trust.
I shake my never-failing bounty out
  Alike upon the just and the unjust."
"That's very true," said I, "but when 'tis shaken
My share by the unjust is ever taken."

"Permit me," it resumed, "now to present
  My eldest son, the Champagne Atmosphere,
And others to rebuke your discontent--
  The Mammoth Squash, Strawberry All the Year,
  The fair No Lightning--flashing only here--
The Wholesome Earthquake and Italian Sky,
  With its Unstriking Sun; and last, not least,
The Compos Mentis Dog. Now, ingrate, try
  To bring a better stomach to the feast:
When Nature makes a dance and pays the piper,
  To be unhappy is to be a viper!"

"Why, yet," said I, "with all your blessings fine
  (And Heaven forbid that I should speak them ill)
I yet am poor and sick and sad. Ye shine
  With more of splendor than of heat: for still,
  Although my will is warm, my bones are chill."
"Then warm you with enthusiasm's blaze--
  Fortune waits not on toil," they cried; "O then
Join the wild chorus clamoring our praise--
  Throw up your beaver and throw down you pen!"
"Begone!" I shouted. They bewent, a-smirking,
  And I, awakening, fell straight a-working.




A "MASS" MEETING


It was a solemn rite as e'er
  Was seen by mortal man.
The celebrants, the people there,
  Were all Republican.

There Estee bent his grizzled head,
  And General Dimond, too,
And one--'twas Reddick, some one said,
  Though no one clearly knew.

I saw the priest, white-robed and tall
  (Assistant, Father Stow)--
He was the pious man men call
  Dan Burns of Mexico.

Ah, 'twas a high and holy rite
  As any one could swear.
"What does it mean?" I asked a wight
  Who knelt apart in prayer.

"A mass for the repose," he said,
  "Of Colonel Markham's"----"What,
Is gallant Colonel Markham dead?
  'Tis sad, 'tis sad, God wot!"

"A mass"--repeated he, and rose
  To go and kneel among
The worshipers--"for the repose
  Of Colonel Markham's tongue."




FOR PRESIDENT, LELAND STANFORD


Mahomet Stanford, with covetous stare,
Gazed on a vision surpassingly fair:
Far on the desert's remote extreme
A mountain of gold with a mellow gleam
Reared its high pinnacles into the sky,
The work of _mirage_ to delude the eye.
Pixley Pasha, at the Prophet's feet
Piously licking them, swearing them sweet,
Ventured, observing his master's glance,
To beg that he order the mountain's advance.
Mahomet Stanford exerted his will,
Commanding: "In Allah's name, hither, hill!"
Never an inch the mountain came.
Mahomet Stanford, with face aflame,
Lifted his foot and kicked, alack!
Pixley Pasha on the end of the back.
Mollified thus and smiling free,
He said: "Since the mountain won't come to me,
I'll go to the mountain." With infinite pains,
Camels in caravans, negroes in trains,
Warriors, workmen, women, and fools,
Food and water and mining tools
He gathered about him, a mighty array,
And the journey began at the close of day.
All night they traveled--at early dawn
Many a wearisome league had gone.
Morning broke fair with a golden sheen,
Mountain, alas, was nowhere seen!
Mahomet Stanford pounded his breast,
Pixley Pasha he thus addressed:
"Dog of mendacity, cheat and slave,
May jackasses sing o'er your grandfather's grave!"




FOR MAYOR


O Abner Doble--whose "catarrhal name"
  Budd of that ilk might envy--'tis a rough
  Rude thing to say, but it is plain enough
Your name is to be sneezed at: its acclaim
Will "fill the speaking trump of future fame"
  With an impeded utterance--a puff
  Suggesting that a pinch or two of snuff
Would clear the tube and somewhat disinflame.
Nay, Abner Doble, you'll not get from me
  My voice and influence: I'll cheer instead,
    Some other man; for when my voice ascends a
Tall pinnacle of praise, and at high C
  Sustains a chosen name, it shan't be said
    My influence is naught but influenza.




A CHEATING PREACHER


Munhall, to save my soul you bravely try,
Although, to save my soul, I can't say why.
'Tis naught to you, to me however much--
Why, bless it! you might save a million such
Yet lose your own; for still the "means of grace"
That you employ to turn us from the place
By the arch-enemy of souls frequented
Are those which to ensnare us he invented!
I do not say you utter falsehoods--I
Would scorn to give to ministers the lie:
They cannot fight--their calling has estopped it.
True, I did not persuade them to adopt it.
But, Munhall, when you say the Devil dwells
In all the breasts of all the infidels--
Making a lot of individual Hells
In gentlemen instinctively who shrink
From thinking anything that you could think,
You talk as I should if some world I trod
Where lying is acceptable to God.
I don't at all object--forbid it Heaven!--
That your discourse you temperately leaven
With airy reference to wicked souls
Cursing impenitent on glowing coals,
Nor quarrel with your fancy, blithe and fine,
Which represents the wickedest as mine.
Each ornament of style my spirit eases:
The subject saddens, but the manner pleases.
But when you "deal damnation round" 'twere sweet
To think hereafter that you did not cheat.
Deal, and let all accept what you allot 'em.
But, blast you! you are dealing from the bottom!




A CROCODILE


Nay, Peter Robertson, 'tis not for you
  To blubber o'er Max Taubles for he's dead.
By Heaven! my hearty, if you only knew
  How better is a grave-worm in the head
Than brains like yours--how far more decent, too,
  A tomb in far Corea than a bed
Where Peter lies with Peter, you would covet
His happier state and, dying, learn to love it.

In the recesses of the silent tomb
  No Maunderings of yours disturb the peace.
Your mental bag-pipe, droning like the gloom
  Of Hades audible, perforce must cease
From troubling further; and that crack o' doom,
  Your mouth, shaped like a long bow, shall release
In vain such shafts of wit as it can utter--
The ear of death can't even hear them flutter.




THE AMERICAN PARTY


Oh, Marcus D. Boruck, me hearty,
  I sympathize wid ye, poor lad!
A man that's shot out of his party
  Is mighty onlucky, bedad!
  An' the sowl o' that man is sad.

But, Marcus, gossoon, ye desarve it--
  Ye know for yerself that ye do,
For ye j'ined not intendin' to sarve it,
  But hopin' to make it sarve you,
  Though the roll of its members wuz two.

The other wuz Pixley, an' "Surely,"
  Ye said, "he's a kite that wall sail."
An' so ye hung till him securely,
  Enactin' the role of a tail.
  But there wuzn't the ghost of a gale!

But the party to-day has behind it
  A powerful backin', I'm told;
For just enough Irish have j'ined it
  (An' I'm m'anin' to be enrolled)
  To kick ye out into the cold.

It's hard on ye, darlint, I'm thinkin'--
  So young--so American, too--
Wid bypassers grinnin' an' winkin',
  An' sayin', wid ref'rence to you:
"Get onto the murtherin' Joo!"

Republicans never will take ye--
  They had ye for many a year;
An' Dimocrats--angels forsake ye!--
  If ever ye come about here
  We'll brand ye and scollop yer ear!




UNCOLONELED


Though war-signs fail in time of peace, they say,
  Two awful portents gloom the public mind:
All Mexico is arming for the fray
  And Colonel Mark McDonald has resigned!
  We know not by what instinct he divined
The coming trouble--may be, like the steed
  Described by Job, he smelled the fight afar.
Howe'er it be, he left, and for that deed
  Is an aspirant to the G.A.R.
When cannon flame along the Rio Grande
A citizen's commission will be handy.




THE GATES AJAR


The Day of Judgment spread its glare
  O'er continents and seas.
The graves cracked open everywhere,
  Like pods of early peas.

Up to the Court of Heaven sped
  The souls of all mankind;
Republicans were at the head
  And Democrats behind.

Reub. Lloyd was there before the tube
  Of Gabriel could call:
The dead in Christ rise first, and Reub.
  Had risen first of all.

He sat beside the Throne of Flame
  As, to the trumpet's sound,
Four statesmen of the Party Came
  And ranged themselves around--

Pure spirits shining like the sun,
  From taint and blemish free--
Great William Stow was there for one,
  And George A. Knight for three.

Souls less indubitably white
  Approached with anxious air,
Judge Blake at head of them by right
  Of having been a Mayor.

His ermine he had donned again,
  Long laid away in gums.
'Twas soiled a trifle by the stains
  Of politicians' thumbs.

Then Knight addressed the Judge of Heaven:
  "Your Honor, would it trench
On custom here if Blake were given
  A seat upon the Bench?"

'Twas done. "Tom Shannon!" Peter cried.
  He came, without ado,
_In forma pauperis_ was tried,
  And was acquitted, too!

Stow rose, remarking: "I concur."
  Lloyd added: "That suits _us_.
I move Tom's nomination, sir,
  Be made unanimous."




TIDINGS OF GOOD


Old Nick from his place of last resort
  Came up and looked the world over.
He saw how the grass of the good was short
  And the wicked lived in clover.

And he gravely said: "This is all, all wrong,
  And never by me intended.
If to me the power should ever belong
  I shall have this thing amended."

He looked so solemn and good and wise
  As he made this observation
That the men who heard him believed their eyes
  Instead of his reputation.

So they bruited the matter about, and each
  Reported the words as nearly
As memory served--with additional speech
  To bring out the meaning clearly.

The consequence was that none understood,
  And the wildest rumors started
Of something intended to help the good
  And injure the evil-hearted.

Then Robert Morrow was seen to smile
  With a bright and lively joyance.
"A man," said he, "that is free from guile
  Will now be free from annoyance.

"The Featherstones doubtless will now increase
  And multiply like the rabbits,
While jailers, deputy sheriffs, police,
  And writers will form good habits.

"The widows more easily robbed will be,
  And no juror will ever heed 'em,
But open his purse to my eloquent plea
  For security, gain, or freedom."

When Benson heard of the luck of the good
  (He was eating his dinner) he muttered:
"It cannot help _me_, for 'tis understood
  My bread is already buttered.

"My plats of surveys are all false, they say,
  But that cannot greatly matter
To me, for I'll tell the jurors that they
  May lick, if they please, my platter."




ARBORICULTURE

    [Californians are asking themselves how Joaquin Miller will
    make the trees grow which he proposes to plant in the form of
    a Maltese cross on Goat Island, in San Francisco Bay.--_New
    York Graphic_.]


You may say they won't grow, and say they'll decay--
Say it again till you're sick of the say,
Get up on your ear, blow your blaring bazoo
And hire a hall to proclaim it; and you
May stand on a stump with a lifted hand
As a pine may stand or a redwood stand,
And stick to your story and cheek it through.
But I point with pride to the far divide
Where the Snake from its groves is seen to glide--
To Mariposa's arboreal suit,
And the shaggy shoulders of Shasta Butte,
And the feathered firs of Siskiyou;
And I swear as I sit on my marvelous hair--
I roll my marvelous eyes and swear,
And sneer, and ask where would your forests be
To-day if it hadn't been for me!
Then I rise tip-toe, with a brow of brass,
Like a bully boy with an eye of glass;
I look at my gum sprouts, red and blue,
And I say it loud and I say it low:
"They know their man and you bet they'll grow!"




A SILURIAN HOLIDAY


'Tis Master Fitch, the editor;
  He takes an holiday.
Now wherefore, venerable sir,
  So resolutely gay?

He lifts his head, he laughs aloud,
  Odzounds! 'tis drear to see!
"Because the Boodle-Scribbler crowd
  Will soon be far from me.

"Full many a year I've striven well
  To freeze the caitiffs out
By making this good town a Hell,
  But still they hang about.

"They maken mouths and eke they grin
  At the dollar limit game;
And they are holpen in that sin
  By many a wicked dame.

"In sylvan bowers hence I'll dwell
  My bruisèd mind to ease.
Farewell, ye urban scenes, farewell!
  Hail, unfamiliar trees!"

Forth Master Fitch did bravely hie,
  And all the country folk
Besought him that he come not nigh
  The deadly poison oak!

He smiled a cheerful smile (the day
  Was straightway overcast)--
The poison oak along his way
  Was blighted as he passed!




REJECTED


When Dr. Charles O'Donnell died
They sank a box with him inside.

The plate with his initials three
Was simply graven--"C.O.D."

That night two demons of the Pit
Adown the coal-hole shunted it.

Ten million million leagues it fell,
Alighting at the gate of Hell.

Nick looked upon it with surprise,
A night-storm darkening his eyes.

"They've sent this rubbish, C.O.D.--
I'll never pay a cent!" said he.




JUDEX JUDICATUS


Judge Armstrong, when the poor have sought your aid,
To be released from vows that they have made
In haste, and leisurely repented, you,
As stern as Rhadamanthus (Minos too,
And Æeacus) have drawn your fierce brows down
And petrified them with a moral frown!
With iron-faced rigor you have made them run
The gauntlet of publicity--each Hun
Or Vandal of the public press allowed
To throw their households open to the crowd
And bawl their secret bickerings aloud.
When Wealth before you suppliant appears,
Bang! go the doors and open fly your ears!
The blinds are drawn, the lights diminished burn,
Lest eyes too curious should look and learn
That gold refines not, sweetens not a life
Of conjugal brutality and strife--
That vice is vulgar, though it gilded shine
Upon the curve of a judicial spine.
The veiled complainant's whispered evidence,
The plain collusion and the no defense,
The sealed exhibits and the secret plea,
The unrecorded and unseen decree,
The midnight signature and--_chink! chink! chink!_--
Nay, pardon, upright Judge, I did but think
I heard that sound abhorred of honest men;
No doubt it was the scratching of your pen.

O California! long-enduring land,
Where Judges fawn upon the Golden Hand,
Proud of such service to that rascal thing
As slaves would blush to render to a king--
Judges, of judgment destitute and heart,
Of conscience conscious only by the smart
From the recoil (so insight is enlarged)
Of duty accidentally discharged;--
Invoking still a "song o' sixpence" from
The Scottish fiddle of each lusty palm,
Thy Judges, California, skilled to play
This silent music, through the livelong-day
Perform obsequious before the rich,
And still the more they scratch the more they itch!




ON THE WEDDING OF AN AËRONAUT


Aëronaut, you're fairly caught,
  Despite your bubble's leaven:
Out of the skies a lady's eyes
  Have brought you down to Heaven!

No more, no more you'll freely soar
  Above the grass and gravel:
Henceforth you'll walk--and she will chalk
  The line that you're to travel!




A HASTY INFERENCE


The Devil one day, coming up from the Pit,
  All grimy with perspiration,
Applied to St. Peter and begged he'd admit
  Him a moment for consultation.

The Saint showed him in where the Master reclined
  On the throne where petitioners sought him;
Both bowed, and the Evil One opened his mind
  Concerning the business that brought him:

"For ten million years I've been kept in a stew
  Because you have thought me immoral;
And though I have had my opinion of you,
  You've had the best end of the quarrel.

"But now--well, I venture to hope that the past
  With its misunderstandings we'll smother;
And you, sir, and I, sir, be throned here at last
  As equals, the one to the other."

"Indeed!" said the Master (I cannot convey
  A sense of his tone by mere letters)
"What makes you presume you'll be bidden to stay
  Up here on such terms with your betters?"

"Why, sure you can't mean it!" said Satan. "I've seen
  How Stanford and Crocker you've nourished,
And Huntington--bless me! the three like a green
  Umbrageous great bay-tree have flourished.

They are fat, they are rolling in gold, they command
  All sources and well-springs of power;
You've given them houses, you've given them land--
  Before them the righteous all cower."

"What of that?" "What of that?" cried the Father of Sin;
  "Why, I thought when I saw you were winking
At crimes such as theirs that perhaps you had been
  Converted to my way of thinking."




A VOLUPTUARY


Who's this that lispeth in the thickening throng
Which crowds to claim distinction in my song?
Fresh from "the palms and temples of the South,"
The mixed aromas quarrel in his mouth:
Of orange blossoms this the lingering gale,
And that the odor of a spicy tale.
Sir, in thy pleasure-dome down by the sea
(No finer one did Kubla Khan decree)
Where, Master of the Revels, thou dost stand
With joys and mysteries on either hand,
Dost keep a poet to report the rites
And sing the tale of those Elysian nights?
Faith, sir, I'd like the place if not too young.
I'm no great bard, but--I can hold my tongue.




AD CATTONUM


I know not, Mr. Catton, who you are,
Nor very clearly why; but you go far
To show that you are many things beside
A Chilean Consul with a tempting hide;
But what they are I hardly could explain
Without afflicting you with mental pain.
Your name (gods! what a name the muse to woo--
Suggesting cats, and hinting kittens, too!)
Points to an origin--perhaps Maltese,
Perhaps Angoran--where the wicked cease
From fiddling, and the animals that grow
The strings that groan to the tormenting bow
Live undespoiled of their insides, resigned
To give their name and nature to mankind.
With Chilean birth your name but poorly tallies;
The test is--Did you ever sell tamales?

It matters very little, though, my boy,
If you're from Chile or from Illinois;
You can't, because you serve a foreign land,
Spit with impunity on ours, expand,
Cock-turkeywise, and strut with blind conceit,
All heedless of the hearts beneath your feet,
Fling falsehoods as a sower scatters grain
And, for security, invoke disdain.
Sir, there are laws that men of sense observe,
No matter whence they come nor whom they serve--
The laws of courtesy; and these forbid
You to malign, as recently you did,
As servant of another State, a State
Wherein your duties all are concentrate;
Branding its Ministers as rogues--in short,
Inviting cuffs as suitable retort.

Chileno or American, 'tis one--
Of any land a citizen, or none--
If like a new Thersites here you rail,
Loading with libels every western gale,
You'll feel the cudgel on your scurvy hump
Impinging with a salutary thump.
'Twill make you civil or 'twill make you jump!




THE NATIONAL GUARDSMAN


I'm a gorgeous golden hero
  And my trade is taking life.
Hear the twittle-twittle-tweero
  Of my sibillating fife
And the rub-a-dub-a-dum
  Of my big bass drum!
I'm an escort strong and bold,
  The Grand Army to protect.
My countenance is cold
  And my attitude erect.
I'm a Californian Guard
  And my banner flies aloft,
But the stones are O, so hard!
  And my feet are O, so soft!




THE BARKING WEASEL


You say, John Irish, Mr. Taylor hath
  A painted beard. Quite likely that is true,
And sure 'tis natural you spend your wrath
  On what has been least merciful to you.
By Taylor's chin, if I am not mistaken,
You like a rat have recently been shaken.

To wear a beard of artificial hue
  May be or this or that, I know not what;
But, faith, 'tis better to be black-and-blue
  In beard from dallying with brush and pot
Than to be so in body from the beating
That hardy rogues get when detected cheating.

You're whacked about the mazzard rather more
  Of late than any other man in town.
Certes your vulnerable back is sore
  And tender, too, your corrigible crown.
In truth your whole periphery discloses
More vivid colors than a bed of posies!

You call it glory! Put your tongue in sheath!--
  Scars got in battle, even if on the breast,
May be a shameful record if, beneath,
  A robber heart a lawless strife attest.
John Sullivan had wounds, and Paddy Ryan--
Nay, as to that, even Masten has, and Bryan.

'Tis willingly conceded you've a knack
  At holding the attention of the town;
The worse for you when you have on your back
  What did not grow there--prithee put it down!
For pride kills thrift, and you lack board and lodging,
Even while the brickbats of renown you're dodging.




A REAR ELEVATION

    [He can speak with his eyes, his hands, arms, legs, body--nay,
    with his very bones, for he turned the broad of his back upon
    us in "Conrad," the other night, and his shoulder-blades
    spoke to us a volume of hesitation, fear, submission,
    desperation--everything which could haunt a man at the moment
    of inevitable detection.--_A "Dramatic Critic."_]


Once Moses (in Scripture the story is told)
Entreated the favor God's face to behold.
Compassion divine the petition denied
Lest vision be blasted and body be fried.
Yet this much, the Record informs us, took place:
Jehovah, concealing His terrible face,
Protruded His rear from behind a great rock,
And edification ensued without shock.
So godlike Salvini, lest worshipers die,
Averting the blaze of his withering eye,
Tempers his terrors and shows to the pack
Of feeble adorers the broad of his back.
The fires of their altars, which, paled and declined
Before him, burn all the more brightly behind.
O happy adorers, to care not at all
Where fawning may tickle or lip-service fall!




IN UPPER SAN FRANCISCO


I heard that Heaven was bright and fair,
And politicians dwelt not there.

'Twas said by knowing ones that they
Were in the Elsewhere--so to say.

So, waking from my last long sleep,
I took my place among the sheep.

I passed the gate--Saint Peter eyed
Me sharply as I stepped inside.

He thought, as afterward I learned,
That I was Chris, the Unreturned.

The new Jerusalem--ah me,
It was a sorry sight to see!

The mansions of the blest were there,
And mostly they were fine and fair;

But O, such streets!--so deep and wide,
And all unpaved, from side to side!

And in a public square there grew
A blighted tree, most sad to view.

From off its trunk the bark was ripped--
Its very branches all were stripped!

An angel perched upon the fence
With all the grace of indolence.

"Celestial bird," I cried, in pain,
"What vandal wrought this wreck? Explain."

He raised his eyelids as if tired:
"What is a Vandal?" he inquired.

"This is the Tree of Life. 'Twas stripped
By Durst and Siebe, who have shipped

"The bark across the Jordan--see?--
And sold it to a tannery."

"Alas," I sighed, "their old-time tricks!
That pavement, too, of golden bricks--

"They've gobbled that?" But with a scowl,
"You greatly wrong them," said the fowl:

"'Twas Gilleran did that, I fear--
Head of the Street Department here."

"What! what!" cried I--"you let such chaps
Come here? You've Satan, too, perhaps."

"We had him, yes, but off he went,
Yet showed some purpose to repent;

"But since your priests and parsons filled
The place with those their preaching killed"--

(Here Siebe passed along with Durst,
Psalming as if their lungs would burst)--

"He swears his foot no more shall press
('Tis cloven, anyhow, I guess)

"Our soil. In short, he's out on strike--
But devils are not all alike."

Lo! Gilleran came down the street,
Pressing the soil with broad, flat feet!




NIMROD


There were brave men, some one has truly said,
Before Atrides (those were mostly dead
Behind him) and ere you could e'er occur
Actaeon lived, Nimrod and Bahram-Gur.
In strength and speed and daring they excelled:
The stag they overtook, the lion felled.
Ah, yes, great hunters flourished before you,
And--for Munchausen lived--great talkers too.
There'll be no more; there's much to kill, but--well,
_You_ have left nothing in the world to tell!




CENSOR LITERARUM


So, Parson Stebbins, you've released your chin
  To say that here, and here, we press-folk ail.
'Tis a great thing an editor to skin
  And hang his faulty pelt upon a nail
  (If over-eared, it has, at least, no tail)
And, for an admonition against sin,
Point out its maculations with a rod,
And act, in short, the gentleman of God.

'Twere needless cruelty to spoil your sport
  By comment, critical or merely rude;
But you, too, have, according to report,
  Despite your posing as a holy dude,
  Imperfect spiritual pulchritude
For so severe a judge. May't please the court,
We shall appeal and take our case at once
Before that higher court, a taller dunce.

Sir, what were _you_ without the press? What spreads
  The fame of your existence, once a week,
From the Pacific Mail dock to the Heads,
  Warning the people you're about to wreak
  Upon the human ear your Sunday freak?--
Whereat the most betake them to their bed
Though some prefer to slumber in the pews
And nod assent to your hypnotic views.

Unhappy man! can you not still your tongue
  When (like a luckless brat afflict with worms,
By cruel fleas intolerably stung,
  Or with a pang in its small lap) it squirms?
Still must it vulgarize your feats of lung?
No preaching better were, the sun beneath,
If you had nothing there behind your teeth.




BORROWED BRAINS


Writer folk across the bay
Take the pains to see and say--
All their upward palms in air:
"Joaquin Miller's cut his hair!"
Hasten, hasten, writer folk--
In the gutters rake and poke,
If by God's exceeding grace
You may hit upon the place
Where the barber threw at length
Samson's literary strength.
Find it, find it if you can;
Happy the successful man!
He has but to put one strand
In his beaver's inner band
And his intellect will soar
As it never did before!
While an inch of it remains
He will noted be for brains,
And at last ('twill so befall)
Fit to cease to write at all.




THE FYGHTYNGE SEVENTH


It is the gallant Seventh--
  It fyghteth faste and free!
God wot the where it fyghteth
  I ne desyre to be.

The Gonfalon it flyeth,
  Seeming a Flayme in Sky;
The Bugel loud yblowen is,
  Which sayeth, Doe and dye!

And (O good Saints defende us
  Agaynst the Woes of Warr)
Drawn Tongues are flashing deadly
  To smyte the Foeman sore!

With divers kinds of Riddance
  The smoaking Earth is wet,
And all aflowe to seaward goe
  The Torrents wide of Sweat!

The Thunder of the Captens,
  And eke the Shouting, mayketh
Such horrid Din the Soule within
  The boddy of me quayketh!

Who fyghteth the bold Seventh?
  What haughty Power defyes?
Their Colonel 'tis they drubben sore,
  And dammen too his Eyes!




INDICTED


Dear Bruner, once we had a little talk
  (That is to say, 'twas I did all the talking)
About the manner of your moral walk:
  How devious the trail you made in stalking,
On level ground, your law-protected game--
"Another's Dollar" is, I think, its name.

Your crooked course more recently is not
  So blamable; for, truly, you have stumbled
On evil days; and 'tis your luckless lot
  To traverse spaces (with a spirit humbled,
Contrite, dejected and divinely sad)
Where, 'tis confessed, the walking's rather bad.

Jordan, the song says, is a road (I thought
  It was a river) that is hard to travel;
And Dublin, if you'd find it, must be sought
  Along a highway with more rocks than gravel.
In difficulty neither can compete
With that wherein you navigate your feet.

As once George Gorham said of Pixley, so
  I say of you: "The prison yawns before you,
The turnkey stalks behind!" Now will you go?
  Or lag, and let that functionary floor you?
To change the metaphor--you seem to be
Between Judge Wallace and the deep, deep sea!




OVER THE BORDER


O, justice, you have fled, to dwell
  In Mexico, unstrangled,
Lest you should hang as high as--well,
    As Haman dangled.

(I know not if his cord he twanged,
  Or the King proved forgiving.
'Tis hard to think of Haman hanged,
    And Haymond living.)

Yes, as I said: in mortal fear
  To Mexico you journeyed;
For you were on your trial here,
    And ill attorneyed.

The Law had long regarded you
  As an extreme offender.
Religion looked upon you, too,
    With thoughts untender.

The Press to you was cold as snow,
  For sin you'd always call so.
In Politics you were _de trop_,
    In Morals also.

All this is accurately true
  And, faith! there might be more said;
But--well, to save your thrapple you
    Fled, as aforesaid.

You're down in Mexico--that's plain
  As that the sun is risen;
For Daniel Burns, down there, his chain
  Drags round in prison.




ONE JUDGE


Wallace, created on a noble plan
To show us that a Judge can be a Man;
Through moral mire exhaling mortal stench
God-guided sweet and foot-clean to the Bench;
In salutation here and sign I lift
A hand as free as yours from lawless thrift,
A heart--ah, would I truly could proclaim
My bosom lighted with so pure a flame!
Alas, not love of justice moves my pen
To praise, or to condemn, my fellow men.
Good will and ill its busy point incite:
I do but gratify them when I write.
In palliation, though, I'd humbly state,
I love the righteous and the wicked hate.
So, sir, although we differ we agree,
Our work alike from persecution free,
And Heaven, approving you, consents to me.
Take, therefore, from this not all useless hand
The crown of honor--not in all the land
One honest man dissenting from the choice,
Nor in approval one Fred. Crocker's voice!




TO AN INSOLENT ATTORNEY


So, Hall McAllister, you'll not be warned--
My protest slighted, admonition scorned!
To save your scoundrel client from a cell
As loth to swallow him as he to swell
Its sum of meals insurgent (it decries
All wars intestinal with meats that rise)
You turn your scurril tongue against the press
And damn the agency you ought to bless.
Had not the press with all its hundred eyes
Discerned the wolf beneath the sheep's disguise
And raised the cry upon him, he to-day
Would lack your company, and you would lack his pay.

Talk not of "hire" and consciences for sale--
You whose profession 'tis to threaten, rail,
Calumniate and libel at the will
Of any villain who can pay the bill--
You whose most honest dollars all were got
By saying for a fee "the thing that's not!"
To you 'tis one, to challenge or defend;
Clients are means, their money is an end.
In my profession sometimes, as in yours
Always, a payment large enough secures
A mercenary service to defend
The guilty or the innocent to rend.
But mark the difference, nor think it slight:
_We_ do not hold it proper, just and right;
Of selfish lies a little still we shame
And give our villainies another name.
Hypocrisy's an ugly vice, no doubt,
But blushing sinners can't get on without.
Happy the lawyer!--at his favored hands
Nor truth nor decency the world demands.
Secure in his immunity from shame,
His cheek ne'er kindles with the tell-tale flame.
His brains for sale, morality for hire,
In every land and century a licensed liar!

No doubt, McAllister, you can explain
How honorable 'tis to lie for gain,
Provided only that the jury's made
To understand that lying is your trade.
A hundred thousand volumes, broad and flat,
(The Bible not included) proving that,
Have been put forth, though still the doubt remains
If God has read them with befitting pains.
No Morrow could get justice, you'll declare,
If none who knew him foul affirmed him fair.
Ingenious man! how easy 'tis to raise
An argument to justify the course that pays!

I grant you, if you like, that men may need
The services performed for crime by greed,--
Grant that the perfect welfare of the State
Requires the aid of those who in debate
As mercenaries lost in early youth
The fine distinction between lie and truth--
Who cheat in argument and set a snare
To take the feet of Justice unaware--
Who serve with livelier zeal when rogues assist
With perjury, embracery (the list
Is long to quote) than when an honest soul,
Scorning to plot, conspire, intrigue, cajole,
Reminds them (their astonishment how great!)
He'd rather suffer wrong than perpetrate.
I grant, in short, 'tis better all around
That ambidextrous consciences abound
In courts of law to do the dirty work
That self-respecting scavengers would shirk.
What then? Who serves however clean a plan
By doing dirty work, he is a dirty man!




ACCEPTED


Charles Shortridge once to St. Peter came.
"Down!" cried the saint with his face aflame;
"'Tis writ that every hardy liar
Shall dwell forever and ever in fire!"
"That's what I said the night that I died,"
The sinner, turning away, replied.
"What! _you_ said that?" cried the saint--"what! what!
_You_ said 'twas so writ? Then, faith, 'tis _not!_
I'm a devil at quoting, but I begin
To fail in my memory. Pray walk in."




A PROMISED FAST TRAIN


I turned my eyes upon the Future's scroll
And saw its pictured prophecies unroll.

I saw that magical life-laden train
Flash its long glories o'er Nebraska's plain.

I saw it smoothly up the mountain glide.
"O happy, happy passengers!" I cried.

For Pleasure, singing, drowned the engine's roar,
And Hope on joyous pinions flew before.

Then dived the train adown the sunset slope--
Pleasure was silent and unseen was Hope.

Crashes and shrieks attested the decay
That greed had wrought upon that iron way.

The rusted rails broke down the rotting ties,
And clouds of flying spikes obscured the skies.

My coward eyes I drew away, distressed,
And fixed them on the terminus to-West,

Where soon, its melancholy tale to tell,
One bloody car-wheel wabbled in and fell!




ONE OF THE SAINTS


Big Smith is an Oakland School Board man,
And he looks as good as ever he can;
And he's such a cold and a chaste Big Smith
That snowflakes all are his kin and kith.
Wherever his eye he chances to throw
The crystals of ice begin to grow;
And the fruits and flowers he sees are lost
By the singeing touch of a sudden frost.
The women all shiver whenever he's near,
And look upon _us_ with a look austere--
Effect of the Smithian atmosphere.
Such, in a word, is the moral plan
Of the Big, Big Smith, the School Board man.
When told that Madame Ferrier had taught
_Hernani_ in school, his fist he brought
Like a trip-hammer down on his bulbous knee,
And he roared: "Her Nanny? By gum, we'll see
If the public's time she dares devote
To the educatin' of any dam goat!"
"You do not entirely comprehend--
_Hernani's_ a play," said his learned friend,
"By Victor Hugo--immoral and bad.
What's worse, it's French!" "Well, well, my lad,"
Said Smith, "if he cuts a swath so wide
I'll have him took re'glar up and tried!"
And he smiled so sweetly the other chap
Thought that himself was a Finn or Lapp
Caught in a storm of his native snows,
With a purple ear and an azure nose.
The Smith continued: "I never pursue
Immoral readin'." And that is true:
He's a saint of remarkably high degree,
With a mind as chaste as a mind can be;
But read!--the devil a word can he!




A MILITARY INCIDENT


Dawn heralded the coming sun--
  Fort Douglas was computing
The minutes--and the sunrise gun
  Was manned for his saluting.

The gunner at that firearm stood,
  The which he slowly loaded,
When, bang!--I know not how it could,
  But sure the charge exploded!

Yes, to that veteran's surprise
  The gun went off sublimely,
And both his busy arms likewise
Went off with it, untimely.

Then said that gunner to his mate
  (He was from Ballyshannon):
"Bedad, the sun's a minute late,
  Accardin' to this cannon!"




SUBSTANCE VERSUS SHADOW


So, gentle critics, you would have me tilt,
Not at the guilty, only just at Guilt!--
Spare the offender and condemn Offense,
And make life miserable to Pretense!
"Whip Vice and Folly--that is satire's use--
But be not personal, for _that's_ abuse;
Nor e'er forget what, 'like a razor keen,
Wounds with a touch that's neither felt nor seen.'"
Well, friends, I venture, destitute of awe,
To think that razor but an old, old saw,
A trifle rusty; and a wound, I'm sure,
That's felt not, seen not, one can well endure.
Go to! go to!--you're as unfitted quite
To give advice to writers as to write.
I find in Folly and in Vice a lack
Of head to hit, and for the lash no back;
Whilst Pixley has a pow that's easy struck,
And though good Deacon Fitch (a Fitch for luck!)
Has none, yet, lest he go entirely free,
God gave to him a corn, a heel to me.
He, also, sets his face (so like a flint
The wonder grows that Pickering doesn't skin't)
With cold austerity, against these wars
On scamps--'tis Scampery that _he_ abhors!
Behold advance in dignity and state--
Grave, smug, serene, indubitably great--
Stanford, philanthropist! One hand bestows
In alms what t'other one as justice owes.
Rascality attends him like a shade,
But closes, woundless, o'er my baffled blade,
Its limbs unsevered, spirit undismayed.
Faith! I'm for something can be made to feel,
If, like Pelides, only in the heel.
The fellow's self invites assault; his crimes
Will each bear killing twenty thousand times!
Anon Creed Haymond--but the list is long
Of names to point the moral of my song.
Rogues, fools, impostors, sycophants, they rise,
They foul the earth and horrify the skies--
With Mr. Huntington (sole honest man
In all the reek of that rapscallion clan)
Denouncing Theft as hard as e'er he can!




THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC MORALS


The Senate met in Sacramento city;
On public morals it had no committee
Though greatly these abounded. Soon the quiet
Was broken by the Senators in riot.
Now, at the end of their contagious quarrels,
There's a committee but no public morals.




CALIFORNIA

    [The Chinaman's Assailant was allowed to walk quietly
    away, although the street was filled with
    pedestrians.--_Newspaper_.]


Why should he not have been allowed
To thread with peaceful feet the crowd
  Which filled that Christian street?
The Decalogue he had observed,
From Faith in Jesus had not swerved,
And scorning pious platitudes,
He saw in the Beatitudes
  A lamp to guide his feet.

He knew that Jonah downed the whale
And made no bones of it. The tale
  That Ananias told
He swore was true. He had no doubt
That Daniel laid the lions out.
In short, he had all holiness,
All meekness and all lowliness,
  And was with saints enrolled.

'Tis true, some slight excess of zeal
Sincerely to promote the weal
  Of this most Christian state
Had moved him rudely to divide
The queue that was a pagan's pride,
And in addition certify
The Faith by making fur to fly
  From pelt as well as pate?

But, Heavenly Father, thou dost know
That in this town these actions go
  For nothing worth a name.
Nay, every editorial ass,
To prove they never come to pass
Will damn his soul eternally,
Although in his own journal he
  May read the printed shame.

From bloody hands the reins of pow'r
Fall slack; the high-decisive hour
  Strikes not for liars' ears.
Remove, O Father, the disgrace
That stains our California's face,
And consecrate to human good
The strength of her young womanhood
  And all her golden years!




DE YOUNG--A PROPHECY


Running for Senator with clumsy pace,
He stooped so low, to win at least a place,
That Fortune, tempted by a mark so droll,
Sprang in an kicked him to the winning pole.




TO EITHER


      Back further than
      I know, in San
Francisco dwelt a wealthy man.
      So rich was he
      That none could be
Wise, good and great in like degree.

      'Tis true he wrought,
      In deed or thought,
But few of all the things he ought;
      But men said: "Who
      Would wish him to?
Great souls are born to be, not do!"

      One thing, indeed,
      He did, we read,
Which was becoming, all agreed:
      Grown provident,
      Ere life was spent
He built a mighty monument.

      For longer than
      I know, in San
Francisco lived a beggar man;
      And when in bed
      They found him dead--
"Just like the scamp!" the people said.

      He died, they say,
      On the same day
His wealthy neighbor passed away.
      What matters it
      When beggars quit
Their beats? I answer: Not a bit.

      They got a spade
      And pick and made
A hole, and there the chap was laid.
      "He asked for bread,"
      'Twas neatly said:
"He'll get not even a stone instead."

      The years rolled round:
      His humble mound
Sank to the level of the ground;
      And men forgot
      That the bare spot
Was like (and was) the beggar's lot.

      Forgotten, too,
      Was t'other, who
Had reared the monument to woo
      Inconstant Fame,
      Though still his name
Shouted in granite just the same.

      That name, I swear,
      They both did bear
The beggar and the millionaire.
      That lofty tomb,
      Then, honored--whom?
For argument here's ample room.

      I'll not debate,
      But only state
The scamp first claimed it at the Gate.
      St. Peter, proud
      To serve him, bowed
And showed him to the softest cloud.




DISAPPOINTMENT


The Senate woke; the Chairman's snore
     Was stilled, its echoes balking;
The startled members dreamed no more,
For Steele, who long had held the floor,
     Had suddenly ceased talking.

As, like Elijah, in his pride,
     He to his seat was passing,
"Go up thou baldhead!" Reddy cried.
Then six fierce bears ensued and tried
     To sunder him for "sassing."

Two seized his legs, and one his head,
     The fourth his trunk, to munch on;
The fifth preferred an arm instead;
The last, with rueful visage, said:
     "Pray what have _I_ for luncheon?"

Then to that disappointed bear
     Said Steele, serene and chipper,
"My friend, you shall not lack your share:
Look in the Treasury, and there
     You'll find his other flipper."




THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF THEFT


In fair Yosemite, that den of thieves
  Wherein the minions of the moon divide
The travelers' purses, lo! the Devil grieves,
  His larger share as leader still denied.

El Capitan, foreseeing that _his_ reign
  May be disputed too, beclouds his head.
The joyous Bridal Veil is torn in twain
  And the crêpe steamer dangles there instead.

The Vernal Fall abates her pleasant speed
  And hesitates to take the final plunge,
For rumors reach her that another greed
  Awaits her in the Valley of the Sponge.

The Brothers envy the accord of mind
  And peace of purpose (by the good deplored
As honor among Commissioners) which bind
  That confraternity of crime, the Board.

The Half-Dome bows its riven face to weep,
  But not, as formerly, because bereft:
Prophetic dreams afflict him when asleep
  Of losing his remaining half by theft.

Ambitious knaves! has not the upper sod
  Enough of room for every crime that crawls
But you must loot the Palaces of God
  And daub your filthy names upon the walls?




DOWN AMONG THE DEAD MEN


Within my dark and narrow bed
  I rested well, new-laid:
I heard above my fleshless head
  The grinding of a spade.

A gruffer note ensued and grew
  To harsh and harsher strains:
The poet Welcker then I knew
  Was "snatching" my remains.

"O Welcker, let your hand be stayed
  And leave me here in peace.
Of your revenge you should have made
  An end with my decease."

"Hush, Mouldyshanks, and hear my moan:
  I once, as you're aware,
Was eminent in letters--known
  And honored everywhere.

"My splendor made all Berkeley bright
  And Sacramento blind.
Men swore no writer e'er could write
  Like me--if I'd a mind.

"With honors all insatiate,
  With curst ambition smit,
Too far, alas! I tempted fate--
  I _published_ what I'd writ!

"Good Heaven! with what a hunger wild
  Oblivion swallows fame!
Men who have known me from a child
  Forget my very name!

"Even creditors with searching looks
  My face cannot recall;
My heaviest one--he prints my books--
  Oblivious most of all.

"O I should feel a sweet content
  If one poor dun his claim
Would bring to me for settlement,
  And bully me by name.

"My dog is at my gate forlorn;
  It howls through all the night,
And when I greet it in the morn
  It answers with a bite!"

"O Poet, what in Satan's name
  To me's all this ado?
Will snatching me restore the fame
  That printing snatched from you?"

"Peace, dread Remains; I'm not about
  To do a deed of sin.
I come not here to hale you out--
  I'm trying to get in."




THE LAST MAN


I dreamed that Gabriel took his horn
On Resurrection's fateful morn,
And lighting upon Laurel Hill
Blew long, blew loud, blew high and shrill.
The houses compassing the ground
Rattled their windows at the sound.
But no one rose. "Alas!" said he,
"What lazy bones these mortals be!"
Again he plied the horn, again
Deflating both his lungs in vain;
Then stood astonished and chagrined
At raising nothing but the wind.
At last he caught the tranquil eye
Of an observer standing by--
Last of mankind, not doomed to die.
To him thus Gabriel: "Sir, I pray
This mystery you'll clear away.
Why do I sound my note in vain?
Why spring they not from out the plain?
Where's Luning, Blythe and Michael Reese,
Magee, who ran the _Golden Fleece?_
Where's Asa Fisk? Jim Phelan, who
Was thought to know a thing or two
Of land which rose but never sank?
Where's Con O'Conor of the Bank,
And all who consecrated lands
Of old by laying on of hands?
I ask of them because their worth
Was known in all they wished--the earth.
Brisk boomers once, alert and wise,
Why don't they rise, why don't they rise?"
The man replied: "Reburied long
With others of the shrouded throng
In San Mateo--carted there
And dumped promiscuous, anywhere,
In holes and trenches--all misfits--
Mixed up with one another's bits:
One's back-bone with another's shin,
A third one's skull with a fourth one's grin--
Your eye was never, never fixed
Upon a company so mixed!
Go now among them there and blow:
'Twill be as good as any show
To see them, when they hear the tones,
Compiling one another's bones!
But here 'tis vain to sound and wait:
Naught rises here but real estate.
I own it all and shan't disgorge.
Don't know me? I am Henry George."




ARBOR DAY


Hasten, children, black and white--
Celebrate the yearly rite.
Every pupil plant a tree:
It will grow some day to be
Big and strong enough to bear
A School Director hanging there.




THE PIUTE


Unbeautiful is the Piute!
  Howe'er bedecked with bravery,
  His person is unsavory--
Of soap he's destitute.

He multiplies upon the earth
  In spite of all admonishing;
  All censure his astonishing
And versatile unworth.

Upon the Reservation wide
  We give for his inhabiting
  He goes a-jackass rabbiting
To furnish his inside.

The hopper singing in the grass
  He seizes with avidity:
  He loves its tart acidity,
And gobbles all that pass.

He penetrates the spider's veil,
  Industriously pillages
  The toads' defenseless villages,
And shadows home the snail.

He lightly runs to earth the quaint
  Red worm and, deftly troweling,
  He makes it with his boweling
Familiarly acquaint.

He tracks the pine-nut to its lair,
  Surrounds it with celerity,
  Regards it with asperity--
Smiles, and it isn't there!

I wish he'd open up a grin
  Of adequate vivacity
  And carrying capacity
To take his Agent in.




FAME


He held a book in his knotty paws,
  And its title grand read he:
"The Chronicles of the Kings" it was,
  By the History Companee.
"I'm a monarch," he said
(But a tear he shed)
  "And my picter here you see.

"Great and lasting is my renown,
  However the wits may flout--
As wide almost as this blessed town"
  (But he winced as if with gout).
"I paid 'em like sin
For to put me in,
  But it's O, and O, to be out!"




ONE OF THE REDEEMED


Saint Peter, standing at the Gate, beheld
A soul whose body Death had lately felled.

A pleasant soul as ever was, he seemed:
His step was joyous and his visage beamed.

"Good morning, Peter." There was just a touch
Of foreign accent, but not overmuch.

The Saint bent gravely, like a stately tree,
And said: "You have the advantage, sir, of me."

"Rénan of Paris," said the immortal part--
"A master of the literary art.

"I'm somewhat famous, too, I grieve to tell,
As controversialist and infidel."

"That's of no consequence," the Saint replied,
"Why, I myself my Master once denied.

"No one up here cares anything for that.
But is there nothing you were always at?

"It seems to me you were accused one day
Of _something_--what it was I can't just say."

"Quite likely," said the other; "but I swear
My life was irreproachable and fair."

Just then a soul appeared upon the wall,
Singing a hymn as loud as he could bawl.

About his head a golden halo gleamed,
As well befitted one of the redeemed.

A harp he bore and vigorously thumbed,
Strumming he sang, and, singing, ever strummed.

His countenance, suffused with holy pride,
Glowed like a pumpkin with a light inside.

"Ah! that's the chap," said Peter, "who declares:
'Rénan's a rake and drunkard--smokes and swears.'

"Yes, that's the fellow--he's a preacher--came
From San Francisco. Mansfield was his name."

"Do you believe him?" said Rénan. "Great Scott!
Believe? Believe the blackguard? Of course _not!_

"Just walk right in and make yourself at home.
And if he pecks at you I'll cut his comb.

"He's only here because the Devil swore
He wouldn't have him, for the smile he wore."

Resting his eyes one moment on that proof
Of saving grace, the Frenchman turned aloof,

And stepping down from cloud to cloud, said he:
"Thank you, monsieur,--I'll see if he'll have _me_."




A CRITIC

    [Apparently the Cleveland _Leader_ is not a good judge of
    poetry.--_The Morning Call_.]


That from _you_, neighbor! to whose vacant lot
  Each rhyming literary knacker scourges
His cart-compelling Pegasus to trot,
  As folly, fame or famine smartly urges?

Admonished by the stimulating goad,
  How gaily, lo! the spavined crow-bait prances--
Its cart before it--eager to unload
  The dead-dog sentiments and swill-tub fancies.

Gravely the sweating scavenger pulls out
  The tail-board of his curst imagination,
Shoots all his rascal rubbish, and, no doubt,
  Thanks Fortune for so good a dumping-station.

To improve your property, the vile cascade
  Your thrift invites--to make a higher level.
In vain: with tons of garbage overlaid,
  Your baseless bog sinks slowly to the devil.

"Rubbish may be shot here"--familiar sign!
  I seem to see it in your every column.
You have your wishes, but if I had mine
  'Twould to your editor mean something solemn.




A QUESTION OF ELIGIBILITY


It was a bruised and battered chap
The victim of some dire mishap,
Who sat upon a rock and spent
His breath in this ungay lament:

"Some wars--I've frequent heard of such--
Has beat the everlastin' Dutch!
But never fight was fit by man
To equal this which has began
In our (I'm in it, if you please)
Academy of Sciences.
For there is various gents belong
To it which go persistent wrong,
And loving the debates' delight
Calls one another names at sight.
Their disposition, too, accords
With fighting like they all was lords!
Sech impulses should be withstood:
'Tis scientific to be good.

"'Twas one of them, one night last week,
Rose up his figure for to speak:
'Please, Mr. Chair, I'm holding here
A resolution which, I fear,
Some ancient fossils that has bust
Their cases and shook off their dust
To sit as Members here will find
Unpleasant, not to say unkind.'
And then he read it every word,
And silence fell on all which heard.
That resolution, wild and strange,
Proposed a fundamental change,
Which was that idiots no more
Could join us as they had before!

"No sooner was he seated than
The members rose up, to a man.
Each chap was primed with a reply
And tried to snatch the Chairman's eye.
They stomped and shook their fists in air,
And, O, what words was uttered there!

"The Chair was silent, but at last
He hove up his proportions vast
And stilled them tumults with a look
By which the undauntedest was shook.
He smiled sarcastical and said:
'If Argus was the Chair, instead
Of me, he'd lack enough of eyes
Each orator to recognize!
And since, denied a hearing, you
Might maybe undertake to do
Each other harm before you cease,
I've took some steps to keep the peace:
I've ordered out--alas, alas,
That Science e'er to such a pass
Should come!--I've ordered out--the gas!'

"O if a tongue or pen of fire
Was mine I could not tell entire
What the ensuin' actions was.
When swollered up in darkness' jaws
We fit and fit and fit and fit,
And everything we felt we hit!
We gouged, we scratched and we pulled hair,
And O, what words was uttered there!
And when at last the day dawn came
Three hundred Scientists was lame;
Two hundred others couldn't stand,
They'd been so careless handled, and
One thousand at the very least
Was spread upon the floor deceased!
'Twere easy to exaggerate,
But lies is things I mortal hate.

"Such, friends, is the disaster sad
Which has befel the Cal. Acad.
And now the question is of more
Importance than it was before:
Shall vacancies among us be
To idiots threw open free?"




FLEET STROTHER


What! you were born, you animated doll,
Within the shadow of the Capitol?
'Twas always thought (and Bancroft so assures
His trusting readers) it was reared in yours.




CALIFORNIAN SUMMER PICTURES


THE FOOT-HILL RESORT

Assembled in the parlor
  Of the place of last resort,
The smiler and the snarler
  And the guests of every sort--
    The elocution chap
    With rhetoric on tap;
  The mimic and the funny dog;
  The social sponge; the money-hog;
    Vulgarian and dude;
    And the prude;
  The adiposing dame
  With pimply face aflame;
  The kitten-playful virgin--
    Vergin' on to fifty years;
  The solemn-looking sturgeon
    Of a firm of auctioneers;
  The widower flirtatious;
  The widow all too gracious;
The man with a proboscis and a sepulcher beneath.
One assassin picks the banjo, and another picks his teeth.


AT ANCHOR

The soft asphaltum in the sun;
Betrays a tendency to run;
Whereas the dog that takes his way
Across its course concludes to stay.


THE IN-COMING CLIMATE

Now o' nights the ocean breeze
  Makes the patient flinch,
For that zephyr bears a sneeze
  In every cubic inch.
Lo! the lively population
Chorusing in sternutation
A catarrhal acclamation!


A LONG-FELT WANT

Dimly apparent, through the gloom
Of Market-street's opaque simoom,
A queue of people, parti-sexed,
Awaiting the command of "Next!"
A sidewalk booth, a dingy sign:
"Teeth dusted nice--five cents a shine."


TO THE HAPPY HUNTING GROUNDS

Wide windy reaches of high stubble field;
A long gray road, bordered with dusty pines;
A wagon moving in a "cloud by day."
Two city sportsmen with a dove between,
Breast-high upon a fence and fast asleep--
A solitary dove, the only dove
In twenty counties, and it sick, or else
It were not there. Two guns that fire as one,
With thunder simultaneous and loud;
Two shattered human wrecks of blood and bone!
And later, in the gloaming, comes a man--
The worthy local coroner is he,
Renowned all thereabout, and popular
With many a remain. All tenderly
Compiling in a game-bag the débris,
He glides into the gloom and fades from sight.
The dove, cured of its ailment by the shock,
Has flown, meantime, on pinions strong and fleet,
To die of age in some far foreign land.




SLANDER


FITCH:

"All vices you've exhausted, friend;
  So all the papers say."

PICKERING:

"Ah, what vile calumnies are penned!--
  'Tis just the other way."




JAMES L. FLOOD


As oft it happens in the youth of day
That mists obscure the sun's imperfect ray,
Who, as he's mounting to the dome's extreme,
Smites and dispels them with a steeper beam,
So you the vapors that begirt your birth
Consumed, and manifested all your worth.
But still one early vice obstructs the light
And sullies all the visible and bright
Display of mind and character. You write.




FOUR CANDIDATES FOR SENATOR


To flatter your way to the goad of your hope,
  O plausible Mr. Perkins,
You'll need ten tons of the softest soap
  And butter a thousand firkins.
The soap you could put to a better use
  In washing your hands of ambition
Ere the butter's used for cooking your goose
  To a beautiful brown condition.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Railroad can't run Stanford." That is so--
  The tail can't curl the pig; but then, you know,
Inside the vegetable-garden's pale
  The pig will eat more cabbage than the tail.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Sargent struts by all the lawmakers say:
  "Right--left!" It is fair to infer
The right will get left, nor polar the day
  When he makes that thing to occur.

Not so, not so, 'tis a joke, that cry--
  Foolish and dull and small:
He so bores them for votes that they mean to imply
  He's a drill-Sargent, that is all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gods! what a sight! Astride McClure's broad back
Estee jogs round the Senatorial track,
The crowd all undecided, as they pass,
Whether to cheer the man or cheer the ass.
They stop: the man to lower his feet is seen
And the tired beast, withdrawing from between,
Mounts, as they start again, the biped's neck,
And scarce the crowd can say which one's on deck.




A GROWLER


Judge Shafter, you're an aged man, I know,
  And learned too, I doubt not, in the law;
And a head white with many a winter's snow
  (I wish, however that your heart would thaw)
  Claims reverence and honor; but the jaw
That's always wagging with a word malign,
  Nagging and scolding every one in sight
As harshly as a jaybird in a pine,
  And with as little sense of wrong and right
As animates that irritable creature,
Is not a very venerable feature.

You damn all witnesses, all jurors too
  (And swear at the attorneys, I suppose,
But _that's_ commendable) "till all is blue";
  And what it's all about, the good Lord knows,
  Not you; but all the hotter, fiercer glows
Your wrath for that--as dogs the louder howl
  With only moonshine to incite their rage,
And bears with more ferocious menace growl,
  Even when their food is flung into the cage.
Reform, your Honor, and forbear to curse us.
Lest all men, hearing you, cry: "_Ecce ursus_!"




AD MOODIUM


Tut! Moody, do not try to show
  To gentlemen and ladies
That if they have not "Faith," they'll go
    Headlong to Hades.

Faith is belief; and how can I
  Have that by being willing?
This dime I cannot, though I try,
    Believe a shilling.

Perhaps you can. If so, pray do--
  Believe you own it, also.
But what seems evidence to you
    I may not call so.

Heaven knows I'd like the Faith to think
  This little vessel's contents
Are liquid gold. I see 'tis ink
    For writing nonsense.

Minds prone to Faith, however, may
  Come now and then to sorrow:
They put their trust in truth to-day,
    In lies to-morrow.

No doubt the happiness is great
  To think as one would wish to;
But not to swallow every bait,
    As certain fish do.

To think a snake a cord, I hope,
  Would bolden and delight me;
But some day I might think a rope
    Would chase and bite me.

"Curst Reason! Faith forever blest!"
  You're crying all the season.
Well, who decides that Faith is best?
    Why, Mr. Reason.

He's right or wrong; he answers you
  According to your folly,
And says what you have taught him to,
    Like any polly.




AN EPITAPH


Hangman's hands laid in this tomb an
  Imp of Satan's getting, whom an
Ancient legend says that woman
  Never bore--he owed his birth
  To Sin herself. From Hell to Earth
  She brought the brat in secret state
  And laid him at the Golden gate,
And they named him Henry Vrooman.
  While with mortals here he stayed,
  His father frequently he played.
Raised his birth-place and in other
Playful ways begot his mother.




A SPADE

    [The spade that was used to turn the first sod in the
    construction of the Central Pacific Railroad is to be
    exhibited at the New Orleans Exposition.--_Press Telegram_.]


Precursor of our woes, historic spade,
What dismal records burn upon thy blade!
On thee I see the maculating stains
Of passengers' commingled blood and brains.
In this red rust a widow's curse appears,
And here an orphan tarnished thee with tears.
Upon thy handle sanguinary bands
Reveal the clutching of thine owner's hands
When first he wielded thee with vigor brave
To cut a sod and dig a people's grave--
(For they who are debauched are dead and ought,
In God's name, to be hid from sight and thought.)
Within thee, as within a magic glass,
I seem to see a foul procession pass--
Judges with ermine dragging in the mud
And spotted here and there with guiltless blood;
Gold-greedy legislators jingling bribes;
Kept editors and sycophantic scribes;
Liars in swarms and plunderers in tribes;
They fade away before the night's advance,
And fancy figures thee a devil's lance
Gleaming portentous through the misty shade,
While ghosts of murdered virtues shriek about my blade!




THE VAN NESSIAD


From end to end, thine avenue, Van Ness,
Rang with the cries of battle and distress!
Brave lungs were thundering with dreadful sound
And perspiration smoked along the ground!
Sing, heavenly muse, to ears of mortal clay,
The meaning, cause and finish of the fray.

Great Porter Ashe (invoking first the gods,
Who signed their favor with assenting nods
That snapped off half their heads--their necks grown dry
Since last the nectar cup went circling by)
Resolved to build a stable on his lot,
His neighbors fiercely swearing he should not.
Said he: "I build that stable!" "No, you don't,"
Said they. "I can!" "You can't!" "I will!" "You won't!"
"By heaven!" he swore; "not only will I build,
But purchase donkeys till the place is filled!"
"Needless expense," they sneered in tones of ice--
"The owner's self, if lodged there, would suffice."
For three long months the awful war they waged:
With women, women, men with men engaged,
While roaring babes and shrilling poodles raged!

Jove, from Olympus, where he still maintains
His ancient session (with rheumatic pains
Touched by his long exposure) marked the strife,
Interminable but by loss of life;
For malediction soon exhausts the breath--
If not, old age itself is certain death.
Lo! he holds high in heaven the fatal beam;
A golden pan depends from each, extreme;
This feels of Porter's fate the downward stress,
That bears the destiny of all Van Ness.
Alas! the rusted scales, their life all gone,
Deliver judgment neither pro nor con:
The dooms hang level and the war goes on.
With a divine, contemptuous disesteem
Jove dropped the pans and kicked, himself, the beam:
Then, to decide the strife, with ready wit,
The nickel that he did not care for it
Twirled absently, remarking: "See it spin:
Head, Porter loses; tail, the others win."
The conscious nickel, charged with doom, spun round,
Portentously and made a ringing sound,
Then, staggering beneath its load of fate,
Sank rattling, died at last and lay in state.

Jove scanned the disk and then, as is his wont,
Raised his considering orbs, exclaiming: "Front!"
With leisurely alacrity approached
The herald god, to whom his mind he broached:
"In San Francisco two belligerent Powers,
Such as contended round great Ilion's towers,
Fight for a stable, though in either class
There's not a horse, and but a single ass.
Achilles Ashe, with formidable jaw
Assails a Trojan band with fierce hee-haw,
Firing the night with brilliant curses. They
With dark vituperation gloom the day.
Fate, against which nor gods nor men compete,
Decrees their victory and his defeat.
With haste, good Mercury, betake thee hence
And salivate him till he has no sense!"

Sheer downward shot the messenger afar,
Trailing a splendor like a falling star!
With dimming lustre through the air he burned,
Vanished, nor till another sun returned.
The sovereign of the gods superior smiled,
Beaming benignant, fatherly and mild:
"Is Destiny's decree performed, my lad?--
And has he now no sense?" "Ah, sire, he never had."




A FISH COMMISSIONER


Great Joseph D. Redding--illustrious name!--
Considered a fish-horn the trumpet of Fame.
That goddess was angry, and what do you think?
Her trumpet she filled with a gallon of ink,
And all through the Press, with a devilish glee,
She sputtered and spattered the name of J.D.




TO A STRAY DOG


Well, Towser (I'm thinking your name must be Towser),
  You're a decentish puppy as puppy dogs go,
For you never, I'm sure, could have dined upon trowser,
  And your tail's unimpeachably curled just so.

But, dear me! your name--if 'tis yours--is a "poser":
  Its meaning I cannot get anywise at,
When spoken correctly perhaps it is Toser,
  And means one who toses. Max Muller, how's that?

I ne'er was ingenious at all at divining
  A word's prehistorical, primitive state,
Or finding its root, like a mole, by consigning
  Its bloom to the turnep-top's sorrowful fate.

And, now that I think of it well, I'm no nearer
 The riddle's solution than ever--for how's
My pretty invented word, "tose," any clearer
  In point of its signification than "towse"?

So, Towser (or Toser), I mean to rename you
  In honor of some good and eminent man,
In the light and the heat of whose quickening fame you
  May grow to an eminent dog if you can.

In sunshine like his you'll not long be a croucher:
 The Senate shall hear you--for that I will vouch.
Come here, sir. Stand up. I rechristen you Goucher.
 But damn you! I'll shoot you if ever you gouch!




IN HIS HAND


De Young (in Chicago the story is told)
"Took his life in his hand," like a warrior bold,
And stood before Buckley--who thought him behind,
For Buckley, the man-eating monster is blind.
"Count fairly the ballots!" so rang the demand
Of the gallant De Young, with his life in his hand.
'Tis done, and the struggle is ended. No more
He havocs the battle-field, gilt with the gore
Of slain reputations. No more he defies
His "lying opponents" with deadlier lies.
His trumpet is hushed and his belt is unbound--
His enemies' characters cumber the ground.
They bloat on the war-plain with ink all asoak,
The fortunate candidates perching to croak.
No more he will charge, with a daring divine,
His foes with corruption, his friends by the line.
The thunders are stilled of the horrid campaign,
De Young is triumphant, and never again
Will he need, with his life in his hand, to roar:
"Count fair or, by G----, I will die on your floor!"
His life has been spared, for his sins to atone,
And the hand that he took it in washed with cologne.




A DEMAGOGUE


   "Yawp, yawp, yawp!
   Under the moon and sun.
   It's aye the rabble,
   And I to gabble,
And hey! for the tale that is never done.

   "Chant, chant, chant!
To woo the reluctant vote.
   I would I were dead
   And my say were said
And my song were sung to its ultimate note.

   "Stab, stab, stab!
Ah! the weapon between my teeth--
   I'm sick of the flash of it;
   See how the slash of it
Misses the foeman to mangle the sheath!

   "Boom, boom, boom!
I'm beating the mammoth drum.
  My nethermost tripes
  I blow into the pipes--
It's oh! for the honors that never come!"

   'Twas the dolorous blab
   Of a tramping "scab"--
   'Twas the eloquent Swift
   Of the marvelous gift--
The wild, weird, wonderful gift of gab!




IGNIS FATUUS


Weep, weep, each loyal partisan,
  For Buckley, king of hearts;
A most accomplished man; a man
Of parts--of foreign parts.

Long years he ruled with gentle sway,
  Nor grew his glory dim;
And he would be with us to-day
  If we were but with him.

Men wondered at his going off
  In such a sudden way;
'Twas thought, as he had come to scoff
  He would remain to prey.

Since he is gone we're all agreed
  That he is what men call
A crook: his very steps, indeed,
  Are bent--to Montreal.

So let our tears unhindered flow,
  Our sighs and groans have way:
It matters not how much we Oh!--
  The devil is to pay.




FROM TOP TO BOTTOM

    [Japan has 73,759 Buddhist priests, "most of whom," says a
    Christian missionary, "are grossly ignorant, and many of them
    lead scandalous lives."]


O Buddha, had you but foreknown
  The vices of your priesthood
It would have made you twist and moan
  As any wounded beast would.
You would have damned the entire lot
And turned a Christian, would you not?

There were no Christians, I'll allow,
  In your day; that would only
Have brought distinction. Even now
  A Christian might feel lonely.
All take the name, but facts are things
As stubborn as the will of kings.

The priests were ignorant and low
  When ridiculed by Lucian;
The records, could we read, might show
  The same of times Confucian.
And yet the fact I can't disguise
That Deacon Rankin's good and wise.

'Tis true he is not quite a priest,
  Nor more than half a preacher;
But he exhorts as loud at least
  As any living creature.
And when the plate is passed about
He never takes a penny out.

From Buddha down to Rankin! There,--
  I never did intend to.
This pen's a buzzard's quill, I swear,
  Such subjects to descend to.
When from the humming-bird I've wrung
A plume I'll write of Mike de Young.




AN IDLER


Who told Creed Haymond he was witty?--who
Had nothing better in this world to do?
Could no greased pig's appeal to his embrace
Kindle his ardor for the friendly chase?
Did no dead dog upon a vacant lot,
Bloated and bald, or curdled in a clot,
Stir his compassion and inspire his arms
To hide from human eyes its faded charms?

If not to works of piety inclined,
Then recreation might have claimed his mind.
The harmless game that shows the feline greed
To cinch the shorts and make the market bleed[A]
Is better sport than victimizing Creed;
And a far livelier satisfaction comes
Of knowing Simon, autocrat of thumbs.[B]
If neither worthy work nor play command
This gentleman of leisure's heart and hand,
Then Mammon might his idle spirit lift
By hope of profit to some deed of thrift.
Is there no cheese to pare, no flint to skin,
No tin to mend, no glass to be put in,
No housewife worthy of a morning visit,
Her rags and sacks and bottles to solicit?
Lo! the blind sow's precarious pursuit
Of the aspiring oak's familiar fruit!--
'Twould more advantage any man to steal
This easy victim's undefended meal
Than tell Creed Haymond he has wit, and so
Expose the state to his narcotic flow!

[Footnote A: "Pussy Wants a Corner."]

[Footnote B: "Simon Says Thumbs Up."]




THE DEAD KING


Hawaii's King resigned his breath--
  Our Legislature guffawed.
The awful dignity of death
  Not any single rough awed.
But when our Legislators die
All Kings, Queens, Jacks and Aces cry.




A PATTER SONG


There was a cranky Governor--
  His name it wasn't Waterman.
  For office he was hotter than
The love of any lover, nor
Was Boruck's threat of aiding him
Effective in dissuading him--
  This pig-headed, big-headed, singularly self-conceited Governor Nonwaterman.

To citrus fairs, _et cætera_,
  He went about philandering,
  To pride of parish pandering.
He knew not any better--ah,
His early education had
Not taught the abnegation fad--
  The wool-witted, bull-witted, fabulously feeble-minded king of gabble-gandering!

He conjured up, _ad libitum_,
  With postures energetical,
  One day (this is prophetical)
His graces, to exhibit 'em.
He straddled in each attitude,
Four parallels of latitude--
  The slab-footed, crab-footed, galloping gregarian, of presence unæsthetical!
An ancient cow, perceiving that
  His powers of agility
  Transcended her ability
(A circumstance for grieving at)
Upon her horns engrafted him
And to the welkin wafted him--
  The high-rolling, sky-rolling, hurtling hallelujah-lad of peerless volatility!



A CALLER


"Why, Goldenson, you're looking very well."
 Said Death as, strolling through the County Jail,
He entered that serene assassin's cell
  And hung his hat and coat upon a nail.
"I think that life in this secluded spot
Agrees with men of your trade, does it not?"

"Well, yes," said Goldenson, "I can't complain:
  Life anywhere--provided it is mine--
Agrees with me; but I observe with pain
  That still the people murmur and repine.
It hurts their sense of harmony, no doubt,
To see a persecuted man grow stout."

"O no, 'tis not your growing stout," said Death,
  "Which makes these malcontents complain and scold--
They like you to be, somehow, scant of breath.
  What they object to is your growing old.
And--though indifferent to lean or fat--
I don't myself entirely favor _that_."

With brows that met above the orbs beneath,
  And nose that like a soaring hawk appeared,
And lifted lip, uncovering his teeth,
  The Mamikellikiller coldly sneered:
"O, so you don't! Well, how will you assuage
Your spongy passion for the blood of age?"

Death with a clattering convulsion, drew
  His coat on, hatted his unmeated pow,
Unbarred the door and, stepping partly through,
  Turned and made answer: "I will _show_ you how.
I'm going to the Bench you call Supreme
And tap the old women who sit there and dream."




THE SHAFTER SHAFTED


Well, James McMillan Shafter, you're a Judge--
  At least you were when last I knew of you;
And if the people since have made you budge
  I did not notice it. I've much to do
  Without endeavoring to follow, through
The miserable squabbles, dust and smudge,
The fate of even the veteran contenders
Who fight with flying colors and suspenders.
Being a Judge, 'tis natural and wrong
  That you should villify the public press--
Save while you are a candidate. That song
  Is easy quite to sing, and I confess
  It wins applause from hearers who have less
Of spiritual graces than belong
To audiences of another kidney--
Men, for example, like Sir Philip Sidney.

Newspapers, so you say, don't always treat
  The Judges with respect. That may be so
And still no harm done, for I swear I'll eat
  My legs and in the long hereafter go,
  Snake-like, upon my belly if you'll show
All Judges are respectable and sweet.
For some of them are rogues and the world's laughter's
Directed at some others, for they're Shafters.




THE MUMMERY




THE TWO CAVEES


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

FITCH                              _a Pelter of Railrogues_
PICKERING                    _his Partner, an Enemy to Sin_
OLD NICK                            _a General Blackwasher_
DEAD CAT                                        _a Missile_
ANTIQUE EGG                                       _Another_
RAILROGUES, DUMP-CARTERS. NAVVIES and Unassorted SHOVELRY in the Lower Distance

_Scene_--The Brink of a Railway Cut, a Mile Deep.

_Time_--1875.


FITCH:

Gods! what a steep declivity! Below
I see the lazy dump-carts come and go,
Creeping like beetles and about as big.
The delving Paddies--

PICKERING:

              Case of _infra dig._

FITCH:

Loring, light-minded and unmeaning quips
Come with but scant propriety from lips
Fringed with the blue-black evidence of age.
'Twere well to cultivate a style more sage,
For men will fancy, hearing how you pun,
Our foulest missiles are but thrown in fun.

                        (_Enter Dead Cat._)

Here's one that thoughtfully has come to hand;
Slant your fine eye below and see it land.
  (_Seizes Dead Cat by the tail and swings it in act to throw._)

DEAD CAT (_singing_):

Merrily, merrily, round I go--
  Over and under and at.
Swing wide and free, swing high and low
  The anti-monopoly cat!

O, who wouldn't be in the place of me,
  The anti-monopoly cat?
    Designed to admonish,
    Persuade and astonish
The capitalist and--

FITCH _(letting go):_

                  Scat!
                         _(Exit Dead Cat.)_


PICKERING:

Huzza! good Deacon, well and truly flung!
Pat Stanford it has grassed, and Mike de Young.
Mike drives a dump-cart for the villains, though
'Twere fitter that he pull it. Well, we owe
The traitor one for leaving us!--some day
We'll get, if not his place, his cart away.
Meantime fling missiles--any kind will do.
                                _(Enter Antique Egg.)_
Ha! we can give them an _ovation_, too!

ANTIQUE EGG:

    In the valley of the Nile,
    Where the Holy Crocodile
    Of immeasurable smile
    Blossoms like the early rose,
    And the Sacred Onion grows--
    When the Pyramids were new
    And the Sphinx possessed a nose,
    By a storkess I was laid
    In the cool papyrus shade,
    Where the rushes later grew,
    That concealed the little Jew,
          Baby Mose.

    Straining very hard to hatch,
    I disrupted there my yolk;
    And I felt my yellow streaming
          Through my white;
    And the dream that I was dreaming
    Of posterity was broke
          In a night.
    Then from the papyrus-patch
    By the rising waters rolled,
    Passing many a temple old,
    I proceeded to the sea.
    Memnon sang, one morn, to me,
    And I heard Cambyses sass
    The tomb of Ozymandias!

FITCH:

O, venerablest orb of all the earth,
God rest the lady fowl that gave thee birth!
Fit missile for the vilest hand to throw--
I freely tender thee mine own. Although
As a bad egg I am myself no slouch,
Thy riper years thy ranker worth avouch.
Now, Pickering, please expose your eye and say
If--whoop!--
                                        _(Exit egg.)_
             I've got the range.

PICKERING:
                                 Hooray! hooray!
A grand good shot, and Teddy Colton's down:
It burst in thunderbolts upon his crown!
Larry O'Crocker drops his pick and flies,
And deafening odors scream along the skies!
Pelt 'em some more.

FITCH:

                 There's nothing left but tar--
wish I were a Yahoo.

PICKERING:

                   Well, you are.
But keep the tar. How well I recollect,
When Mike was in with us--proud, strong, erect--
_Mens conscia recti_--flinging mud, he stood,
Austerely brave, incomparably good,
Ere yet for filthy lucre he began
To drive a cart as Stanford's hired man,
That pitch-pot bearing in his hand, Old Nick
Appeared and tarred us all with the same stick.
                           _(Enter Old Nick)_.
I hope he won't return and use his arts
To make us part with our immortal parts.

OLD NICK:

Make yourself easy on that score my lamb;
For both your souls I wouldn't give a damn!
I want my tar-pot--hello! where's the stick?

FITCH:

Don't look at _me_ that fashion!--look at Pick.

PICKERING:

Forgive me, father--pity my remorse!
Truth is--Mike took that stick to spank his horse.
It fills my pericardium with grief
That I kept company with such a thief.

(_Endeavoring to get his handkerchief, he opens his coat and
the tar-stick falls out. Nick picks it up, looks at the culprit
reproachfully and withdraws in tears._)

FITCH (_excitedly_):

O Pickering, come hither to the brink--
There's something going on down there, I think!
With many an upward smile and meaning wink
The navvies all are running from the cut
Like lunatics, to right and left--

PICKERING:
                                   Tut, tut--
'Tis only some poor sport or boisterous joke.
Let us sit down and have a quiet smoke.
                         (_They sit and light cigars._)

      FITCH (_singing_):

    When first I met Miss Toughie
      I smoked a fine cigyar,
    An' I was on de dummy
      And she was in de cyar.

      BOTH (_singing_):

    An' I was on de dummy
      And she was in de cyar.

      FITCH (_singing_):

    I couldn't go to her,
      An' she wouldn't come to me;
    An' I was as oneasy
      As a gander on a tree.

      BOTH (_singing_):

    An' I was as oneasy
      As a gander on a tree.

      FITCH (_singing_):

    But purty soon I weakened
      An' lef' de dummy's bench,
    An' frew away a ten-cent weed
      To win a five-cent wench!

      BOTH (_singing_)

    An' frew away a ten-cent weed
      To win a five-cent wench!

FITCH:

Is there not now a certain substance sold
Under the name of fulminate of gold,
A high explosive, popular for blasting,
Producing an effect immense and lasting?

PICKERING:

Nay, that's mere superstition. Rocks are rent
And excavations made by argument.
Explosives all have had their day and season;
The modern engineer relies on reason.
He'll talk a tunnel through a mountain's flank
And by fair speech cave down the tallest bank.

(_The earth trembles, a deep subterranean explosion is heard
and a section of the bank as big as El Capitan starts away and
plunges thunderously into the cut. A part of it strikes De
Young's dumpcart abaft the axletree and flings him, hurtling,
skyward, a thing of legs and arms, to descend on the distant
mountains, where it is cold. Fitch and Pickering pull themselves
out of the débris and stand ungraveling their eyes and
noses._)

FITCH:

Well, since I'm down here I will help to grade,
And do dirt-throwing henceforth with a spade.

PICKERING:

God bless my soul! it gave me quit a start.
Well, fate is fate--I guess I'll drive this cart.
               (_Curtain._)




METEMPSYCHOSIS


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

ST. JOHN                        _a Presidential Candidate_
MCDONALD                             _a Defeated Aspirant_
MRS. HAYES                               _an Ex-President_
PITTS-STEVENS                              _a Water Nymph_

_Scene_--A Small Lake in the Alleghany Mountains.

ST. JOHN:

Hours I've immersed my muzzle in this tarn
And, quaffing copious potations, tried
To suck it dry; but ever as I pumped
Its waters into my distended skin
The labor of my zeal extruded them
In perspiration from my pores; and so,
Rilling the marginal declivity,
They fell again into their source. Ah, me!
Could I but find within these ancient hills
Some long extinct volcano, by the rains
Of countless ages in its crater brimmed
Like a full goblet, I would lay me down
Prone on the outer slope, and o'er its edge
Arching my neck, I'd siphon out its store
And flood the valleys with my sweat for aye.
So should I be accounted as a god,
Even as Father Nilus is. What's that?
Methought I heard some sawyer draw his file
With jarring, stridulous cacophany
Across his notchy blade, to set its teeth
And mine on edge. Ha! there it goes again!

_Song, within_.

  Cold water's the milk of the mountains,
    And Nature's our wet-nurse. O then,
  Glue thou thy blue lips to her fountains
    Forever and ever, amen!

ST. JOHN:

Why surely there's congenial company
Aloof--the spirit, I suppose, that guards
This sacred spot; perchance some water-nymph
Who laving in the crystal flood her limbs
Has taken cold, and so, with raucous voice
Afflicts the sensitive membrane of mine ear
The while she sings my sentiments.
                     _(Enter Pitts-Stevens.)_
                                    Hello!
What fiend is this?

PITTS-STEVENS:

'Tis I, be not afraid.

ST. JOHN:

And who, thou antiquated crone, art thou?
I ne'er forget a face, but names I can't
So well remember. I have seen thee oft.
When in the middle season of the night,
Curved with a cucumber, or knotted hard
With an eclectic pie, I've striven to keep
My head and heels asunder, thou has come,
With sociable familiarity,
Into my dream, but not, alas, to bless.

PITTS-STEVENS:

My name's Pitts-Stevens, age just seventeen years;
Talking teetotaler, professional
Beauty.

ST. JOHN:

What dost them here?

PITTS-STEVENS:

I'm come, fair sir,
With paint and brush to blazon on these rocks
The merits of my master's nostrum--so:
                                _(Paints rapidly.)_
"McDonald's Vinegar Bitters!"

ST. JOHN:

What are they?

PITTS-STEVENS:

A woman suffering from widowhood
Took a full bottle and was cured. A man
There was--a murderer; the doctors all
Had given him up--he'd but an hour to live.
He swallowed half a glassful. He is dead,
But not of Vinegar Bitters. A wee babe
Lay sick and cried for it. The mother gave
That innocent a spoonful and it smoothed
Its pathway to the tomb. 'Tis warranted
To cause a boy to strike his father, make
A pig squeal, start the hair upon a stone,
Or play the fiddle for a country dance.
_(Enter McDonald, reading a Sunday-school book.)_
Good morrow, sir; I trust you're well.

MCDONALD:

H'lo, Pitts!
Observe, good friends, I have a volume here
Myself am author of--a noble book
To train the infant mind (delightful task!)
It tells how one Samantha Brown, age, six,
A gutter-bunking slave to rum, was saved
By Vinegar Bitters, went to church and now
Has an account at the Pacific Bank.
I'll read the whole work to you.

ST JOHN:
                                Heaven forbid!
I've elsewhere an engagement.

PITTS-STEVENS:
                             I am deaf.

MCDONALD _(reading regardless):_

"Once on a time there lived"----

_(Enter Mrs. Hayes.)_
                                Behold our queen!

ALL:

Her eyes upon the ground
  Before her feet she low'rs,
Walking, in thought profound,
  As 'twere, upon all fours.
Her visage is austere,
  Her gait a high parade;
At every step you hear
  The sloshing lemonade!

MRS. HAYES _(to herself):_

Once, sitting in the White House, hard at work
Signing State papers (Rutherford was there,
Knitting some hose) a sudden glory fell
Upon my paper. I looked up and saw
An angel, holding in his hand a rod
Wherewith he struck me. Smarting with the blow
I rose and (cuffing Rutherford) inquired:
"Wherefore this chastisement?" The angel said:
"Four years you have been President, and still
There's rum!"--then flew to Heaven. Contrite, I swore
Such oath as lady Methodist might take,
My second term should medicine my first.
The people would not have it that way; so
I seek some candidate who'll take my soul--
My spirit of reform, fresh from my breast,
And give me his instead; and thus equipped
With my imperious and fiery essence,
Drive the Drink-Demon from the land and fill
The people up with water till their teeth
Are all afloat.

                    (_St. John discovers himself_.)
          What, _you_?

ST. JOHN:

                    Aye, Madam, I'll
Swap souls with you and lead the cold sea-green
Amphibians of Prohibition on,
Pallid of nose and webbed of foot, swim-bladdered,
Gifted with gills, invincible!

MRS. HAYES:

                    Enough,
Stand forth and consummate the interchange.

(_While McDonald and Pitts-Stevens modestly turn their
backs, the latter blushing a delicate shrimp-pink, St. John and
Mrs. Hayes effect an exchange of immortal parts. When the
transfer is complete McDonald turns and advances, uncorking
a bottle of Vinegar Bitters_.)

MCDONALD (_chanting_):

    Nectar compounded of simples
      Cocted in Stygian shades--
    Acids of wrinkles and pimples
      From faces of ancient maids--
    Acrid precipitates sunken
      From tempers of scolding wives
    Whose husbands, uncommonly drunken,
      Are commonly found in dives,--
    With this I baptize and appoint thee
                                        (_to St. John_.)
      To marshal the vinophobe ranks.
    In the name of Dambosh I anoint thee
                   (_pours the liquid down St. John's back_.)
      As King of aquatical cranks!

(_The liquid blisters the royal back, and His Majesty starts
on a dead run, energetically exclaiming. Exit St. John_.)

MRS. HAYES:

My soul! My soul! I'll never get it back
Unless I follow nimbly on his track.
                                  (_Exit Mrs. Hayes_.)

PITTS-STEVENS:

O my! he's such a beautiful young man!
I'll follow, too, and catch him if I can.
                                     (_Exit Pitts-Stevens_.)

MCDONALD:

He scarce is visible, his dust so great!
Methinks for so obscure a candidate
He runs quite well. But as for Prohibition--
I mean myself to hold the first position.

(_Produces a pocket flask, topes a cruel quantity of double-distilled
thunder-and-lightning out of it, smiles so grimly as to
darken all the stage and sings_):

    Though fortunes vary let all be merry,
      And then if e'er a disaster befall,
    At Styx's ferry is Charon's wherry
            In easy call.

    Upon a ripple of golden tipple
      That tipsy ship'll convey you best.
    To king and cripple, the bottle's the nipple
            Of Nature's breast!

                (_Curtain_.)




SLICKENS


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

HAYSEED                                          _a Granger_
NOZZLE                                             _a Miner_
RINGDIVVY                                      _a Statesman_
FEEGOBBLE                                         _a Lawyer_
JUNKET                                         _a Committee_

_Scene_--Yuba Dam.

_Feegobble, Ringdivvy, Nozzle_.


NOZZLE:

My friends, since '51 I have pursued
The evil tenor of my watery way,
Removing hills as by an act of faith--

RINGDIVVY:

Just so; the steadfast faith of those who hold,
In foreign lands beyond the Eastern sea,
The shares in your concern--a simple, blind,
Unreasoning belief in dividends,
Still stimulated by assessments which,
When the skies fall, ensnaring all the larks,
Will bring, no doubt, a very great return.

ALL (_singing_):

        O the beautiful assessment,
        The exquisite assessment,
        The regular assessment,
          That makes the water flow.

RINGDIVVY:

        The rascally-assessment!

FEEGOBBLE:

        The murderous assessment!

NOZZLE:

        The glorious assessment
          That makes my mare to go!

FEEGOBBLE:

But, Nozzle, you, I think, were on the point
Of making a remark about some rights--
Some certain vested rights you have acquired
By long immunity; for still the law
Holds that if one do evil undisturbed
His right to do so ripens with the years;
And one may be a villain long enough
To make himself an honest gentleman.

ALL (_singing_):

        Hail, holy law,
        The soul with awe
          Bows to thy dispensation.

NOZZLE:

        It breaks my jaw!

RINGDIVVY:

        It qualms my maw!

FEEGOBBLE:

        It feeds my jaw,
        It crams my maw,
          It is my soul's salvation!

NOZZLE:

Why, yes, I've floated mountains to the sea
For lo! these many years; though some, they say,
Do strand themselves along the bottom lands
And cover up a village here and there,
And here and there a ranch. 'Tis said, indeed,
The granger with his female and his young
Do not infrequently go to the dickens
By premature burial in slickens.

ALL (_singing_):

        Could slickens forever
        Choke up the river,
        And slime's endeavor
          Be tried on grain,
        How small the measure
        Of granger's treasure,
          How keen his pain!

RINGDIVVY:

"A consummation devoutly to be wished!"
These rascal grangers would long since have been
Submerged in slimes, to the last man of them,
But for the fact that all their wicked tribes
Affect our legislation with their bribes.

ALL (_singing_):

        O bribery's great--
        'Tis a pillar of State,
          And the people they are free.

FEEGOBBLE:

        It smashes my slate!

NOZZLE:

        It is thievery straight!

RINGDIVVY:

        But it's been the making of me!

NOZZLE:

I judge by certain shrewd sensations here
In these callosities I call my thumbs--
thrilling sense as of ten thousand pins,
Red-hot and penetrant, transpiercing all
The cuticle and tickling through the nerves--
That some malign and awful thing draws near.

                                   (_Enter Hayseed._)

Good Lord! here are the ghosts and spooks of all
The grangers I have decently interred,
Rolled into one!

FEEGOBBLE:

                Plead, phantom.

RINGDIVVY:

                                   You've the floor.

HAYSEED:

      From the margin of the river
      (Bitter Creek, they sometimes call it)
      Where I cherished once the pumpkin,
      And the summer squash promoted,
      Harvested the sweet potato,
      Dallied with the fatal melon
      And subdued the fierce cucumber,
      I've been driven by the slickens,
      Driven by the slimes and tailings!
      All my family--my Polly
      Ann and all my sons and daughters,
      Dog and baby both included--
      All were swamped in seas of slickens,
      Buried fifty fathoms under,
      Where they lie, prepared to play their
      Gentle prank on geologic
      Gents that shall exhume them later,
      In the dim and distant future,
      Taking them for melancholy
      Relics antedating Adam.
      I alone got up and dusted.

NOZZLE:

Avaunt! you horrid and infernal cuss!
What dire distress have you prepared for us?

RINGDIVVY:

    Were I a buzzard stooping from the sky
      My craw with filth to fill,
    Into your honorable body I
      Would introduce a bill.

FEEGOBBLE:

Defendant, hence, or, by the gods, I'll brain thee!--
Unless you saved some turneps to retain me.

HAYSEED:

As I was saying, I got up and dusted,
My ranch a graveyard and my business busted!
But hearing that a fellow from the City,
Who calls himself a Citizens' Committee,
Was coming up to play the very dickens,
With those who cover up our farms with slickens,
And make himself--unless I am in error--
To all such miscreants a holy terror,
I thought if I would join the dialogue
I maybe might get payment for my dog.

ALL (_Singing_):

O the dog is the head of Creation,
  Prime work of the Master's hand;
He hasn't a known occupation,
  Yet lives on the fat of the land.
Adipose, indolent, sleek and orbicular,
Sun-soaken, door matted, cross and particular,
Men, women, children, all coddle and wait on him,
Then, accidentally shutting the gate on him,
Miss from their calves, ever after, the rifted out
Mouthful of tendons that doggy has lifted out!
                              (_Enter Junket_.)

JUNKET:

Well met, my hearties! I must trouble you
Jointly and severally to provide
A comfortable carriage, with relays
Of hardy horses. This Committee means
To move in state about the country here.
I shall expect at every place I stop
Good beds, of course, and everything that's nice,
With bountiful repast of meat and wine.
For this Committee comes to sea and mark
And inwardly digest.

HAYSEED:

                   Digest my dog!

NOZZLE:

First square my claim for damages: the gold
Escaping with the slickens keeps me poor!

RINGDIVVY:

I merely would remark that if you'd grease
My itching palm it would more glibly glide
Into the public pocket.

FEEGOBBLE:

                   Sir, the wheels
Of justice move but slowly till they're oiled.
I have some certain writs and warrants here,
Prepared against your advent. You recall
The tale of Zaccheus, who did climb a tree,
And Jesus said: "Come down"?

JUNKET:

                   Why, bless your souls!
I've got no money; I but came to see
What all this noisy babble is about,
Make a report and file the same away.

NOZZLE, RINGDIVVY, FEEGOBBLE, HAYSEED:

How'll that help _us_? Reports are not our style
Of provender!

JUNKET:

                   Well, you can gnaw the file.

                    (_Curtain._)




"PEACEABLE EXPULSION"


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

MOUNTWAVE                _a Politician_
HARDHAND                 _a Workingman_
TOK BAK                    _a Chinaman_
SATAN           _a Friend to Mountwave_

CHORUS OF FOREIGN VOTERS.


MOUNTWAVE:

My friend, I beg that you will lend your ears
(I know 'tis asking a good deal of you)
While I for your instruction nominate
Some certain wrongs you suffer. Men like you
Imperfectly are sensible of all
The miseries they actually feel.
Hence, Providence has prudently raised up
Clear-sighted men like me to diagnose
Their cases and inform them where they're hurt.
The wounds of honest workingmen I've made
A specialty, and probing them's my trade.

HARDHAND:

Well, Mister, s'pose you let yer bossest eye
Camp on my mortal part awhile; then you
Jes' toot my sufferin's an' tell me what's
The fashionable caper now in writhes--
The very swellest wiggle.

MOUNTWAVE:

                               Well, my lad,
'Tis plain as is the long, conspicuous nose
Borne, ponderous and pendulous, between
The elephant's remarkable eye-teeth
                                   (_Enter Tok Bak._)
That Chinese competition's what ails _you_.

BOTH (_Singing_):

            O pig-tail Celestial,
            O barbarous bestial,
              Abominable Chinee!
            Simian fellow man,
            Primitive yellow man,
              Joshian devotee!
            Shoe-and-cigar machine,
            Oleomargarine
              You are, and butter are we--
            Fat of the land are we,
              Salt of the earth;
            In God's image planned to be--
              Noble in birth!
            You, on the contrary,
            Modeled upon very
              Different lines indeed,
            Show in conspicuous,
            Base and ridiculous
              Ways your inferior breed.
            Wretched apology,
            Shame of ethnology,
              Monster unspeakably low!
            Fit to be buckshotted--
            Be you 'steboycotted.
              Vanish--vamoose--mosy--Go!

TOK BAK:

You listen me! You beatee the big dlum
An' tell me go to Flowly Kingdom Come.
You all too muchee fool. You chinnee heap.
Such talkee like my washee--belly cheap!
                          (_Enter Satan._)
You dlive me outee clunty towns all way;
Why you no tackle me Safflisco, hay?

SATAN:

Methought I heard a murmuring of tongues
Sound through the ceiling of the hollow earth,
As if the anti-coolie ques----ha! friends,
Well met. You see I keep my ancient word:
Where two or three are gathered in my name,
There am I in their midst.

MOUNTWAVE:

                           O monstrous thief!
To quote the words of Shakespeare as your own.
I know his work.

HARDHAND:

                 Who's Shakespeare?--what's his trade?
I've heard about the work o' that galoot
Till I'm jest sick!

TOK BAK:

                    Go Sunny school--you'll know
Mo' Bible. Bime by pleach--hell-talkee. Tell
'Bout Abel--mebby so he live too cheap.
He mebby all time dig on lanch--no dlink,
No splee--no go plocession fo' make vote--
No sendee money out of clunty fo'
To helpee Ilishmen. Cain killum. Josh
He catchee at it, an' he belly mad--
Say: "Allee Melicans boycottee Cain."
Not muchee--you no pleachee that:
You all same lie.

MOUNTWAVE:

                   This cuss must be expelled.
                                   (_Draws pistol_.)

MOUNTWAVE, HARDHAND, SATAN (_singing_):

    For Chinese expulsion, hurrah!
      To mobbing and murder, all hail!
    Away with your justice and law--
      We'll make every pagan turn tail.

CHORUS OF FOREIGN VOTERS:

    Bedad! oof dot tief o'ze vorld--
    Zat Ivan Tchanay vos got hurled
    In Hella, da debil he say:
   "Wor be yer return pairmit, hey?"
    Und gry as 'e shaka da boot:
   "Zis haythen haf nevaire been oot!"

HARDHAND:

Too many cooks are working at this broth--
I think, by thunder, t'will be mostly froth!
I'm cussed ef I can sarvy, up to date,
What good this dern fandango does the State.

MOUNTWAVE:

The State's advantage, sir, you may not see,
But think how good it is for me.

SATAN:

                                And me.

                 (_Curtain_.)




ASPIRANTS THREE


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

_QUICK_:
     DE YOUNG      _a Brother to Mushrooms_

_DEAD_:
     SWIFT                    _an Heirloom_
     ESTEE                        _a Relic_

_IMMORTALS_:
     THE SPIRIT OF BROKEN HOPES. THE AUTHOR.

_MISCELLANEOUS_:
     A TROUPE OF COFFINS. THE MOON. VARIOUS COLORED FIRES.


_Scene_--The Political Graveyard at Bone Mountain.


DE YOUNG:

This is the spot agreed upon. Here rest
The sainted statesman who upon the field
Of honor have at various times laid down
Their own, and ended, ignominious,
Their lives political. About me, lo!
Their silent headstones, gilded by the moon,
Half-full and near her setting--midnight. Hark!
Through the white mists of this portentous night
(Which throng in moving shapes about my way,
As they were ghosts of candidates I've slain,
To fray their murderer) my open ear,
Spacious to maw the noises of the world,
Engulfs a footstep.
             (_Enter Estee from his tomb._)
                    Ah, 'tis he, my foe,
True to appointment; and so here we fight--
Though truly 'twas my firm belief that he
Would send regrets, or I had not been here.

ESTEE:

O moon that hast so oft surprised the deeds
Whereby I rose to greatness!--tricksy orb,
The type and symbol of my politics,
Now draw my ebbing fortunes to their flood,
As, by the magic of a poultice, boils
That burn ambitions with defeated fires
Are lifted into eminence.
                         (_Sees De Young._)
                         What? you!
Faith, if I had suspected you would come
From the fair world of politics wherein
So lately you were whelped, and which, alas,
I vainly to revisit strive, though still
Rapped on the rotting head and bidden sleep
Till Resurrection's morn,--if I had thought
You would accept the challenge that I flung
I would have seen you damned ere I came forth
In the night air, shroud-clad and shivering,
To fight so mean a thing! But since you're here,
Draw and defend yourself. By gad, we'll _see_
Who'll be Postmaster-General!

DE YOUNG:

                              We will--
I'll fight (for I am lame) with any blue
And redolent remain that dares aspire
To wreck the Grand Old Grandson's cabinet.
Here's at you, nosegay!

(_They draw tongues and are about to fight, when from an
adjacent whited sepulcher, enter Swift._)

SWIFT:

                Hold! put up your tongues!
Within the confines of this sacred spot
Broods such a holy calm as none may break
By clash of weapons, without sacrilege.
          (_Beats down their tongues with a bone._)
Madmen! what profits it? For though you fought
With such heroic skill that both survived,
Yet neither should achieve the prize, for I
Would wrest it from him. Let us not contend,
But friendliwise by stipulation fix
A slate for mutual advantage. Why,
Having the pick and choice of seats, should we
Forego them all but one? Nay, we'll take three,
And part them so among us that to each
Shall fall the fittest to his powers. In brief,
Let us establish a Portfolio Trust.

ESTEE:

                                    Agreed.

DE YOUNG:

                Aye, truly, 'tis a greed--and one
The offices imperfectly will sate,
But I'll stand in.

SWIFT:

                   Well, so 'tis understood,
As you're the junior member of the Trust,
Politically younger and undead,
Speak, Michael: what portfolio do you choose?

DE YOUNG:

I've thought the Postal service best would serve
My interest; but since I have my pick,
I'll take the War Department. It is known
Throughout the world, from Market street to Pine,
(For a Chicago journal told the tale)
How in this hand I lately took my life
And marched against great Buckley, thundering
My mandate that he count the ballots fair!
Earth heard and shrank to half her size! Yon moon,
Which rivaled then a liver's whiteness, paused
That night at Butchertown and daubed her face
With sheep's blood! Then my serried rank I drew
Back to my stronghold without loss. To mark
My care in saving human life and limb,
The Peace Society bestowed on me
Its leather medal and the title, too,
Of Colonel. Yes, my genius is for war. Good land!
I naturally dote on a brass band!

                     (_Sings._)

O, give me a life on the tented field,
  Where the cannon roar and ring,
Where the flag floats free and the foemen yield
  And bleed as the bullets sing.
But be it not mine to wage the fray
Where matters are ordered the other way,
  For that is a different thing.

O, give me a life in the fierce campaign--
  Let it be the life of my foe:
I'd rather fall upon him than the plain;
  That service I'd fain forego.
O, a warrior's life is fine and free,
But a warrior's death--ah me! ah me!
  That's a different thing, you know.

ESTEE:

Some claim I might myself advance to that
Portfolio. When Rebellion raised its head,
And you, my friends, stayed meekly in your shirts,
I marched with banners to the party stump,
Spat on my hands, made faces fierce as death,
Shook my two fists at once and introduced
Brave resolutions terrible to read!
Nay, only recently, as you do know,
I conquered Treason by the word of mouth,
And slew, with Samson's weapon, the whole South!

SWIFT:

You once fought Stanford, too.

ESTEE:

                              Enough of that--
Give me the Interior and I'll devote
My mind to agriculture and improve
The breed of cabbages, especially
The _Brassica Celeritatis_, named
For _you_ because in days of long ago
You sold it at your market stall,--and, faith,
'Tis said you were an honest huckster then.
I'll be Attorney-General if you
Prefer; for know I am a lawyer too!

SWIFT:

I never have heard that!--did you, De Young?

DE YOUNG:

Never, so help me! And I swear I've heard
A score of Judges say that he is not.

SWIFT (_to Estee_):

You take the Interior. I might aspire
To military station too, for once
I led my party into Pixley's camp,
And he paroled me. I defended, too,
The State of Oregon against the sharp
And bloody tooth of the Australian sheep.
But I've an aptitude exceeding neat
For bloodless battles of diplomacy.
My cobweb treaty of Exclusion once,
Through which a hundred thousand coolies sailed,
Was much admired, but most by Colonel Bee.
Though born a tinker I'm a diplomat
From old Missouri, and I--ha! what's that?

(_Exit Moon. Enter Blue Lights on all the tombs, and a
circle of Red Fire on the grass; in the center the Spirit of
Broken Hopes, and round about, a Troupe of Coffins, dancing
and singing._)

CHORUS OF COFFINS:

        Two bodies dead and one alive--
          Yo, ho, merrily all!
        Now for boodle strain and strive--
          Buzzards all a-warble, O!
        Prophets three, agape for bread;
        Raven with a stone instead--
          Providential raven!
        Judges two and Colonel one--
        Run, run, rustics, run!
        But it's O, the pig is shaven,
          And oily, oily all!

(_Exeunt Coffins, dancing. The Spirit of Broken Hopes
advances, solemnly pointing at each of the Three Worthies in
turn._)

SPIRIT OF BROKEN HOPES:

      Governor, Governor, editor man,
Rusty, musty, spick-and-span,
Harlequin, harridan, dicky-dout,
Demagogue, charlatan--o, u, t, OUT!
                    (_De Young falls and sleeps._)

    Antimonopoler, diplomat,
    Railroad lackey, political rat,
    One, two, three--SCAT!
                    (_Swift falls and sleeps._)

Boycotting chin-worker, working to woo
Fortune, the fickle, to smile upon _you_,
Jo-coated acrobat, shuttle-cock--SHOO!
                    (_Estee falls and sleeps._)

    Now they lie in slumber sweet,
    Now the charm is all complete,
    Hasten I with flying feet
    Where beyond the further sea
    A babe upon its mother's knee
    Is gazing into skies afar
    And crying for a golden star.
    I'll drag a cloud across the blue
    And break that infant's heart in two!

(_Exeunt the Spirit of Broken Hopes and the Red and Blue
Fires. Re-enter Moon._)

ESTEE (_waking_):

Why, this is strange! I dreamed I know not what,
It seemed that certain apparitions were,
Which sang uncanny words, significant
And yet ambiguous--half-understood--
Portending evil; and an awful spook,
Even as I stood with my accomplices,
Counted me out, as children do in play.
Is that you, Mike?

DE YOUNG _(waking):_

It was.

SWIFT _(waking):_

                   Am I all that?
Then I'll reform my ways.
_(Reforms his ways.)_
Ah! had I known
How sweet it is to be an honest man
I never would have stooped to turn my coat
For public favor, as chameleons take
The hue (as near as they can judge) of that
Supporting them. Henceforth I'll buy
With money all the offices I need,
And know the pleasure of an honest life,
Or stay forever in this dismal place.
Now that I'm good, it will no longer do
To make a third with such, a wicked two.
_(Returns to his tomb.)_

DE YOUNG:

Prophetic dream! by some good angel sent
To make me with a quiet life content.
The question shall no more my bosom irk,
To go to Washington or go to work.
From Fame's debasing struggle I'll withdraw,
And taking up the pen lay down the law.
I'll leave this rogue, lest my example make
An honest man of him--his heart would break.
_(Exit De Young.)_

ESTEE:

Out of my company these converts flee,
But that advantage is denied to me:
My curst identity's confining skin
Nor lets me out nor tolerates me in.
Well, since my hopes eternally have fled,
And, dead before, I'm more than ever dead,
To find a grander tomb be now my task,
And pack my pork into a stolen cask.
_(Exit, searching. Loud calls for the Author, who appears,
bowing and smiling_.)

AUTHOR _(singing):_

Jack Satan's the greatest of gods,
  And Hell is the best of abodes.
'Tis reached, through the Valley of Clods,
  By seventy different roads.
  Hurrah for the Seventy Roads!
Hurrah for the clods that resound
With a hollow, thundering sound!
  Hurrah for the Best of Abodes!

We'll serve him as long as we've breath--
  Jack Satan the greatest of gods.
To all of his enemies, death!--
  A home in the Valley of Clods.
  Hurrah for the thunder of clods
That smother the soul of his foe!
Hurrah for the spirits that go
  To dwell with the Greatest of Gods;

_(Curtain falls to faint odor of mortality. Exit the Gas_.)




THE BIRTH OF THE RAIL

DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

LELAND, THE KID              _a Road Agent_
COWBOY CHARLEY       _Same Line of Business_
HAPPY HUNTY          _Ditto in All Respects_
SOOTYMUG                           _a Devil_

_Scene_--the Dutch Flat Stage Road, at 12 P.M., on a Night
of 1864.


COWBOY CHARLEY:

My boss, I fear she is delayed to-night.
Already it is past the hour, and yet
My ears have reached no sound of wheels; no note
Melodious, of long, luxurious oaths
Betokens the traditional dispute
(Unsettled from the dawn of time) between
The driver and off wheeler; no clear chant
Nor carol of Wells Fargo's messenger
Unbosoming his soul upon the air--
his prowess to the tender-foot,
And how at divers times in sundry ways
He strewed the roadside with our carcasses.
Clearly, the stage will not come by to-night.

LELAND, THE KID:

I now remember that but yesterday
I saw three ugly looking fellows start
From Colfax with a gun apiece, and they
Did seem on business of importance bent.
Furtively casting all their eyes about
And covering their tracks with all the care
That business men do use. I think perhaps
They were Directors of that rival line,
The great Pacific Mail. If so, they have
Indubitably taken in that coach,
And we are overreached. Three times before
This thing has happened, and if once again
These outside operators dare to cut
Our rates of profit I shall quit the road
And take my money out of this concern.
When robbery no longer pays expense
It loses then its chiefest charm for me,
And I prefer to cheat--you hear me shout!

HAPPY HUNTY:

My chief, you do but echo back my thoughts:
This competition is the death of trade.
'Tis plain (unless we wish to go to work)
Some other business we must early find.
What shall it be? The field of usefulness
Is yearly narrowing with the advance
Of wealth and population on this coast.
There's little left that any man can do
Without some other fellow stepping in
And doing it as well. If one essay
To pick a pocket he is sure to feel
(With what disgust I need not say to you)
Another hand inserted in the same.
You crack a crib at dead of night, and lo!
As you explore the dining-room for plate
You find, in session there, a graceless band
Stuffing their coats with spoons, their skins with wine.
And so it goes. Why even undertake
To salt a mine and you will find it rich
With noble specimens placed there before!

LELAND, THE KID:

And yet this line of immigration has
Advantages superior to aught
That elsewhere offers: all these passengers,
If punched with care--

COWBOY CHARLEY:

                   Significant remark!
It opens up a prospect wide and fair,
Suggesting to the thoughtful mind--_my_ mind--
A scheme that is the boss lay-out. Instead
Of stopping passengers, let's carry them.
Instead of crying out: "Throw up your hands!"
Let's say: "Walk up and buy a ticket!" Why
Should we unwieldy goods and bullion take,
Watches and all such trifles, when we might
Far better charge their value three times o'er
For carrying them to market?

LELAND, THE KID:

                              Put it there,
Old son!

HAPPY HUNTY:

          You take the cake, my dear. We'll build
A mighty railroad through this pass, and then
The stage folk will come up to us and squeal,
And say: "It is bad medicine for both:
What will you give or take?" And then we'll sell.

COWBOY CHARLEY:

Enlarge your notions, little one; this is
No petty, slouching, opposition scheme,
To be bought off like honest men and fools;
Mine eye prophetic pierces through the mists
That cloud the future, and I seem to see
A well-devised and executed scheme
Of wholesale robbery within the law
(Made by ourselves)--great, permanent, sublime,
And strong to grapple with the public throat--
Shaking the stuffing from the public purse,
The tears from bankrupt merchants' eyes, the blood
From widows' famished carcasses, the bread
From orphans' mouths!

HAPPY HUNTY:

                      Hooray!

LELAND, THE; KID:

                              Hooray!

ALL:

                                      Hooray!

_(They tear the masks from their faces, and discharging their
shotguns, throw them into the chapparal. Then they join hands,
dance and sing the following song:)_

Ah! blessèd to measure
The glittering treasure!
  Ah! blessèd to heap up the gold
             Untold
That flows in a wide
And deepening tide--
  Rolled, rolled, rolled
From multifold sources,
Converging its courses
  Upon our--

LELAND, THE KID:

Just wait a bit, my pards, I thought I heard
A sneaking grizzly cracking the dry twigs.
Such an intrusion might deprive the State
Of all the good that we intend it. Ha!

_(Enter Sootymug. He saunters carelessly in and gracefully
leans his back against a redwood.)_

SOOTYMUG:

My boys, I thought I heard
  Some careless revelry,
As if your minds were stirred
  By some new devilry.
I too am in that line. Indeed, the mission
On which I come--

HAPPY HUNTY:

            Here's more damned competition!
              _(Curtain.)_




A BAD NIGHT

DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

VILLIAM                    _a Sen_
NEEDLESON             _a Sidniduc_
SMILER               _a Scheister_
KI-YI                   _a Trader_
GRIMGHAST               _a Spader_
SARALTHIA      _a Love-lorn Nymph_
NELLIBRAC              _a Sweetun_

A BODY; A GHOST; AN UNMENTIONABLE THING; SKULLS;
HOODOOS; ETC.

_Scene_--a Cemetery in San Francisco.

_Saralthia, Nellibrac, Grimghast._


SARALTHIA:

The red half-moon is dipping to the west,
And the cold fog invades the sleeping land.
Lo! how the grinning skulls in the level light
Litter the place! Methinks that every skull
Is a most lifelike portrait of my Sen,
Drawn by the hand of Death; each fleshless pate,
Cursed with a ghastly grin to eyes unrubbed
With love's magnetic ointment, seems to mine
To smile an amiable smile like his
Whose amiable smile I--I alone
Am able to distinguish from his leer!
See how the gathering coyotes flit
Through the lit spaces, or with burning eyes
Star the black shadows with a steadfast gaze!
About my feet the poddy toads at play,
Bulbously comfortable, try to hop,
And tumble clumsily with all their warts;
While pranking lizards, sliding up and down
My limbs, as they were public roads, impart
A singularly interesting chill.
The circumstance and passion of the time,
The cast and manner of the place--the spirit
Of this confederate environment,
Command the rights we come to celebrate
Obedient to the Inspired Hag--
The seventh daughter of the seventh daughter,
Who rules all destinies from Minna street,
A dollar a destiny. Here at this grave,
Which for my purposes thou, Jack of Spades--
               _(To Grimghast_)
Corrupter than the thing that reeks below--
Hast opened secretly, we'll work the charm.
Now what's the hour?
                 _(Distant clock strikes thirteen_.)
                 Enough--hale forth the stiff!

_(Grimghast by means of a boat-hook stands the coffin on end
in the excavation; the lid crumbles, exposing the remains of a
man.)_

Ha! Master Mouldybones, how fare you, sir?

THE BODY:

Poorly, I thank your ladyship; I miss
Some certain fingers and an ear or two.
There's something, too, gone wrong with my inside,
And my periphery's not what it was.
How can we serve each other, you and I?

NELLIBRAC:

O what a personable man!

_(Blushes bashfully, drops her eyes and twists the corner of
her apron_.)

SARALTHIA:

                            Yes, dear,
A very proper and alluring male,
And quite superior to Lubin Rroyd,
Who has, however, this distinct advantage--
He is alive.

GRIMGHAST:

                  Missus, these yer remains
Was the boss singer back in '72,
And used to allers git invites to go
Down to Swellmont and sing at every feed.
In t'other Villiam's time, that was, afore
The gent that you've hooked onto bought the place.

THE BODY _(singing):_

Down among the sainted dead
  Many years I lay;
Beetles occupied my head,
  Moles explored my clay.

There we feasted day and night--
  I and bug and beast;
They provided appetite
  And I supplied the feast.

The raven is a dicky-bird,

SARALTHIA _(singing):_

The jackal is a daisy,

NELLIBRAC _(singing):_

        The wall-mouse is a worthy third,

A SPOOK _(singing):_

        But mortals all are crazy.

CHORUS OF SKULLS:

        O mortals all are crazy,
        Their intellects are hazy;
In the growing moon they shake their shoon
        And trip it in the mazy.

        But when the moon is waning,
        Their senses they're regaining:
      They fall to prayer and from their hair
        Remove the straws remaining.

SARALTHIA:

That's right, Rogues Gallery, pray keep it up:
Your song recalls my Villiam's "Auld Lang Syne,"
What time he came and (like an amorous bird
That struts before the female of its kind,
Warbling to cave her down the bank) piped high
His cracked falsetto out of reach. Enough--
Now let's to business. Nellibrac, sweet child,
St. Cloacina's future devotee,
The time is ripe and rotten--gut the grip!

_(Nellibrac brings forward a valise and takes from it five
articles of clothing, which, one by one, she lays upon the points
of a magic pentagram that has thoughtfully inscribed itself in
lines of light on the wet grass. The Body holds its late lamented
nose.)_

NELLIBRAC _(singing):_

        Fragrant socks, by Villiam's toes
        Consecrated to the nose;

        Shirt that shows the well worn track
        Of the knuckles of his back,

        Handkerchief with mottled stains,
        Into which he blew his brains;

        Collar crying out for soap--
        Prophet of the future rope;

        An unmentionable thing
        It would sicken me to sing.

UNMENTIONABLE THING _(aside):_

What! _I_ unmentionable? Just you wait!
In all the family journals of the State
You'll sometime see that I'm described at length,
With supereditorial grace and strength.

SARALTHIA _(singing):_

        Throw them in the open tomb
        They will cause his love to bloom
        With an amatory boom!

CHORUS OF INVISIBLE HOODOOS:

        Hoodoo, hoodoo, voudou-vet
        Villiam struggles in the net!
        By the power and intent
        Of the charm his strength is spent!
        By the virtue in each rag
        Blessed by the Inspired Hag
        He will be a willing victim
        Limp as if a donkey kicked him!
        By this awful incantation
        We decree his animation--

        By the magic of our art
        Warm the cockles of his heart,
        Villiam, if alive or dead,
        Thou Saralthia shalt wed!

_(They cast the garments into the grave and push over the
coffin. Grimghast fills up the hole. Hoodoos gradually become
apparent in a phosphorescent light about the grave, holding one
another's back-hair and dancing in a circle.)_

HOODOO SONG AND DANCE:

  O we're the larrikin hoodoos!
  The chirruping, lirruping hoodoos!
  We mix things up that the Fates ordain,
  Bring back the past and the present detain,
  Postpone the future and sometimes tether
  The three and drive them abreast together--
  We rollicking, frolicking hoodoos!

  To us all things are the same as none
  And nothing is that is under the sun.
  Seven's a dozen and never is then,
  Whether is what and what is when,
  A man is a tree and a cuckoo a cow
  For gold galore and silver enow
  To magical, mystical hoodoos!

SARALTHIA:

What monstrous shadow darkens all the place,

                         _(Enter Smyler.)_

Flung like a doom athwart--ha!--thou?
Portentous presence, art thou not the same
That stalks with aspect horrible among
Small youths and maidens, baring snaggy teeth,
Champing their tender limbs till crimson spume,
Flung from, thy lips in cursing God and man,
Incarnadines the land?

SMYLER:

                       Thou dammid slut!

                              _(Exit Smyler.)_

NELLIBRAC:

O what a pretty man!

SARALTHIA

                     Now who is next?
Of tramps and casuals this graveyard seems
Prolific to a fault!

_(Enter Needleson, exhaling, prophetically, an odor of decayed
eggs and, actually, one of unlaundried linen. He darts an
intense regard at an adjacent marble angel and places his open
hand behind his ear.)_

NEEDLESON:

                     Hay?
                               _(Exit Needleson.)_

NELLIBRAC:

                          Sweet, sweet male!
I yearn to play at Copenhagen with him!

                    _(Blushes diligently and energetically.)_

CHORUS OF SKULLS:

      Hoodoos, hoodoos, disappear--
      Some dread deity draws near!

                               _(Exeunt Hoodos.)_

      Smitten with a sense of doom,
      The dead are cowering in the tomb,
      Seas are calling, stars are falling
      And appalling is the gloom!
      Fragmentary flames are flung
      Through the air the trees among!
      Lo! each hill inclines its head--
      Earth is bending 'neath his thread!

_(On the contrary, enter Villiam on a chip, navigating an
odor of mignonette. Saralthia springs forward to put him in
her pocket, but he is instantly retracted by an invisible string.
She falls headlong, breaking her heart. Reënter Villiam,
Needleson, Smyler. All gather about Saralthia, who loudly
laments her accident. The Spirit of Tar-and Feathers, rising
like a black smoke in their midst, executes a monstrous wink of
graphic and vivid significance, then contemplates them with an
obviously baptismal intention. The cross on Lone Mountain
takes fire, splendoring the Peninsula. Tableau. Curtain.)_




ON STONE




_As in a dream, strange epitaphs I see,
  Inscribed on yet unquarried stone,
  Where wither flowers yet unstrown--
The Campo Santo of the time to be_.




A WREATH OF IMMORTELLES

       *       *       *       *       *

LORING PICKERING

_(After Pope)_


Here rests a writer, great but not immense,
Born destitute of feeling and of sense.
No power he but o'er his brain desired--
How not to suffer it to be inspired.
Ideas unto him were all unknown,
Proud of the words which, only, were his own.
So unreflecting, so confused his mind,
Torpid in error, indolently blind,
A fever Heaven, to quicken him, applied,
But, rather than revive, the sluggard died.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WATER-PIRATE


Pause, stranger--whence you lightly tread
Bill Carr's immoral part has fled.
For him no heart of woman burned,
But all the rivers' heads he turned.
Alas! he now lifts up his eyes
In torment and for water cries,
Entreating that he may procure
One drop to cool his parched McClure!

       *       *       *       *       *

C.P. BERRY


Here's crowbait!--ravens, too, and daws
Flock hither to advance their caws,
And, with a sudden courage armed,
Devour the foe who once alarmed--
In life and death a fair deceit:
Nor strong to harm nor good to eat.
King bogey of the scarecrow host,
When known the least affrighting most,
Though light his hand (his mind was dark)
He left on earth a straw Berry mark.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE REV. JOSEPH


He preached that sickness he could floor
  By prayer and by commanding;
When sick himself he sent for four
  Physicians in good standing.
He was struck dead despite their care,
  For, fearing their dissension,
He secretly put up a prayer,
  Thus drawing God's attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cynic perforce from studying mankind
In the false volume of his single mind,
He damned his fellows for his own unworth,
And, bad himself, thought nothing good on earth.
Yet, still so judging and so erring still,
Observing well, but understanding ill,
His learning all was got by dint of sight,
And what he learned by day he lost by night.
When hired to flatter he would never cease
Till those who'd paid for praises paid for peace.
Not wholly miser and but half a knave,
He yearned to squander but he lived to save,
And did not, for he could not, cheat the grave.
_Hic jacet_ Pixley, scribe and muleteer:
Step lightly, stranger, anywhere but here.

       *       *       *       *       *

McAllister, of talents rich and rare,
  Lies at this spot at finish of his race.
Alike to him if it is here or there:
  The one spot that he cared for was the ace.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here lies Joseph Redding, who gave us the catfish.
He dined upon every fish except that fish.
'Twas touching to hear him expounding his fad
With a heart full of zeal and a mouth full of shad.
The catfish miaowed with unspeakable woe
When Death, the lone fisherman, landed their Jo.

       *       *       *       *       *

Judge Sawyer, whom in vain the people tried
To push from power, here is laid aside.
Death only from the bench could ever start
The sluggish load of his immortal part.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Irish went, one luckless day,
To loaf and fish at San Jose.
He got no loaf, he got no fish:
They brained him with an empty dish!
They laid him in this place asleep--
O come, ye crocodiles, and weep.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Sacramento City here
This wooden monument we rear
In memory of Dr. May,
Whose smile even Death could not allay.
He's buried, Heaven alone knows where,
And only the hyenas care;
This May-pole merely marks the spot
Where, ere the wretch began to rot,
Fame's trumpet, with its brazen bray,
Bawled; "Who (and why) was Dr. May?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dennis Spencer's mortal coil
Here is laid away to spoil--
Great riparian, who said
Not a stream should leave its bed.
Now his soul would like a river
Turned upon its parching liver.

       *       *       *       *       *

For those this mausoleum is erected
Who Stanford to the Upper House elected.
Their luck is less or their promotion slower,
For, dead, they were elected to the Lower.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beneath this stone lies Reuben Lloyd,
Of breath deprived, of sense devoid.
The Templars' Captain-General, he
So formidable seemed to be,
That had he not been on his back
Death ne'er had ventured to attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here lies Barnes in all his glory--
Master he of oratOry.
When he died the people weeping,
(For they thought him only sleeping)
Cried: "Although he now is quiet
And his tongue is not a riot,
Soon, the spell that binds him breaking,
He a motion will be making.
Then, alas, he'll rise and speak
In support of it a week."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rash mortal! stay thy feet and look around--
This vacant tomb as yet is holy ground;
But soon, alas! Jim Fair will occupy
These premises--then, holiness, good-bye!

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Salomon's body reposes;
Bring roses, ye rebels, bring roses.
Set all of your drumsticks a-rolling,
Discretion and Valor extrolling:
Discretion--he always retreated--
And Valor--the dead he defeated.
Brings roses, ye loyal, bring roses:
As patriot here he re-poses.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Waterman ended his bright career
He left his wet name to history here.
To carry it with him he did not care:
'Twould tantalize spirits of statesmen There.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here lie the remains of Fred Emerson Brooks,
A poet, as every one knew by his looks
Who hadn't unluckily met with his books.

On civic occasions he sprang to the fore
With poems consisting of stanzas three score.
The men whom they deafened enjoyed them the more.

Of reason his fantasy knew not the check:
All forms of inharmony came at his beck.
The weight of his ignorance fractured his neck.

In this peaceful spot, so the grave-diggers say,
With pen, ink and paper they laid him away--
The Poet-elect of the Judgment Day.

       *       *       *       *       *

  George Perry here lies stiff and stark,
With stone at foot and stone at head.
  His heart was dark, his mind was dark--
"Ignorant ass!" the people said.

  Not ignorant but skilled, alas,
In all the secrets of his trade:
  He knew more ways to be an ass
Than any ass that ever brayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here lies the last of Deacon Fitch,
Whose business was to melt the pitch.
Convenient to this sacred spot
Lies Sammy, who applied it, hot.
'Tis hard--so much alike they smell--

One's grave from t'other's grave to tell,
But when his tomb the Deacon's burst
(Of two he'll always be the first)
He'll see by studying the stones
That he's obtained his proper bones,
Then, seeking Sammy's vault, unlock it,
And put that person in his pocket.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beneath this stone O'Donnell's tongue's at rest--
Our noses by his spirit still addressed.
Living or dead, he's equally Satanic--
His noise a terror and his smell a panic.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Gabriel blows a dreadful blast
And swears that Time's forever past,
Days, weeks, months, years all one at last,
Then Asa Fiske, laid here, distressed,
Will beat (and skin his hand) his breast:
There'll be no rate of interest!

       *       *       *       *       *

Step lightly, stranger: here Jerome B. Cox
Is for the second time in a bad box.
He killed a man--the labor party rose
And showed him by its love how killing goes.

       *       *       *       *       *

  When Vrooman here lay down to sleep,
  The other dead awoke to weep.
"Since he no longer lives," they said
"Small honor comes of being dead."

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Porter Ashe is laid to rest
Green grows the grass upon his breast.
This patron of the turf, I vow,
Ne'er served it half so well as now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Like a cold fish escaping from its tank,
Hence fled the soul of Joe Russel, crank.
He cried: "Cold water!" roaring like a beast.
'Twas thrown upon him and the music ceased.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Estee rests. He shook a basket,
When, like a jewel from its casket,
Fell Felton out. Said Estee, shouting
With mirth; "I've given you an outing."
Then told him to go back. He wouldn't.
Then tried to _put_ him back. He couldn't.
So Estee died (his blood congealing
In Felton's growing shadow) squealing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mourn here for one Bruner, called Elwood.
He doesn't--he never did--smell good
  To noses of critics and scholars.
If now he'd an office to sell could
He sell it? O, no--where (in Hell) could
  He find a cool four hundred dollars?

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Stanford lies, who thought it odd
That he should go to meet his God.
He looked, until his eyes grew dim,
For God to hasten to meet him.







I

For by death is wrought greater change than hath been shown.  Whereas
in general the spirit that removed cometh back upon occasion, and is
sometimes seen of those in flesh (appearing in the form of the body
it bore) yet it hath happened that the veritable body without the
spirit hath walked.  And it is attested of those encountering who
have lived to speak thereon that a lich so raised up hath no natural
affection, nor remembrance thereof, but only hate.  Also, it is known
that some spirits which in life were benign become by death evil
altogether.--Hali.


One dark night in midsummer a man waking from a dreamless sleep in a
forest lifted his head from the earth, and staring a few moments into
the blackness, said:  "Catherine Larue."  He said nothing more; no
reason was known to him why he should have said so much.

The man was Halpin Frayser.  He lived in St. Helena, but where he
lives now is uncertain, for he is dead.  One who practices sleeping
in the woods with nothing under him but the dry leaves and the damp
earth, and nothing over him but the branches from which the leaves
have fallen and the sky from which the earth has fallen, cannot hope
for great longevity, and Frayser had already attained the age of
thirty-two.  There are persons in this world, millions of persons,
and far and away the best persons, who regard that as a very advanced
age.  They are the children.  To those who view the voyage of life
from the port of departure the bark that has accomplished any
considerable distance appears already in close approach to the
farther shore.  However, it is not certain that Halpin Frayser came
to his death by exposure.

He had been all day in the hills west of the Napa Valley, looking for
doves and such small game as was in season.  Late in the afternoon it
had come on to be cloudy, and he had lost his bearings; and although
he had only to go always downhill--everywhere the way to safety when
one is lost--the absence of trails had so impeded him that he was
overtaken by night while still in the forest.  Unable in the darkness
to penetrate the thickets of manzanita and other undergrowth, utterly
bewildered and overcome with fatigue, he had lain down near the root
of a large madrono and fallen into a dreamless sleep.  It was hours
later, in the very middle of the night, that one of God's mysterious
messengers, gliding ahead of the incalculable host of his companions
sweeping westward with the dawn line, pronounced the awakening word
in the ear of the sleeper, who sat upright and spoke, he knew not
why, a name, he knew not whose.

Halpin Frayser was not much of a philosopher, nor a scientist.  The
circumstance that, waking from a deep sleep at night in the midst of
a forest, he had spoken aloud a name that he had not in memory and
hardly had in mind did not arouse an enlightened curiosity to
investigate the phenomenon.  He thought it odd, and with a little
perfunctory shiver, as if in deference to a seasonal presumption that
the night was chill, he lay down again and went to sleep.  But his
sleep was no longer dreamless.

He thought he was walking along a dusty road that showed white in the
gathering darkness of a summer night.  Whence and whither it led, and
why he traveled it, he did not know, though all seemed simple and
natural, as is the way in dreams; for in the Land Beyond the Bed
surprises cease from troubling and the judgment is at rest.  Soon he
came to a parting of the ways; leading from the highway was a road
less traveled, having the appearance, indeed, of having been long
abandoned, because, he thought, it led to something evil; yet he
turned into it without hesitation, impelled by some imperious
necessity.

As he pressed forward he became conscious that his way was haunted by
invisible existences whom he could not definitely figure to his mind.
From among the trees on either side he caught broken and incoherent
whispers in a strange tongue which yet he partly understood.  They
seemed to him fragmentary utterances of a monstrous conspiracy
against his body and soul.

It was now long after nightfall, yet the interminable forest through
which he journeyed was lit with a wan glimmer having no point of
diffusion, for in its mysterious lumination nothing cast a shadow.  A
shallow pool in the guttered depression of an old wheel rut, as from
a recent rain, met his eye with a crimson gleam.  He stooped and
plunged his hand into it.  It stained his fingers; it was blood!
Blood, he then observed, was about him everywhere.  The weeds growing
rankly by the roadside showed it in blots and splashes on their big,
broad leaves.  Patches of dry dust between the wheelways were pitted
and spattered as with a red rain.  Defiling the trunks of the trees
were broad maculations of crimson, and blood dripped like dew from
their foliage.

All this he observed with a terror which seemed not incompatible with
the fulfillment of a natural expectation.  It seemed to him that it
was all in expiation of some crime which, though conscious of his
guilt, he could not rightly remember.  To the menaces and mysteries
of his surroundings the consciousness was an added horror.  Vainly he
sought by tracing life backward in memory, to reproduce the moment of
his sin; scenes and incidents came crowding tumultuously into his
mind, one picture effacing another, or commingling with it in
confusion and obscurity, but nowhere could he catch a glimpse of what
he sought.  The failure augmented his terror; he felt as one who has
murdered in the dark, not knowing whom nor why.  So frightful was the
situation--the mysterious light burned with so silent and awful a
menace; the noxious plants, the trees that by common consent are
invested with a melancholy or baleful character, so openly in his
sight conspired against his peace; from overhead and all about came
so audible and startling whispers and the sighs of creatures so
obviously not of earth--that he could endure it no longer, and with a
great effort to break some malign spell that bound his faculties to
silence and inaction, he shouted with the full strength of his lungs!
His voice broken, it seemed, into an infinite multitude of unfamiliar
sounds, went babbling and stammering away into the distant reaches of
the forest, died into silence, and all was as before.  But he had
made a beginning at resistance and was encouraged.  He said:

"I will not submit unheard.  There may be powers that are not
malignant traveling this accursed road.  I shall leave them a record
and an appeal.  I shall relate my wrongs, the persecutions that I
endure--I, a helpless mortal, a penitent, an unoffending poet!"
Halpin Frayser was a poet only as he was a penitent:  in his dream.

Taking from his clothing a small red-leather pocketbook, one-half of
which was leaved for memoranda, he discovered that he was without a
pencil.  He broke a twig from a bush, dipped it into a pool of blood
and wrote rapidly.  He had hardly touched the paper with the point of
his twig when a low, wild peal of laughter broke out at a measureless
distance away, and growing ever louder, seemed approaching ever
nearer; a soulless, heartless, and unjoyous laugh, like that of the
loon, solitary by the lakeside at midnight; a laugh which culminated
in an unearthly shout close at hand, then died away by slow
gradations, as if the accursed being that uttered it had withdrawn
over the verge of the world whence it had come.  But the man felt
that this was not so--that it was near by and had not moved.

A strange sensation began slowly to take possession of his body and
his mind.  He could not have said which, if any, of his senses was
affected; he felt it rather as a consciousness--a mysterious mental
assurance of some overpowering presence--some supernatural
malevolence different in kind from the invisible existences that
swarmed about him, and superior to them in power.  He knew that it
had uttered that hideous laugh.  And now it seemed to be approaching
him; from what direction he did not know--dared not conjecture.  All
his former fears were forgotten or merged in the gigantic terror that
now held him in thrall.  Apart from that, he had but one thought:  to
complete his written appeal to the benign powers who, traversing the
haunted wood, might some time rescue him if he should be denied the
blessing of annihilation.  He wrote with terrible rapidity, the twig
in his fingers rilling blood without renewal; but in the middle of a
sentence his hands denied their service to his will, his arms fell to
his sides, the book to the earth; and powerless to move or cry out,
he found himself staring into the sharply drawn face and blank, dead
eyes of his own mother, standing white and silent in the garments of
the grave!

II

In his youth Halpin Frayser had lived with his parents in Nashville,
Tennessee.  The Fraysers were well-to-do, having a good position in
such society as had survived the wreck wrought by civil war.  Their
children had the social and educational opportunities of their time
and place, and had responded to good associations and instruction
with agreeable manners and cultivated minds.  Halpin being the
youngest and not over robust was perhaps a trifle "spoiled."  He had
the double disadvantage of a mother's assiduity and a father's
neglect.  Frayser pere was what no Southern man of means is not--a
politician.  His country, or rather his section and State, made
demands upon his time and attention so exacting that to those of his
family he was compelled to turn an ear partly deafened by the thunder
of the political captains and the shouting, his own included.

Young Halpin was of a dreamy, indolent and rather romantic turn,
somewhat more addicted to literature than law, the profession to
which he was bred.  Among those of his relations who professed the
modern faith of heredity it was well understood that in him the
character of the late Myron Bayne, a maternal great-grandfather, had
revisited the glimpses of the moon--by which orb Bayne had in his
lifetime been sufficiently affected to be a poet of no small Colonial
distinction.  If not specially observed, it was observable that while
a Frayser who was not the proud possessor of a sumptuous copy of the
ancestral "poetical works" (printed at the family expense, and long
ago withdrawn from an inhospitable market) was a rare Frayser indeed,
there was an illogical indisposition to honor the great deceased in
the person of his spiritual successor.  Halpin was pretty generally
deprecated as an intellectual black sheep who was likely at any
moment to disgrace the flock by bleating in meter.  The Tennessee
Fraysers were a practical folk--not practical in the popular sense of
devotion to sordid pursuits, but having a robust contempt for any
qualities unfitting a man for the wholesome vocation of politics.

In justice to young Halpin it should be said that while in him were
pretty faithfully reproduced most of the mental and moral
characteristics ascribed by history and family tradition to the
famous Colonial bard, his succession to the gift and faculty divine
was purely inferential.  Not only had he never been known to court
the muse, but in truth he could not have written correctly a line of
verse to save himself from the Killer of the Wise.  Still, there was
no knowing when the dormant faculty might wake and smite the lyre.

In the meantime the young man was rather a loose fish, anyhow.
Between him and his mother was the most perfect sympathy, for
secretly the lady was herself a devout disciple of the late and great
Myron Bayne, though with the tact so generally and justly admired in
her sex (despite the hardy calumniators who insist that it is
essentially the same thing as cunning) she had always taken care to
conceal her weakness from all eyes but those of him who shared it.
Their common guilt in respect of that was an added tie between them.
If in Halpin's youth his mother had "spoiled" him, he had assuredly
done his part toward being spoiled.  As he grew to such manhood as is
attainable by a Southerner who does not care which way elections go
the attachment between him and his beautiful mother--whom from early
childhood he had called Katy--became yearly stronger and more tender.
In these two romantic natures was manifest in a signal way that
neglected phenomenon, the dominance of the sexual element in all the
relations of life, strengthening, softening, and beautifying even
those of consanguinity.  The two were nearly inseparable, and by
strangers observing their manner were not infrequently mistaken for
lovers.

Entering his mother's boudoir one day Halpin Frayser kissed her upon
the forehead, toyed for a moment with a lock of her dark hair which
had escaped from its confining pins, and said, with an obvious effort
at calmness:

"Would you greatly mind, Katy, if I were called away to California
for a few weeks?"

It was hardly needful for Katy to answer with her lips a question to
which her telltale cheeks had made instant reply.  Evidently she
would greatly mind; and the tears, too, sprang into her large brown
eyes as corroborative testimony.

"Ah, my son," she said, looking up into his face with infinite
tenderness, "I should have known that this was coming.  Did I not lie
awake a half of the night weeping because, during the other half,
Grandfather Bayne had come to me in a dream, and standing by his
portrait--young, too, and handsome as that--pointed to yours on the
same wall?  And when I looked it seemed that I could not see the
features; you had been painted with a face cloth, such as we put upon
the dead.  Your father has laughed at me, but you and I, dear, know
that such things are not for nothing.  And I saw below the edge of
the cloth the marks of hands on your throat--forgive me, but we have
not been used to keep such things from each other.  Perhaps you have
another interpretation.  Perhaps it does not mean that you will go to
California.  Or maybe you will take me with you?"

It must be confessed that this ingenious interpretation of the dream
in the light of newly discovered evidence did not wholly commend
itself to the son's more logical mind; he had, for the moment at
least, a conviction that it foreshadowed a more simple and immediate,
if less tragic, disaster than a visit to the Pacific Coast.  It was
Halpin Frayser's impression that he was to be garroted on his native
heath.

"Are there not medicinal springs in California?" Mrs. Frayser resumed
before he had time to give her the true reading of the dream--"places
where one recovers from rheumatism and neuralgia?  Look--my fingers
feel so stiff; and I am almost sure they have been giving me great
pain while I slept."

She held out her hands for his inspection.  What diagnosis of her
case the young man may have thought it best to conceal with a smile
the historian is unable to state, but for himself he feels bound to
say that fingers looking less stiff, and showing fewer evidences of
even insensible pain, have seldom been submitted for medical
inspection by even the fairest patient desiring a prescription of
unfamiliar scenes.

The outcome of it was that of these two odd persons having equally
odd notions of duty, the one went to California, as the interest of
his client required, and the other remained at home in compliance
with a wish that her husband was scarcely conscious of entertaining.

While in San Francisco Halpin Frayser was walking one dark night
along the water front of the city, when, with a suddenness that
surprised and disconcerted him, he became a sailor.  He was in fact
"shanghaied" aboard a gallant, gallant ship, and sailed for a far
countree.  Nor did his misfortunes end with the voyage; for the ship
was cast ashore on an island of the South Pacific, and it was six
years afterward when the survivors were taken off by a venturesome
trading schooner and brought back to San Francisco.

Though poor in purse, Frayser was no less proud in spirit than he had
been in the years that seemed ages and ages ago.  He would accept no
assistance from strangers, and it was while living with a fellow
survivor near the town of St. Helena, awaiting news and remittances
from home, that he had gone gunning and dreaming.

III

The apparition confronting the dreamer in the haunted wood--the thing
so like, yet so unlike his mother--was horrible!  It stirred no love
nor longing in his heart; it came unattended with pleasant memories
of a golden past--inspired no sentiment of any kind; all the finer
emotions were swallowed up in fear.  He tried to turn and run from
before it, but his legs were as lead; he was unable to lift his feet
from the ground.  His arms hung helpless at his sides; of his eyes
only he retained control, and these he dared not remove from the
lusterless orbs of the apparition, which he knew was not a soul
without a body, but that most dreadful of all existences infesting
that haunted wood--a body without a soul!  In its blank stare was
neither love, nor pity, nor intelligence--nothing to which to address
an appeal for mercy.  "An appeal will not lie," he thought, with an
absurd reversion to professional slang, making the situation more
horrible, as the fire of a cigar might light up a tomb.

For a time, which seemed so long that the world grew gray with age
and sin, and the haunted forest, having fulfilled its purpose in this
monstrous culmination of its terrors, vanished out of his
consciousness with all its sights and sounds, the apparition stood
within a pace, regarding him with the mindless malevolence of a wild
brute; then thrust its hands forward and sprang upon him with
appalling ferocity!  The act released his physical energies without
unfettering his will; his mind was still spellbound, but his powerful
body and agile limbs, endowed with a blind, insensate life of their
own, resisted stoutly and well.  For an instant he seemed to see this
unnatural contest between a dead intelligence and a breathing
mechanism only as a spectator--such fancies are in dreams; then he
regained his identity almost as if by a leap forward into his body,
and the straining automaton had a directing will as alert and fierce
as that of its hideous antagonist.

But what mortal can cope with a creature of his dream?  The
imagination creating the enemy is already vanquished; the combat's
result is the combat's cause.  Despite his struggles--despite his
strength and activity, which seemed wasted in a void, he felt the
cold fingers close upon his throat.  Borne backward to the earth, he
saw above him the dead and drawn face within a hand's breadth of his
own, and then all was black.  A sound as of the beating of distant
drums--a murmur of swarming voices, a sharp, far cry signing all to
silence, and Halpin Frayser dreamed that he was dead.

IV

A warm, clear night had been followed by a morning of drenching fog.
At about the middle of the afternoon of the preceding day a little
whiff of light vapor--a mere thickening of the atmosphere, the ghost
of a cloud--had been observed clinging to the western side of Mount
St. Helena, away up along the barren altitudes near the summit.  It
was so thin, so diaphanous, so like a fancy made visible, that one
would have said:  "Look quickly! in a moment it will be gone."

In a moment it was visibly larger and denser.  While with one edge it
clung to the mountain, with the other it reached farther and farther
out into the air above the lower slopes.  At the same time it
extended itself to north and south, joining small patches of mist
that appeared to come out of the mountainside on exactly the same
level, with an intelligent design to be absorbed.  And so it grew and
grew until the summit was shut out of view from the valley, and over
the valley itself was an ever-extending canopy, opaque and gray.  At
Calistoga, which lies near the head of the valley and the foot of the
mountain, there were a starless night and a sunless morning.  The
fog, sinking into the valley, had reached southward, swallowing up
ranch after ranch, until it had blotted out the town of St. Helena,
nine miles away.  The dust in the road was laid; trees were adrip
with moisture; birds sat silent in their coverts; the morning light
was wan and ghastly, with neither color nor fire.

Two men left the town of St. Helena at the first glimmer of dawn, and
walked along the road northward up the valley toward Calistoga.  They
carried guns on their shoulders, yet no one having knowledge of such
matters could have mistaken them for hunters of bird or beast.  They
were a deputy sheriff from Napa and a detective from San Francisco--
Holker and Jaralson, respectively.  Their business was man-hunting.

"How far is it?" inquired Holker, as they strode along, their feet
stirring white the dust beneath the damp surface of the road.

"The White Church?  Only a half mile farther," the other answered.
"By the way," he added, "it is neither white nor a church; it is an
abandoned schoolhouse, gray with age and neglect.  Religious services
were once held in it--when it was white, and there is a graveyard
that would delight a poet.  Can you guess why I sent for you, and
told you to come heeled?"

"Oh, I never have bothered you about things of that kind.  I've
always found you communicative when the time came.  But if I may
hazard a guess, you want me to help you arrest one of the corpses in
the graveyard."

"You remember Branscom?" said Jaralson, treating his companion's wit
with the inattention that it deserved.

"The chap who cut his wife's throat?  I ought; I wasted a week's work
on him and had my expenses for my trouble.  There is a reward of five
hundred dollars, but none of us ever got a sight of him.  You don't
mean to say--"

"Yes, I do.  He has been under the noses of you fellows all the time.
He comes by night to the old graveyard at the White Church."

"The devil!  That's where they buried his wife."

"Well, you fellows might have had sense enough to suspect that he
would return to her grave some time."

"The very last place that anyone would have expected him to return
to."

"But you had exhausted all the other places.  Learning your failure
at them, I 'laid for him' there."

"And you found him?"

"Damn it! he found ME.  The rascal got the drop on me--regularly held
me up and made me travel.  It's God's mercy that he didn't go through
me.  Oh, he's a good one, and I fancy the half of that reward is
enough for me if you're needy."

Holker laughed good humoredly, and explained that his creditors were
never more importunate.

"I wanted merely to show you the ground, and arrange a plan with
you," the detective explained.  "I thought it as well for us to be
heeled, even in daylight."

"The man must be insane," said the deputy sheriff.  "The reward is
for his capture and conviction.  If he's mad he won't be convicted."

Mr. Holker was so profoundly affected by that possible failure of
justice that he involuntarily stopped in the middle of the road, then
resumed his walk with abated zeal.

"Well, he looks it," assented Jaralson.  "I'm bound to admit that a
more unshaven, unshorn, unkempt, and uneverything wretch I never saw
outside the ancient and honorable order of tramps.  But I've gone in
for him, and can't make up my mind to let go.  There's glory in it
for us, anyhow.  Not another soul knows that he is this side of the
Mountains of the Moon."

"All right," Holker said; "we will go and view the ground," and he
added, in the words of a once favorite inscription for tombstones:
"'where you must shortly lie'--I mean, if old Branscom ever gets
tired of you and your impertinent intrusion.  By the way, I heard the
other day that 'Branscom' was not his real name."

"What is?"

"I can't recall it.  I had lost all interest in the wretch, and it
did not fix itself in my memory--something like Pardee.  The woman
whose throat he had the bad taste to cut was a widow when he met her.
She had come to California to look up some relatives--there are
persons who will do that sometimes.  But you know all that."

"Naturally."

"But not knowing the right name, by what happy inspiration did you
find the right grave?  The man who told me what the name was said it
had been cut on the headboard."

"I don't know the right grave."  Jaralson was apparently a trifle
reluctant to admit his ignorance of so important a point of his plan.
"I have been watching about the place generally.  A part of our work
this morning will be to identify that grave.  Here is the White
Church."

For a long distance the road had been bordered by fields on both
sides, but now on the left there was a forest of oaks, madronos, and
gigantic spruces whose lower parts only could be seen, dim and
ghostly in the fog.  The undergrowth was, in places, thick, but
nowhere impenetrable.  For some moments Holker saw nothing of the
building, but as they turned into the woods it revealed itself in
faint gray outline through the fog, looking huge and far away.  A few
steps more, and it was within an arm's length, distinct, dark with
moisture, and insignificant in size.  It had the usual country-
schoolhouse form--belonged to the packing-box order of architecture;
had an underpinning of stones, a moss-grown roof, and blank window
spaces, whence both glass and sash had long departed.  It was ruined,
but not a ruin--a typical Californian substitute for what are known
to guide-bookers abroad as "monuments of the past."  With scarcely a
glance at this uninteresting structure Jaralson moved on into the
dripping undergrowth beyond.

"I will show you where he held me up," he said.  "This is the
graveyard."

Here and there among the bushes were small inclosures containing
graves, sometimes no more than one.  They were recognized as graves
by the discolored stones or rotting boards at head and foot, leaning
at all angles, some prostrate; by the ruined picket fences
surrounding them; or, infrequently, by the mound itself showing its
gravel through the fallen leaves.  In many instances nothing marked
the spot where lay the vestiges of some poor mortal--who, leaving "a
large circle of sorrowing friends," had been left by them in turn--
except a depression in the earth, more lasting than that in the
spirits of the mourners.  The paths, if any paths had been, were long
obliterated; trees of a considerable size had been permitted to grow
up from the graves and thrust aside with root or branch the inclosing
fences.  Over all was that air of abandonment and decay which seems
nowhere so fit and significant as in a village of the forgotten dead.

As the two men, Jaralson leading, pushed their way through the growth
of young trees, that enterprising man suddenly stopped and brought up
his shotgun to the height of his breast, uttered a low note of
warning, and stood motionless, his eyes fixed upon something ahead.
As well as he could, obstructed by brush, his companion, though
seeing nothing, imitated the posture and so stood, prepared for what
might ensue.  A moment later Jaralson moved cautiously forward, the
other following.

Under the branches of an enormous spruce lay the dead body of a man.
Standing silent above it they noted such particulars as first strike
the attention--the face, the attitude, the clothing; whatever most
promptly and plainly answers the unspoken question of a sympathetic
curiosity.

The body lay upon its back, the legs wide apart.  One arm was thrust
upward, the other outward; but the latter was bent acutely, and the
hand was near the throat.  Both hands were tightly clenched.  The
whole attitude was that of desperate but ineffectual resistance to--
what?

Near by lay a shotgun and a game bag through the meshes of which was
seen the plumage of shot birds.  All about were evidences of a
furious struggle; small sprouts of poison-oak were bent and denuded
of leaf and bark; dead and rotting leaves had been pushed into heaps
and ridges on both sides of the legs by the action of other feet than
theirs; alongside the hips were unmistakable impressions of human
knees.

The nature of the struggle was made clear by a glance at the dead
man's throat and face.  While breast and hands were white, those were
purple--almost black.  The shoulders lay upon a low mound, and the
head was turned back at an angle otherwise impossible, the expanded
eyes staring blankly backward in a direction opposite to that of the
feet.  From the froth filling the open mouth the tongue protruded,
black and swollen.  The throat showed horrible contusions; not mere
finger-marks, but bruises and lacerations wrought by two strong hands
that must have buried themselves in the yielding flesh, maintaining
their terrible grasp until long after death.  Breast, throat, face,
were wet; the clothing was saturated; drops of water, condensed from
the fog, studded the hair and mustache.

All this the two men observed without speaking--almost at a glance.
Then Holker said:

"Poor devil! he had a rough deal."

Jaralson was making a vigilant circumspection of the forest, his
shotgun held in both hands and at full cock, his finger upon the
trigger.

"The work of a maniac," he said, without withdrawing his eyes from
the inclosing wood.  "It was done by Branscom--Pardee."

Something half hidden by the disturbed leaves on the earth caught
Holker's attention.  It was a red-leather pocketbook.  He picked it
up and opened it.  It contained leaves of white paper for memoranda,
and upon the first leaf was the name "Halpin Frayser."  Written in
red on several succeeding leaves--scrawled as if in haste and barely
legible--were the following lines, which Holker read aloud, while his
companion continued scanning the dim gray confines of their narrow
world and hearing matter of apprehension in the drip of water from
every burdened branch:


"Enthralled by some mysterious spell, I stood
In the lit gloom of an enchanted wood.
   The cypress there and myrtle twined their boughs,
Significant, in baleful brotherhood.

"The brooding willow whispered to the yew;
Beneath, the deadly nightshade and the rue,
   With immortelles self-woven into strange
Funereal shapes, and horrid nettles grew.

"No song of bird nor any drone of bees,
Nor light leaf lifted by the wholesome breeze:
   The air was stagnant all, and Silence was
A living thing that breathed among the trees.

"Conspiring spirits whispered in the gloom,
Half-heard, the stilly secrets of the tomb.
   With blood the trees were all adrip; the leaves
Shone in the witch-light with a ruddy bloom.

"I cried aloud!--the spell, unbroken still,
Rested upon my spirit and my will.
   Unsouled, unhearted, hopeless and forlorn,
I strove with monstrous presages of ill!

"At last the viewless--"


Holker ceased reading; there was no more to read.  The manuscript
broke off in the middle of a line.

"That sounds like Bayne," said Jaralson, who was something of a
scholar in his way.  He had abated his vigilance and stood looking
down at the body.

"Who's Bayne?" Holker asked rather incuriously.

"Myron Bayne, a chap who flourished in the early years of the nation-
-more than a century ago.  Wrote mighty dismal stuff; I have his
collected works.  That poem is not among them, but it must have been
omitted by mistake."

"It is cold," said Holker; "let us leave here; we must have up the
coroner from Napa."

Jaralson said nothing, but made a movement in compliance.  Passing
the end of the slight elevation of earth upon which the dead man's
head and shoulders lay, his foot struck some hard substance under the
rotting forest leaves, and he took the trouble to kick it into view.
It was a fallen headboard, and painted on it were the hardly
decipherable words, "Catharine Larue."

"Larue, Larue!" exclaimed Holker, with sudden animation.  "Why, that
is the real name of Branscom--not Pardee.  And--bless my soul! how it
all comes to me--the murdered woman's name had been Frayser!"

"There is some rascally mystery here," said Detective Jaralson.  "I
hate anything of that kind."

There came to them out of the fog--seemingly from a great distance--
the sound of a laugh, a low, deliberate, soulless laugh, which had no
more of joy than that of a hyena night-prowling in the desert; a
laugh that rose by slow gradation, louder and louder, clearer, more
distinct and terrible, until it seemed barely outside the narrow
circle of their vision; a laugh so unnatural, so unhuman, so
devilish, that it filled those hardy man-hunters with a sense of
dread unspeakable!  They did not move their weapons nor think of
them; the menace of that horrible sound was not of the kind to be met
with arms.  As it had grown out of silence, so now it died away; from
a culminating shout which had seemed almost in their ears, it drew
itself away into the distance, until its failing notes, joyless and
mechanical to the last, sank to silence at a measureless remove.



THE SECRET OF MACARGER'S GULCH



North Westwardly from Indian Hill, about nine miles as the crow
flies, is Macarger's Gulch.  It is not much of a gulch--a mere
depression between two wooded ridges of inconsiderable height.  From
its mouth up to its head--for gulches, like rivers, have an anatomy
of their own--the distance does not exceed two miles, and the width
at bottom is at only one place more than a dozen yards; for most of
the distance on either side of the little brook which drains it in
winter, and goes dry in the early spring, there is no level ground at
all; the steep slopes of the hills, covered with an almost
impenetrable growth of manzanita and chemisal, are parted by nothing
but the width of the water course.  No one but an occasional
enterprising hunter of the vicinity ever goes into Macarger's Gulch,
and five miles away it is unknown, even by name.  Within that
distance in any direction are far more conspicuous topographical
features without names, and one might try in vain to ascertain by
local inquiry the origin of the name of this one.

About midway between the head and the mouth of Macarger's Gulch, the
hill on the right as you ascend is cloven by another gulch, a short
dry one, and at the junction of the two is a level space of two or
three acres, and there a few years ago stood an old board house
containing one small room.  How the component parts of the house, few
and simple as they were, had been assembled at that almost
inaccessible point is a problem in the solution of which there would
be greater satisfaction than advantage.  Possibly the creek bed is a
reformed road.  It is certain that the gulch was at one time pretty
thoroughly prospected by miners, who must have had some means of
getting in with at least pack animals carrying tools and supplies;
their profits, apparently, were not such as would have justified any
considerable outlay to connect Macarger's Gulch with any center of
civilization enjoying the distinction of a sawmill.  The house,
however, was there, most of it.  It lacked a door and a window frame,
and the chimney of mud and stones had fallen into an unlovely heap,
overgrown with rank weeds.  Such humble furniture as there may once
have been and much of the lower weatherboarding, had served as fuel
in the camp fires of hunters; as had also, probably, the curbing of
an old well, which at the time I write of existed in the form of a
rather wide but not very deep depression near by.

One afternoon in the summer of 1874, I passed up Macarger's Gulch
from the narrow valley into which it opens, by following the dry bed
of the brook.  I was quail-shooting and had made a bag of about a
dozen birds by the time I had reached the house described, of whose
existence I was until then unaware.  After rather carelessly
inspecting the ruin I resumed my sport, and having fairly good
success prolonged it until near sunset, when it occurred to me that I
was a long way from any human habitation--too far to reach one by
nightfall.  But in my game bag was food, and the old house would
afford shelter, if shelter were needed on a warm and dewless night in
the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, where one may sleep in comfort on
the pine needles, without covering.  I am fond of solitude and love
the night, so my resolution to "camp out" was soon taken, and by the
time that it was dark I had made my bed of boughs and grasses in a
corner of the room and was roasting a quail at a fire that I had
kindled on the hearth.  The smoke escaped out of the ruined chimney,
the light illuminated the room with a kindly glow, and as I ate my
simple meal of plain bird and drank the remains of a bottle of red
wine which had served me all the afternoon in place of the water,
which the region did not supply, I experienced a sense of comfort
which better fare and accommodations do not always give.

Nevertheless, there was something lacking.  I had a sense of comfort,
but not of security.  I detected myself staring more frequently at
the open doorway and blank window than I could find warrant for
doing.  Outside these apertures all was black, and I was unable to
repress a certain feeling of apprehension as my fancy pictured the
outer world and filled it with unfriendly entities, natural and
supernatural--chief among which, in their respective classes, were
the grizzly bear, which I knew was occasionally still seen in that
region, and the ghost, which I had reason to think was not.
Unfortunately, our feelings do not always respect the law of
probabilities, and to me that evening, the possible and the
impossible were equally disquieting.

Everyone who has had experience in the matter must have observed that
one confronts the actual and imaginary perils of the night with far
less apprehension in the open air than in a house with an open
doorway.  I felt this now as I lay on my leafy couch in a corner of
the room next to the chimney and permitted my fire to die out.  So
strong became my sense of the presence of something malign and
menacing in the place, that I found myself almost unable to withdraw
my eyes from the opening, as in the deepening darkness it became more
and more indistinct.  And when the last little flame flickered and
went out I grasped the shotgun which I had laid at my side and
actually turned the muzzle in the direction of the now invisible
entrance, my thumb on one of the hammers, ready to cock the piece, my
breath suspended, my muscles rigid and tense.  But later I laid down
the weapon with a sense of shame and mortification.  What did I fear,
and why?--I, to whom the night had been


   a more familiar face
Than that of man -


I, in whom that element of hereditary superstition from which none of
us is altogether free had given to solitude and darkness and silence
only a more alluring interest and charm!  I was unable to comprehend
my folly, and losing in the conjecture the thing conjectured of, I
fell asleep.  And then I dreamed.

I was in a great city in a foreign land--a city whose people were of
my own race, with minor differences of speech and costume; yet
precisely what these were I could not say; my sense of them was
indistinct.  The city was dominated by a great castle upon an
overlooking height whose name I knew, but could not speak.  I walked
through many streets, some broad and straight with high, modern
buildings, some narrow, gloomy, and tortuous, between the gables of
quaint old houses whose overhanging stories, elaborately ornamented
with carvings in wood and stone, almost met above my head.

I sought someone whom I had never seen, yet knew that I should
recognize when found.  My quest was not aimless and fortuitous; it
had a definite method.  I turned from one street into another without
hesitation and threaded a maze of intricate passages, devoid of the
fear of losing my way.

Presently I stopped before a low door in a plain stone house which
might have been the dwelling of an artisan of the better sort, and
without announcing myself, entered.  The room, rather sparely
furnished, and lighted by a single window with small diamond-shaped
panes, had but two occupants; a man and a woman.  They took no notice
of my intrusion, a circumstance which, in the manner of dreams,
appeared entirely natural.  They were not conversing; they sat apart,
unoccupied and sullen.

The woman was young and rather stout, with fine large eyes and a
certain grave beauty; my memory of her expression is exceedingly
vivid, but in dreams one does not observe the details of faces.
About her shoulders was a plaid shawl.  The man was older, dark, with
an evil face made more forbidding by a long scar extending from near
the left temple diagonally downward into the black mustache; though
in my dreams it seemed rather to haunt the face as a thing apart--I
can express it no otherwise--than to belong to it.  The moment that I
found the man and woman I knew them to be husband and wife.

What followed, I remember indistinctly; all was confused and
inconsistent--made so, I think, by gleams of consciousness.  It was
as if two pictures, the scene of my dream, and my actual
surroundings, had been blended, one overlying the other, until the
former, gradually fading, disappeared, and I was broad awake in the
deserted cabin, entirely and tranquilly conscious of my situation.

My foolish fear was gone, and opening my eyes I saw that my fire, not
altogether burned out, had revived by the falling of a stick and was
again lighting the room.  I had probably slept only a few minutes,
but my commonplace dream had somehow so strongly impressed me that I
was no longer drowsy; and after a little while I rose, pushed the
embers of my fire together, and lighting my pipe proceeded in a
rather ludicrously methodical way to meditate upon my vision.

It would have puzzled me then to say in what respect it was worth
attention.  In the first moment of serious thought that I gave to the
matter I recognized the city of my dream as Edinburgh, where I had
never been; so if the dream was a memory it was a memory of pictures
and description.  The recognition somehow deeply impressed me; it was
as if something in my mind insisted rebelliously against will and
reason on the importance of all this.  And that faculty, whatever it
was, asserted also a control of my speech.  "Surely," I said aloud,
quite involuntarily, "the MacGregors must have come here from
Edinburgh."

At the moment, neither the substance of this remark nor the fact of
my making it, surprised me in the least; it seemed entirely natural
that I should know the name of my dreamfolk and something of their
history.  But the absurdity of it all soon dawned upon me:  I laughed
aloud, knocked the ashes from my pipe and again stretched myself upon
my bed of boughs and grass, where I lay staring absently into my
failing fire, with no further thought of either my dream or my
surroundings.  Suddenly the single remaining flame crouched for a
moment, then, springing upward, lifted itself clear of its embers and
expired in air.  The darkness was absolute.

At that instant--almost, it seemed, before the gleam of the blaze had
faded from my eyes--there was a dull, dead sound, as of some heavy
body falling upon the floor, which shook beneath me as I lay.  I
sprang to a sitting posture and groped at my side for my gun; my
notion was that some wild beast had leaped in through the open
window.  While the flimsy structure was still shaking from the impact
I heard the sound of blows, the scuffling of feet upon the floor, and
then--it seemed to come from almost within reach of my hand, the
sharp shrieking of a woman in mortal agony.  So horrible a cry I had
never heard nor conceived; it utterly unnerved me; I was conscious
for a moment of nothing but my own terror!  Fortunately my hand now
found the weapon of which it was in search, and the familiar touch
somewhat restored me.  I leaped to my feet, straining my eyes to
pierce the darkness.  The violent sounds had ceased, but more
terrible than these, I heard, at what seemed long intervals, the
faint intermittent gasping of some living, dying thing!

As my eyes grew accustomed to the dim light of the coals in the
fireplace, I saw first the shapes of the door and window, looking
blacker than the black of the walls.  Next, the distinction between
wall and floor became discernible, and at last I was sensible to the
form and full expanse of the floor from end to end and side to side.
Nothing was visible and the silence was unbroken.

With a hand that shook a little, the other still grasping my gun, I
restored my fire and made a critical examination of the place.  There
was nowhere any sign that the cabin had been entered.  My own tracks
were visible in the dust covering the floor, but there were no
others.  I relit my pipe, provided fresh fuel by ripping a thin board
or two from the inside of the house--I did not care to go into the
darkness out of doors--and passed the rest of the night smoking and
thinking, and feeding my fire; not for added years of life would I
have permitted that little flame to expire again.


Some years afterward I met in Sacramento a man named Morgan, to whom
I had a note of introduction from a friend in San Francisco.  Dining
with him one evening at his home I observed various "trophies" upon
the wall, indicating that he was fond of shooting.  It turned out
that he was, and in relating some of his feats he mentioned having
been in the region of my adventure.

"Mr. Morgan," I asked abruptly, "do you know a place up there called
Macarger's Gulch?"

"I have good reason to," he replied; "it was I who gave to the
newspapers, last year, the accounts of the finding of the skeleton
there."

I had not heard of it; the accounts had been published, it appeared,
while I was absent in the East.

"By the way," said Morgan, "the name of the gulch is a corruption; it
should have been called 'MacGregor's.'  My dear," he added, speaking
to his wife, "Mr. Elderson has upset his wine."

That was hardly accurate--I had simply dropped it, glass and all.

"There was an old shanty once in the gulch," Morgan resumed when the
ruin wrought by my awkwardness had been repaired, "but just
previously to my visit it had been blown down, or rather blown away,
for its debris was scattered all about, the very floor being parted,
plank from plank.  Between two of the sleepers still in position I
and my companion observed the remnant of a plaid shawl, and examining
it found that it was wrapped about the shoulders of the body of a
woman, of which but little remained besides the bones, partly covered
with fragments of clothing, and brown dry skin.  But we will spare
Mrs. Morgan," he added with a smile.  The lady had indeed exhibited
signs of disgust rather than sympathy.

"It is necessary to say, however," he went on, "that the skull was
fractured in several places, as by blows of some blunt instrument;
and that instrument itself--a pick-handle, still stained with blood--
lay under the boards near by."

Mr. Morgan turned to his wife.  "Pardon me, my dear," he said with
affected solemnity, "for mentioning these disagreeable particulars,
the natural though regrettable incidents of a conjugal quarrel--
resulting, doubtless, from the luckless wife's insubordination."

"I ought to be able to overlook it," the lady replied with composure;
"you have so many times asked me to in those very words."

I thought he seemed rather glad to go on with his story.

"From these and other circumstances," he said, "the coroner's jury
found that the deceased, Janet MacGregor, came to her death from
blows inflicted by some person to the jury unknown; but it was added
that the evidence pointed strongly to her husband, Thomas MacGregor,
as the guilty person.  But Thomas MacGregor has never been found nor
heard of.  It was learned that the couple came from Edinburgh, but
not--my dear, do you not observe that Mr. Elderson's boneplate has
water in it?"

I had deposited a chicken bone in my finger bowl.

"In a little cupboard I found a photograph of MacGregor, but it did
not lead to his capture."

"Will you let me see it?" I said.

The picture showed a dark man with an evil face made more forbidding
by a long scar extending from near the temple diagonally downward
into the black mustache.

"By the way, Mr. Elderson," said my affable host, "may I know why you
asked about 'Macarger's Gulch'?"

"I lost a mule near there once," I replied, "and the mischance has--
has quite--upset me."

"My dear," said Mr. Morgan, with the mechanical intonation of an
interpreter translating, "the loss of Mr. Elderson's mule has
peppered his coffee."



ONE SUMMER NIGHT



The fact that Henry Armstrong was buried did not seem to him to prove
that he was dead:  he had always been a hard man to convince.  That
he really was buried, the testimony of his senses compelled him to
admit.  His posture--flat upon his back, with his hands crossed upon
his stomach and tied with something that he easily broke without
profitably altering the situation--the strict confinement of his
entire person, the black darkness and profound silence, made a body
of evidence impossible to controvert and he accepted it without
cavil.

But dead--no; he was only very, very ill.  He had, withal, the
invalid's apathy and did not greatly concern himself about the
uncommon fate that had been allotted to him.  No philosopher was he--
just a plain, commonplace person gifted, for the time being, with a
pathological indifference:  the organ that he feared consequences
with was torpid.  So, with no particular apprehension for his
immediate future, he fell asleep and all was peace with Henry
Armstrong.

But something was going on overhead.  It was a dark summer night,
shot through with infrequent shimmers of lightning silently firing a
cloud lying low in the west and portending a storm.  These brief,
stammering illuminations brought out with ghastly distinctness the
monuments and headstones of the cemetery and seemed to set them
dancing.  It was not a night in which any credible witness was likely
to be straying about a cemetery, so the three men who were there,
digging into the grave of Henry Armstrong, felt reasonably secure.

Two of them were young students from a medical college a few miles
away; the third was a gigantic negro known as Jess.  For many years
Jess had been employed about the cemetery as a man-of-all-work and it
was his favorite pleasantry that he knew "every soul in the place."
From the nature of what he was now doing it was inferable that the
place was not so populous as its register may have shown it to be.

Outside the wall, at the part of the grounds farthest from the public
road, were a horse and a light wagon, waiting.

The work of excavation was not difficult:  the earth with which the
grave had been loosely filled a few hours before offered little
resistance and was soon thrown out.  Removal of the casket from its
box was less easy, but it was taken out, for it was a perquisite of
Jess, who carefully unscrewed the cover and laid it aside, exposing
the body in black trousers and white shirt.  At that instant the air
sprang to flame, a cracking shock of thunder shook the stunned world
and Henry Armstrong tranquilly sat up.  With inarticulate cries the
men fled in terror, each in a different direction.  For nothing on
earth could two of them have been persuaded to return.  But Jess was
of another breed.

In the gray of the morning the two students, pallid and haggard from
anxiety and with the terror of their adventure still beating
tumultuously in their blood, met at the medical college.

"You saw it?" cried one.

"God! yes--what are we to do?"

They went around to the rear of the building, where they saw a horse,
attached to a light wagon, hitched to a gatepost near the door of the
dissecting-room.  Mechanically they entered the room.  On a bench in
the obscurity sat the negro Jess.  He rose, grinning, all eyes and
teeth.

"I'm waiting for my pay," he said.

Stretched naked on a long table lay the body of Henry Armstrong, the
head defiled with blood and clay from a blow with a spade.



THE MOONLIT ROAD



I--STATEMENT OF JOEL HETMAN, JR.

I am the most unfortunate of men.  Rich, respected, fairly well
educated and of sound health--with many other advantages usually
valued by those having them and coveted by those who have them not--I
sometimes think that I should be less unhappy if they had been denied
me, for then the contrast between my outer and my inner life would
not be continually demanding a painful attention.  In the stress of
privation and the need of effort I might sometimes forget the somber
secret ever baffling the conjecture that it compels.

I am the only child of Joel and Julia Hetman.  The one was a well-to-
do country gentleman, the other a beautiful and accomplished woman to
whom he was passionately attached with what I now know to have been a
jealous and exacting devotion.  The family home was a few miles from
Nashville, Tennessee, a large, irregularly built dwelling of no
particular order of architecture, a little way off the road, in a
park of trees and shrubbery.

At the time of which I write I was nineteen years old, a student at
Yale.  One day I received a telegram from my father of such urgency
that in compliance with its unexplained demand I left at once for
home.  At the railway station in Nashville a distant relative awaited
me to apprise me of the reason for my recall:  my mother had been
barbarously murdered--why and by whom none could conjecture, but the
circumstances were these:  My father had gone to Nashville, intending
to return the next afternoon.  Something prevented his accomplishing
the business in hand, so he returned on the same night, arriving just
before the dawn.  In his testimony before the coroner he explained
that having no latchkey and not caring to disturb the sleeping
servants, he had, with no clearly defined intention, gone round to
the rear of the house.  As he turned an angle of the building, he
heard a sound as of a door gently closed, and saw in the darkness,
indistinctly, the figure of a man, which instantly disappeared among
the trees of the lawn.  A hasty pursuit and brief search of the
grounds in the belief that the trespasser was some one secretly
visiting a servant proving fruitless, he entered at the unlocked door
and mounted the stairs to my mother's chamber.  Its door was open,
and stepping into black darkness he fell headlong over some heavy
object on the floor.  I may spare myself the details; it was my poor
mother, dead of strangulation by human hands!

Nothing had been taken from the house, the servants had heard no
sound, and excepting those terrible finger-marks upon the dead
woman's throat--dear God! that I might forget them!--no trace of the
assassin was ever found.

I gave up my studies and remained with my father, who, naturally, was
greatly changed.  Always of a sedate, taciturn disposition, he now
fell into so deep a dejection that nothing could hold his attention,
yet anything--a footfall, the sudden closing of a door--aroused in
him a fitful interest; one might have called it an apprehension.  At
any small surprise of the senses he would start visibly and sometimes
turn pale, then relapse into a melancholy apathy deeper than before.
I suppose he was what is called a "nervous wreck."  As to me, I was
younger then than now--there is much in that.  Youth is Gilead, in
which is balm for every wound.  Ah, that I might again dwell in that
enchanted land!  Unacquainted with grief, I knew not how to appraise
my bereavement; I could not rightly estimate the strength of the
stroke.

One night, a few months after the dreadful event, my father and I
walked home from the city.  The full moon was about three hours above
the eastern horizon; the entire countryside had the solemn stillness
of a summer night; our footfalls and the ceaseless song of the
katydids were the only sound aloof.  Black shadows of bordering trees
lay athwart the road, which, in the short reaches between, gleamed a
ghostly white.  As we approached the gate to our dwelling, whose
front was in shadow, and in which no light shone, my father suddenly
stopped and clutched my arm, saying, hardly above his breath:

"God!  God! what is that?"

"I hear nothing," I replied.

"But see--see!" he said, pointing along the road, directly ahead.

I said:  "Nothing is there.  Come, father, let us go in--you are
ill."

He had released my arm and was standing rigid and motionless in the
center of the illuminated roadway, staring like one bereft of sense.
His face in the moonlight showed a pallor and fixity inexpressibly
distressing.  I pulled gently at his sleeve, but he had forgotten my
existence.  Presently he began to retire backward, step by step,
never for an instant removing his eyes from what he saw, or thought
he saw.  I turned half round to follow, but stood irresolute.  I do
not recall any feeling of fear, unless a sudden chill was its
physical manifestation.  It seemed as if an icy wind had touched my
face and enfolded my body from head to foot; I could feel the stir of
it in my hair.

At that moment my attention was drawn to a light that suddenly
streamed from an upper window of the house:  one of the servants,
awakened by what mysterious premonition of evil who can say, and in
obedience to an impulse that she was never able to name, had lit a
lamp.  When I turned to look for my father he was gone, and in all
the years that have passed no whisper of his fate has come across the
borderland of conjecture from the realm of the unknown.

II--STATEMENT OF CASPAR GRATTAN

To-day I am said to live; to-morrow, here in this room, will lie a
senseless shape of clay that all too long was I.  If anyone lift the
cloth from the face of that unpleasant thing it will be in
gratification of a mere morbid curiosity.  Some, doubtless, will go
further and inquire, "Who was he?"  In this writing I supply the only
answer that I am able to make--Caspar Grattan.  Surely, that should
be enough.  The name has served my small need for more than twenty
years of a life of unknown length.  True, I gave it to myself, but
lacking another I had the right.  In this world one must have a name;
it prevents confusion, even when it does not establish identity.
Some, though, are known by numbers, which also seem inadequate
distinctions.

One day, for illustration, I was passing along a street of a city,
far from here, when I met two men in uniform, one of whom, half
pausing and looking curiously into my face, said to his companion,
"That man looks like 767."  Something in the number seemed familiar
and horrible.  Moved by an uncontrollable impulse, I sprang into a
side street and ran until I fell exhausted in a country lane.

I have never forgotten that number, and always it comes to memory
attended by gibbering obscenity, peals of joyless laughter, the clang
of iron doors.  So I say a name, even if self-bestowed, is better
than a number.  In the register of the potter's field I shall soon
have both.  What wealth!

Of him who shall find this paper I must beg a little consideration.
It is not the history of my life; the knowledge to write that is
denied me.  This is only a record of broken and apparently unrelated
memories, some of them as distinct and sequent as brilliant beads
upon a thread, others remote and strange, having the character of
crimson dreams with interspaces blank and black--witch-fires glowing
still and red in a great desolation.

Standing upon the shore of eternity, I turn for a last look landward
over the course by which I came.  There are twenty years of
footprints fairly distinct, the impressions of bleeding feet.  They
lead through poverty and pain, devious and unsure, as of one
staggering beneath a burden -


Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow.


Ah, the poet's prophecy of Me--how admirable, how dreadfully
admirable!

Backward beyond the beginning of this via dolorosa--this epic of
suffering with episodes of sin--I see nothing clearly; it comes out
of a cloud.  I know that it spans only twenty years, yet I am an old
man.

One does not remember one's birth--one has to be told.  But with me
it was different; life came to me full-handed and dowered me with all
my faculties and powers.  Of a previous existence I know no more than
others, for all have stammering intimations that may be memories and
may be dreams.  I know only that my first consciousness was of
maturity in body and mind--a consciousness accepted without surprise
or conjecture.  I merely found myself walking in a forest, half-clad,
footsore, unutterably weary and hungry.  Seeing a farmhouse, I
approached and asked for food, which was given me by one who inquired
my name.  I did not know, yet knew that all had names.  Greatly
embarrassed, I retreated, and night coming on, lay down in the forest
and slept.

The next day I entered a large town which I shall not name.  Nor
shall I recount further incidents of the life that is now to end--a
life of wandering, always and everywhere haunted by an overmastering
sense of crime in punishment of wrong and of terror in punishment of
crime.  Let me see if I can reduce it to narrative.

I seem once to have lived near a great city, a prosperous planter,
married to a woman whom I loved and distrusted.  We had, it sometimes
seems, one child, a youth of brilliant parts and promise.  He is at
all times a vague figure, never clearly drawn, frequently altogether
out of the picture.

One luckless evening it occurred to me to test my wife's fidelity in
a vulgar, commonplace way familiar to everyone who has acquaintance
with the literature of fact and fiction.  I went to the city, telling
my wife that I should be absent until the following afternoon.  But I
returned before daybreak and went to the rear of the house, purposing
to enter by a door with which I had secretly so tampered that it
would seem to lock, yet not actually fasten.  As I approached it, I
heard it gently open and close, and saw a man steal away into the
darkness.  With murder in my heart, I sprang after him, but he had
vanished without even the bad luck of identification.  Sometimes now
I cannot even persuade myself that it was a human being.

Crazed with jealousy and rage, blind and bestial with all the
elemental passions of insulted manhood, I entered the house and
sprang up the stairs to the door of my wife's chamber.  It was
closed, but having tampered with its lock also, I easily entered and
despite the black darkness soon stood by the side of her bed.  My
groping hands told me that although disarranged it was unoccupied.

"She is below," I thought, "and terrified by my entrance has evaded
me in the darkness of the hall."

With the purpose of seeking her I turned to leave the room, but took
a wrong direction--the right one!  My foot struck her, cowering in a
corner of the room.  Instantly my hands were at her throat, stifling
a shriek, my knees were upon her struggling body; and there in the
darkness, without a word of accusation or reproach, I strangled her
till she died!

There ends the dream.  I have related it in the past tense, but the
present would be the fitter form, for again and again the somber
tragedy reenacts itself in my consciousness--over and over I lay the
plan, I suffer the confirmation, I redress the wrong.  Then all is
blank; and afterward the rains beat against the grimy window-panes,
or the snows fall upon my scant attire, the wheels rattle in the
squalid streets where my life lies in poverty and mean employment.
If there is ever sunshine I do not recall it; if there are birds they
do not sing.

There is another dream, another vision of the night.  I stand among
the shadows in a moonlit road.  I am aware of another presence, but
whose I cannot rightly determine.  In the shadow of a great dwelling
I catch the gleam of white garments; then the figure of a woman
confronts me in the road--my murdered wife!  There is death in the
face; there are marks upon the throat.  The eyes are fixed on mine
with an infinite gravity which is not reproach, nor hate, nor menace,
nor anything less terrible than recognition.  Before this awful
apparition I retreat in terror--a terror that is upon me as I write.
I can no longer rightly shape the words.  See! they -

Now I am calm, but truly there is no more to tell:  the incident ends
where it began--in darkness and in doubt.

Yes, I am again in control of myself:  "the captain of my soul."  But
that is not respite; it is another stage and phase of expiation.  My
penance, constant in degree, is mutable in kind:  one of its variants
is tranquillity.  After all, it is only a life-sentence.  "To Hell
for life"--that is a foolish penalty:  the culprit chooses the
duration of his punishment.  To-day my term expires.

To each and all, the peace that was not mine.

III--STATEMENT OF THE LATE JULIA HETMAN, THROUGH THE MEDIUM BAYROLLES

I had retired early and fallen almost immediately into a peaceful
sleep, from which I awoke with that indefinable sense of peril which
is, I think, a common experience in that other, earlier life.  Of its
unmeaning character, too, I was entirely persuaded, yet that did not
banish it.  My husband, Joel Hetman, was away from home; the servants
slept in another part of the house.  But these were familiar
conditions; they had never before distressed me.  Nevertheless, the
strange terror grew so insupportable that conquering my reluctance to
move I sat up and lit the lamp at my bedside.  Contrary to my
expectation this gave me no relief; the light seemed rather an added
danger, for I reflected that it would shine out under the door,
disclosing my presence to whatever evil thing might lurk outside.
You that are still in the flesh, subject to horrors of the
imagination, think what a monstrous fear that must be which seeks in
darkness security from malevolent existences of the night.  That is
to spring to close quarters with an unseen enemy--the strategy of
despair!

Extinguishing the lamp I pulled the bed-clothing about my head and
lay trembling and silent, unable to shriek, forgetful to pray.  In
this pitiable state I must have lain for what you call hours--with us
there are no hours, there is no time.

At last it came--a soft, irregular sound of footfalls on the stairs!
They were slow, hesitant, uncertain, as of something that did not see
its way; to my disordered reason all the more terrifying for that, as
the approach of some blind and mindless malevolence to which is no
appeal.  I even thought that I must have left the hall lamp burning
and the groping of this creature proved it a monster of the night.
This was foolish and inconsistent with my previous dread of the
light, but what would you have?  Fear has no brains; it is an idiot.
The dismal witness that it bears and the cowardly counsel that it
whispers are unrelated.  We know this well, we who have passed into
the Realm of Terror, who skulk in eternal dusk among the scenes of
our former lives, invisible even to ourselves and one another, yet
hiding forlorn in lonely places; yearning for speech with our loved
ones, yet dumb, and as fearful of them as they of us.  Sometimes the
disability is removed, the law suspended:  by the deathless power of
love or hate we break the spell--we are seen by those whom we would
warn, console, or punish.  What form we seem to them to bear we know
not; we know only that we terrify even those whom we most wish to
comfort, and from whom we most crave tenderness and sympathy.

Forgive, I pray you, this inconsequent digression by what was once a
woman.  You who consult us in this imperfect way--you do not
understand.  You ask foolish questions about things unknown and
things forbidden.  Much that we know and could impart in our speech
is meaningless in yours.  We must communicate with you through a
stammering intelligence in that small fraction of our language that
you yourselves can speak.  You think that we are of another world.
No, we have knowledge of no world but yours, though for us it holds
no sunlight, no warmth, no music, no laughter, no song of birds, nor
any companionship.  O God! what a thing it is to be a ghost, cowering
and shivering in an altered world, a prey to apprehension and
despair!

No, I did not die of fright:  the Thing turned and went away.  I
heard it go down the stairs, hurriedly, I thought, as if itself in
sudden fear.  Then I rose to call for help.  Hardly had my shaking
hand found the doorknob when--merciful heaven!--I heard it returning.
Its footfalls as it remounted the stairs were rapid, heavy and loud;
they shook the house.  I fled to an angle of the wall and crouched
upon the floor.  I tried to pray.  I tried to call the name of my
dear husband.  Then I heard the door thrown open.  There was an
interval of unconsciousness, and when I revived I felt a strangling
clutch upon my throat--felt my arms feebly beating against something
that bore me backward--felt my tongue thrusting itself from between
my teeth!  And then I passed into this life.

No, I have no knowledge of what it was.  The sum of what we knew at
death is the measure of what we know afterward of all that went
before.  Of this existence we know many things, but no new light
falls upon any page of that; in memory is written all of it that we
can read.  Here are no heights of truth overlooking the confused
landscape of that dubitable domain.  We still dwell in the Valley of
the Shadow, lurk in its desolate places, peering from brambles and
thickets at its mad, malign inhabitants.  How should we have new
knowledge of that fading past?

What I am about to relate happened on a night.  We know when it is
night, for then you retire to your houses and we can venture from our
places of concealment to move unafraid about our old homes, to look
in at the windows, even to enter and gaze upon your faces as you
sleep.  I had lingered long near the dwelling where I had been so
cruelly changed to what I am, as we do while any that we love or hate
remain.  Vainly I had sought some method of manifestation, some way
to make my continued existence and my great love and poignant pity
understood by my husband and son.  Always if they slept they would
wake, or if in my desperation I dared approach them when they were
awake, would turn toward me the terrible eyes of the living,
frightening me by the glances that I sought from the purpose that I
held.

On this night I had searched for them without success, fearing to
find them; they were nowhere in the house, nor about the moonlit
lawn.  For, although the sun is lost to us forever, the moon, full-
orbed or slender, remains to us.  Sometimes it shines by night,
sometimes by day, but always it rises and sets, as in that other
life.

I left the lawn and moved in the white light and silence along the
road, aimless and sorrowing.  Suddenly I heard the voice of my poor
husband in exclamations of astonishment, with that of my son in
reassurance and dissuasion; and there by the shadow of a group of
trees they stood--near, so near!  Their faces were toward me, the
eyes of the elder man fixed upon mine.  He saw me--at last, at last,
he saw me!  In the consciousness of that, my terror fled as a cruel
dream.  The death-spell was broken:  Love had conquered Law!  Mad
with exultation I shouted--I MUST have shouted, "He sees, he sees:
he will understand!"  Then, controlling myself, I moved forward,
smiling and consciously beautiful, to offer myself to his arms, to
comfort him with endearments, and, with my son's hand in mine, to
speak words that should restore the broken bonds between the living
and the dead.

Alas! alas! his face went white with fear, his eyes were as those of
a hunted animal.  He backed away from me, as I advanced, and at last
turned and fled into the wood--whither, it is not given to me to
know.

To my poor boy, left doubly desolate, I have never been able to
impart a sense of my presence.  Soon he, too, must pass to this Life
Invisible and be lost to me forever.



A DIAGNOSIS OF DEATH



"I am not so superstitious as some of your physicians--men of
science, as you are pleased to be called," said Hawver, replying to
an accusation that had not been made.  "Some of you--only a few, I
confess--believe in the immortality of the soul, and in apparitions
which you have not the honesty to call ghosts.  I go no further than
a conviction that the living are sometimes seen where they are not,
but have been--where they have lived so long, perhaps so intensely,
as to have left their impress on everything about them.  I know,
indeed, that one's environment may be so affected by one's
personality as to yield, long afterward, an image of one's self to
the eyes of another.  Doubtless the impressing personality has to be
the right kind of personality as the perceiving eyes have to be the
right kind of eyes--mine, for example."

"Yes, the right kind of eyes, conveying sensations to the wrong kind
of brain," said Dr. Frayley, smiling.

"Thank you; one likes to have an expectation gratified; that is about
the reply that I supposed you would have the civility to make."

"Pardon me.  But you say that you know.  That is a good deal to say,
don't you think?  Perhaps you will not mind the trouble of saying how
you learned."

"You will call it an hallucination," Hawver said, "but that does not
matter."  And he told the story.

"Last summer I went, as you know, to pass the hot weather term in the
town of Meridian.  The relative at whose house I had intended to stay
was ill, so I sought other quarters.  After some difficulty I
succeeded in renting a vacant dwelling that had been occupied by an
eccentric doctor of the name of Mannering, who had gone away years
before, no one knew where, not even his agent.  He had built the
house himself and had lived in it with an old servant for about ten
years.  His practice, never very extensive, had after a few years
been given up entirely.  Not only so, but he had withdrawn himself
almost altogether from social life and become a recluse.  I was told
by the village doctor, about the only person with whom he held any
relations, that during his retirement he had devoted himself to a
single line of study, the result of which he had expounded in a book
that did not commend itself to the approval of his professional
brethren, who, indeed, considered him not entirely sane.  I have not
seen the book and cannot now recall the title of it, but I am told
that it expounded a rather startling theory.  He held that it was
possible in the case of many a person in good health to forecast his
death with precision, several months in advance of the event.  The
limit, I think, was eighteen months.  There were local tales of his
having exerted his powers of prognosis, or perhaps you would say
diagnosis; and it was said that in every instance the person whose
friends he had warned had died suddenly at the appointed time, and
from no assignable cause.  All this, however, has nothing to do with
what I have to tell; I thought it might amuse a physician.

"The house was furnished, just as he had lived in it.  It was a
rather gloomy dwelling for one who was neither a recluse nor a
student, and I think it gave something of its character to me--
perhaps some of its former occupant's character; for always I felt in
it a certain melancholy that was not in my natural disposition, nor,
I think, due to loneliness.  I had no servants that slept in the
house, but I have always been, as you know, rather fond of my own
society, being much addicted to reading, though little to study.
Whatever was the cause, the effect was dejection and a sense of
impending evil; this was especially so in Dr. Mannering's study,
although that room was the lightest and most airy in the house.  The
doctor's life-size portrait in oil hung in that room, and seemed
completely to dominate it.  There was nothing unusual in the picture;
the man was evidently rather good looking, about fifty years old,
with iron-gray hair, a smooth-shaven face and dark, serious eyes.
Something in the picture always drew and held my attention.  The
man's appearance became familiar to me, and rather 'haunted' me.

"One evening I was passing through this room to my bedroom, with a
lamp--there is no gas in Meridian.  I stopped as usual before the
portrait, which seemed in the lamplight to have a new expression, not
easily named, but distinctly uncanny.  It interested but did not
disturb me.  I moved the lamp from one side to the other and observed
the effects of the altered light.  While so engaged I felt an impulse
to turn round.  As I did so I saw a man moving across the room
directly toward me!  As soon as he came near enough for the lamplight
to illuminate the face I saw that it was Dr. Mannering himself; it
was as if the portrait were walking!

"'I beg your pardon,' I said, somewhat coldly, 'but if you knocked I
did not hear.'

"He passed me, within an arm's length, lifted his right forefinger,
as in warning, and without a word went on out of the room, though I
observed his exit no more than I had observed his entrance.

"Of course, I need not tell you that this was what you will call an
hallucination and I call an apparition.  That room had only two
doors, of which one was locked; the other led into a bedroom, from
which there was no exit.  My feeling on realizing this is not an
important part of the incident.

"Doubtless this seems to you a very commonplace 'ghost story'--one
constructed on the regular lines laid down by the old masters of the
art.  If that were so I should not have related it, even if it were
true.  The man was not dead; I met him to-day in Union street.  He
passed me in a crowd."

Hawver had finished his story and both men were silent.  Dr. Frayley
absently drummed on the table with his fingers.

"Did he say anything to-day?" he asked--"anything from which you
inferred that he was not dead?"

Hawver stared and did not reply.

"Perhaps," continued Frayley, "he made a sign, a gesture--lifted a
finger, as in warning.  It's a trick he had--a habit when saying
something serious--announcing the result of a diagnosis, for
example."

"Yes, he did--just as his apparition had done.  But, good God! did
you ever know him?"

Hawver was apparently growing nervous.

"I knew him.  I have read his book, as will every physician some day.
It is one of the most striking and important of the century's
contributions to medical science.  Yes, I knew him; I attended him in
an illness three years ago.  He died."

Hawver sprang from his chair, manifestly disturbed.  He strode
forward and back across the room; then approached his friend, and in
a voice not altogether steady, said:  "Doctor, have you anything to
say to me--as a physician?"

"No, Hawver; you are the healthiest man I ever knew.  As a friend I
advise you to go to your room.  You play the violin like an angel.
Play it; play something light and lively.  Get this cursed bad
business off your mind."

The next day Hawver was found dead in his room, the violin at his
neck, the bow upon the strings, his music open before him at Chopin's
funeral march.



MOXON'S MASTER



"Are you serious?--do you really believe that a machine thinks?"

I got no immediate reply; Moxon was apparently intent upon the coals
in the grate, touching them deftly here and there with the fire-poker
till they signified a sense of his attention by a brighter glow.  For
several weeks I had been observing in him a growing habit of delay in
answering even the most trivial of commonplace questions.  His air,
however, was that of preoccupation rather than deliberation:  one
might have said that he had "something on his mind."

Presently he said:

"What is a 'machine'?  The word has been variously defined.  Here is
one definition from a popular dictionary:  'Any instrument or
organization by which power is applied and made effective, or a
desired effect produced.'  Well, then, is not a man a machine?  And
you will admit that he thinks--or thinks he thinks."

"If you do not wish to answer my question," I said, rather testily,
"why not say so?--all that you say is mere evasion.  You know well
enough that when I say 'machine' I do not mean a man, but something
that man has made and controls."

"When it does not control him," he said, rising abruptly and looking
out of a window, whence nothing was visible in the blackness of a
stormy night.  A moment later he turned about and with a smile said:
"I beg your pardon; I had no thought of evasion.  I considered the
dictionary man's unconscious testimony suggestive and worth something
in the discussion.  I can give your question a direct answer easily
enough:  I do believe that a machine thinks about the work that it is
doing."

That was direct enough, certainly.  It was not altogether pleasing,
for it tended to confirm a sad suspicion that Moxon's devotion to
study and work in his machine-shop had not been good for him.  I
knew, for one thing, that he suffered from insomnia, and that is no
light affliction.  Had it affected his mind?  His reply to my
question seemed to me then evidence that it had; perhaps I should
think differently about it now.  I was younger then, and among the
blessings that are not denied to youth is ignorance.  Incited by that
great stimulant to controversy, I said:

"And what, pray, does it think with--in the absence of a brain?"

The reply, coming with less than his customary delay, took his
favorite form of counter-interrogation:

"With what does a plant think--in the absence of a brain?"

"Ah, plants also belong to the philosopher class!  I should be
pleased to know some of their conclusions; you may omit the
premises."

"Perhaps," he replied, apparently unaffected by my foolish irony,
"you may be able to infer their convictions from their acts.  I will
spare you the familiar examples of the sensitive mimosa, the several
insectivorous flowers and those whose stamens bend down and shake
their pollen upon the entering bee in order that he may fertilize
their distant mates.  But observe this.  In an open spot in my garden
I planted a climbing vine.  When it was barely above the surface I
set a stake into the soil a yard away.  The vine at once made for it,
but as it was about to reach it after several days I removed it a few
feet.  The vine at once altered its course, making an acute angle,
and again made for the stake.  This manoeuvre was repeated several
times, but finally, as if discouraged, the vine abandoned the pursuit
and ignoring further attempts to divert it traveled to a small tree,
further away, which it climbed.

"Roots of the eucalyptus will prolong themselves incredibly in search
of moisture.  A well-known horticulturist relates that one entered an
old drain pipe and followed it until it came to a break, where a
section of the pipe had been removed to make way for a stone wall
that had been built across its course.  The root left the drain and
followed the wall until it found an opening where a stone had fallen
out.  It crept through and following the other side of the wall back
to the drain, entered the unexplored part and resumed its journey."

"And all this?"

"Can you miss the significance of it?  It shows the consciousness of
plants.  It proves that they think."

"Even if it did--what then?  We were speaking, not of plants, but of
machines.  They may be composed partly of wood--wood that has no
longer vitality--or wholly of metal.  Is thought an attribute also of
the mineral kingdom?"

"How else do you explain the phenomena, for example, of
crystallization?"

"I do not explain them."

"Because you cannot without affirming what you wish to deny, namely,
intelligent cooperation among the constituent elements of the
crystals.  When soldiers form lines, or hollow squares, you call it
reason.  When wild geese in flight take the form of a letter V you
say instinct.  When the homogeneous atoms of a mineral, moving freely
in solution, arrange themselves into shapes mathematically perfect,
or particles of frozen moisture into the symmetrical and beautiful
forms of snowflakes, you have nothing to say.  You have not even
invented a name to conceal your heroic unreason."

Moxon was speaking with unusual animation and earnestness.  As he
paused I heard in an adjoining room known to me as his "machine-
shop," which no one but himself was permitted to enter, a singular
thumping sound, as of some one pounding upon a table with an open
hand.  Moxon heard it at the same moment and, visibly agitated, rose
and hurriedly passed into the room whence it came.  I thought it odd
that any one else should be in there, and my interest in my friend--
with doubtless a touch of unwarrantable curiosity--led me to listen
intently, though, I am happy to say, not at the keyhole.  There were
confused sounds, as of a struggle or scuffle; the floor shook.  I
distinctly heard hard breathing and a hoarse whisper which said "Damn
you!"  Then all was silent, and presently Moxon reappeared and said,
with a rather sorry smile:

"Pardon me for leaving you so abruptly.  I have a machine in there
that lost its temper and cut up rough."

Fixing my eyes steadily upon his left cheek, which was traversed by
four parallel excoriations showing blood, I said:

"How would it do to trim its nails?"

I could have spared myself the jest; he gave it no attention, but
seated himself in the chair that he had left and resumed the
interrupted monologue as if nothing had occurred:

"Doubtless you do not hold with those (I need not name them to a man
of your reading) who have taught that all matter is sentient, that
every atom is a living, feeling, conscious being.  _I_ do.  There is
no such thing as dead, inert matter:  it is all alive; all instinct
with force, actual and potential; all sensitive to the same forces in
its environment and susceptible to the contagion of higher and
subtler ones residing in such superior organisms as it may be brought
into relation with, as those of man when he is fashioning it into an
instrument of his will.  It absorbs something of his intelligence and
purpose--more of them in proportion to the complexity of the
resulting machine and that of its work.

"Do you happen to recall Herbert Spencer's definition of 'Life'?  I
read it thirty years ago.  He may have altered it afterward, for
anything I know, but in all that time I have been unable to think of
a single word that could profitably be changed or added or removed.
It seems to me not only the best definition, but the only possible
one.

"'Life,' he says, 'is a definite combination of heterogeneous
changes, both simultaneous and successive, in correspondence with
external coexistences and sequences.'"

"That defines the phenomenon," I said, "but gives no hint of its
cause."

"That," he replied, "is all that any definition can do.  As Mill
points out, we know nothing of cause except as an antecedent--nothing
of effect except as a consequent.  Of certain phenomena, one never
occurs without another, which is dissimilar:  the first in point of
time we call cause, the second, effect.  One who had many times seen
a rabbit pursued by a dog, and had never seen rabbits and dogs
otherwise, would think the rabbit the cause of the dog.

"But I fear," he added, laughing naturally enough, "that my rabbit is
leading me a long way from the track of my legitimate quarry:  I'm
indulging in the pleasure of the chase for its own sake.  What I want
you to observe is that in Herbert Spencer's definition of 'life' the
activity of a machine is included--there is nothing in the definition
that is not applicable to it.  According to this sharpest of
observers and deepest of thinkers, if a man during his period of
activity is alive, so is a machine when in operation.  As an inventor
and constructor of machines I know that to be true."

Moxon was silent for a long time, gazing absently into the fire.  It
was growing late and I thought it time to be going, but somehow I did
not like the notion of leaving him in that isolated house, all alone
except for the presence of some person of whose nature my conjectures
could go no further than that it was unfriendly, perhaps malign.
Leaning toward him and looking earnestly into his eyes while making a
motion with my hand through the door of his workshop, I said:

"Moxon, whom have you in there?"

Somewhat to my surprise he laughed lightly and answered without
hesitation:

"Nobody; the incident that you have in mind was caused by my folly in
leaving a machine in action with nothing to act upon, while I
undertook the interminable task of enlightening your understanding.
Do you happen to know that Consciousness is the creature of Rhythm?"

"O bother them both!" I replied, rising and laying hold of my
overcoat.  "I'm going to wish you good night; and I'll add the hope
that the machine which you inadvertently left in action will have her
gloves on the next time you think it needful to stop her."

Without waiting to observe the effect of my shot I left the house.

Rain was falling, and the darkness was intense.  In the sky beyond
the crest of a hill toward which I groped my way along precarious
plank sidewalks and across miry, unpaved streets I could see the
faint glow of the city's lights, but behind me nothing was visible
but a single window of Moxon's house.  It glowed with what seemed to
me a mysterious and fateful meaning.  I knew it was an uncurtained
aperture in my friend's "machine-shop," and I had little doubt that
he had resumed the studies interrupted by his duties as my instructor
in mechanical consciousness and the fatherhood of Rhythm.  Odd, and
in some degree humorous, as his convictions seemed to me at that
time, I could not wholly divest myself of the feeling that they had
some tragic relation to his life and character--perhaps to his
destiny--although I no longer entertained the notion that they were
the vagaries of a disordered mind.  Whatever might be thought of his
views, his exposition of them was too logical for that.  Over and
over, his last words came back to me:  "Consciousness is the creature
of Rhythm."  Bald and terse as the statement was, I now found it
infinitely alluring.  At each recurrence it broadened in meaning and
deepened in suggestion.  Why, here, (I thought) is something upon
which to found a philosophy.  If consciousness is the product of
rhythm all things ARE conscious, for all have motion, and all motion
is rhythmic.  I wondered if Moxon knew the significance and breadth
of his thought--the scope of this momentous generalization; or had he
arrived at his philosophic faith by the tortuous and uncertain road
of observation?

That faith was then new to me, and all Moxon's expounding had failed
to make me a convert; but now it seemed as if a great light shone
about me, like that which fell upon Saul of Tarsus; and out there in
the storm and darkness and solitude I experienced what Lewes calls
"The endless variety and excitement of philosophic thought."  I
exulted in a new sense of knowledge, a new pride of reason.  My feet
seemed hardly to touch the earth; it was as if I were uplifted and
borne through the air by invisible wings.

Yielding to an impulse to seek further light from him whom I now
recognized as my master and guide, I had unconsciously turned about,
and almost before I was aware of having done so found myself again at
Moxon's door.  I was drenched with rain, but felt no discomfort.
Unable in my excitement to find the doorbell I instinctively tried
the knob.  It turned and, entering, I mounted the stairs to the room
that I had so recently left.  All was dark and silent; Moxon, as I
had supposed, was in the adjoining room--the "machine-shop."  Groping
along the wall until I found the communicating door I knocked loudly
several times, but got no response, which I attributed to the uproar
outside, for the wind was blowing a gale and dashing the rain against
the thin walls in sheets.  The drumming upon the shingle roof
spanning the unceiled room was loud and incessant.

I had never been invited into the machine-shop--had, indeed, been
denied admittance, as had all others, with one exception, a skilled
metal worker, of whom no one knew anything except that his name was
Haley and his habit silence.  But in my spiritual exaltation,
discretion and civility were alike forgotten and I opened the door.
What I saw took all philosophical speculation out of me in short
order.

Moxon sat facing me at the farther side of a small table upon which a
single candle made all the light that was in the room.  Opposite him,
his back toward me, sat another person.  On the table between the two
was a chessboard; the men were playing.  I knew little of chess, but
as only a few pieces were on the board it was obvious that the game
was near its close.  Moxon was intensely interested--not so much, it
seemed to me, in the game as in his antagonist, upon whom he had
fixed so intent a look that, standing though I did directly in the
line of his vision, I was altogether unobserved.  His face was
ghastly white, and his eyes glittered like diamonds.  Of his
antagonist I had only a back view, but that was sufficient; I should
not have cared to see his face.

He was apparently not more than five feet in height, with proportions
suggesting those of a gorilla--a tremendous breadth of shoulders,
thick, short neck and broad, squat head, which had a tangled growth
of black hair and was topped with a crimson fez.  A tunic of the same
color, belted tightly to the waist, reached the seat--apparently a
box--upon which he sat; his legs and feet were not seen.  His left
forearm appeared to rest in his lap; he moved his pieces with his
right hand, which seemed disproportionately long.

I had shrunk back and now stood a little to one side of the doorway
and in shadow.  If Moxon had looked farther than the face of his
opponent he could have observed nothing now, except that the door was
open.  Something forbade me either to enter or to retire, a feeling--
I know not how it came--that I was in the presence of an imminent
tragedy and might serve my friend by remaining.  With a scarcely
conscious rebellion against the indelicacy of the act I remained.

The play was rapid.  Moxon hardly glanced at the board before making
his moves, and to my unskilled eye seemed to move the piece most
convenient to his hand, his motions in doing so being quick, nervous
and lacking in precision.  The response of his antagonist, while
equally prompt in the inception, was made with a slow, uniform,
mechanical and, I thought, somewhat theatrical movement of the arm,
that was a sore trial to my patience.  There was something unearthly
about it all, and I caught myself shuddering.  But I was wet and
cold.

Two or three times after moving a piece the stranger slightly
inclined his head, and each time I observed that Moxon shifted his
king.  All at once the thought came to me that the man was dumb.  And
then that he was a machine--an automaton chess-player!  Then I
remembered that Moxon had once spoken to me of having invented such a
piece of mechanism, though I did not understand that it had actually
been constructed.  Was all his talk about the consciousness and
intelligence of machines merely a prelude to eventual exhibition of
this device--only a trick to intensify the effect of its mechanical
action upon me in my ignorance of its secret?

A fine end, this, of all my intellectual transports--my "endless
variety and excitement of philosophic thought!"  I was about to
retire in disgust when something occurred to hold my curiosity.  I
observed a shrug of the thing's great shoulders, as if it were
irritated:  and so natural was this--so entirely human--that in my
new view of the matter it startled me.  Nor was that all, for a
moment later it struck the table sharply with its clenched hand.  At
that gesture Moxon seemed even more startled than I:  he pushed his
chair a little backward, as in alarm.

Presently Moxon, whose play it was, raised his hand high above the
board, pounced upon one of his pieces like a sparrow-hawk and with
the exclamation "checkmate!" rose quickly to his feet and stepped
behind his chair.  The automaton sat motionless.

The wind had now gone down, but I heard, at lessening intervals and
progressively louder, the rumble and roll of thunder.  In the pauses
between I now became conscious of a low humming or buzzing which,
like the thunder, grew momentarily louder and more distinct.  It
seemed to come from the body of the automaton, and was unmistakably a
whirring of wheels.  It gave me the impression of a disordered
mechanism which had escaped the repressive and regulating action of
some controlling part--an effect such as might be expected if a pawl
should be jostled from the teeth of a ratchet-wheel.  But before I
had time for much conjecture as to its nature my attention was taken
by the strange motions of the automaton itself.  A slight but
continuous convulsion appeared to have possession of it.  In body and
head it shook like a man with palsy or an ague chill, and the motion
augmented every moment until the entire figure was in violent
agitation.  Suddenly it sprang to its feet and with a movement almost
too quick for the eye to follow shot forward across table and chair,
with both arms thrust forth to their full length--the posture and
lunge of a diver.  Moxon tried to throw himself backward out of
reach, but he was too late:  I saw the horrible thing's hands close
upon his throat, his own clutch its wrists.  Then the table was
overturned, the candle thrown to the floor and extinguished, and all
was black dark.  But the noise of the struggle was dreadfully
distinct, and most terrible of all were the raucous, squawking sounds
made by the strangled man's efforts to breathe.  Guided by the
infernal hubbub, I sprang to the rescue of my friend, but had hardly
taken a stride in the darkness when the whole room blazed with a
blinding white light that burned into my brain and heart and memory a
vivid picture of the combatants on the floor, Moxon underneath, his
throat still in the clutch of those iron hands, his head forced
backward, his eyes protruding, his mouth wide open and his tongue
thrust out; and--horrible contrast!--upon the painted face of his
assassin an expression of tranquil and profound thought, as in the
solution of a problem in chess!  This I observed, then all was
blackness and silence.

Three days later I recovered consciousness in a hospital.  As the
memory of that tragic night slowly evolved in my ailing brain
recognized in my attendant Moxon's confidential workman, Haley.
Responding to a look he approached, smiling.

"Tell me about it," I managed to say, faintly--"all about it."

"Certainly," he said; "you were carried unconscious from a burning
house--Moxon's.  Nobody knows how you came to be there.  You may have
to do a little explaining.  The origin of the fire is a bit
mysterious, too.  My own notion is that the house was struck by
lightning."

"And Moxon?"

"Buried yesterday--what was left of him."

Apparently this reticent person could unfold himself on occasion.
When imparting shocking intelligence to the sick he was affable
enough.  After some moments of the keenest mental suffering I
ventured to ask another question:

"Who rescued me?"

"Well, if that interests you--I did."

"Thank you, Mr. Haley, and may God bless you for it.  Did you rescue,
also, that charming product of your skill, the automaton chess-player
that murdered its inventor?"

The man was silent a long time, looking away from me.  Presently he
turned and gravely said:

"Do you know that?"

"I do," I replied; "I saw it done."

That was many years ago.  If asked to-day I should answer less
confidently.



A TOUGH TUSSLE



One night in the autumn of 1861 a man sat alone in the heart of a
forest in western Virginia.  The region was one of the wildest on the
continent--the Cheat Mountain country.  There was no lack of people
close at hand, however; within a mile of where the man sat was the
now silent camp of a whole Federal brigade.  Somewhere about--it
might be still nearer--was a force of the enemy, the numbers unknown.
It was this uncertainty as to its numbers and position that accounted
for the man's presence in that lonely spot; he was a young officer of
a Federal infantry regiment and his business there was to guard his
sleeping comrades in the camp against a surprise.  He was in command
of a detachment of men constituting a picket-guard.  These men he had
stationed just at nightfall in an irregular line, determined by the
nature of the ground, several hundred yards in front of where he now
sat.  The line ran through the forest, among the rocks and laurel
thickets, the men fifteen or twenty paces apart, all in concealment
and under injunction of strict silence and unremitting vigilance.  In
four hours, if nothing occurred, they would be relieved by a fresh
detachment from the reserve now resting in care of its captain some
distance away to the left and rear.  Before stationing his men the
young officer of whom we are writing had pointed out to his two
sergeants the spot at which he would be found if it should be
necessary to consult him, or if his presence at the front line should
be required.

It was a quiet enough spot--the fork of an old wood-road, on the two
branches of which, prolonging themselves deviously forward in the dim
moonlight, the sergeants were themselves stationed, a few paces in
rear of the line.  If driven sharply back by a sudden onset of the
enemy--and pickets are not expected to make a stand after firing--the
men would come into the converging roads and naturally following them
to their point of intersection could be rallied and "formed."  In his
small way the author of these dispositions was something of a
strategist; if Napoleon had planned as intelligently at Waterloo he
would have won that memorable battle and been overthrown later.

Second-Lieutenant Brainerd Byring was a brave and efficient officer,
young and comparatively inexperienced as he was in the business of
killing his fellow-men.  He had enlisted in the very first days of
the war as a private, with no military knowledge whatever, had been
made first-sergeant of his company on account of his education and
engaging manner, and had been lucky enough to lose his captain by a
Confederate bullet; in the resulting promotions he had gained a
commission.  He had been in several engagements, such as they were--
at Philippi, Rich Mountain, Carrick's Ford and Greenbrier--and had
borne himself with such gallantry as not to attract the attention of
his superior officers.  The exhilaration of battle was agreeable to
him, but the sight of the dead, with their clay faces, blank eyes and
stiff bodies, which when not unnaturally shrunken were unnaturally
swollen, had always intolerably affected him.  He felt toward them a
kind of reasonless antipathy that was something more than the
physical and spiritual repugnance common to us all.  Doubtless this
feeling was due to his unusually acute sensibilities--his keen sense
of the beautiful, which these hideous things outraged.  Whatever may
have been the cause, he could not look upon a dead body without a
loathing which had in it an element of resentment.  What others have
respected as the dignity of death had to him no existence--was
altogether unthinkable.  Death was a thing to be hated.  It was not
picturesque, it had no tender and solemn side--a dismal thing,
hideous in all its manifestations and suggestions.  Lieutenant Byring
was a braver man than anybody knew, for nobody knew his horror of
that which he was ever ready to incur.

Having posted his men, instructed his sergeants and retired to his
station, he seated himself on a log, and with senses all alert began
his vigil.  For greater ease he loosened his sword-belt and taking
his heavy revolver from his holster laid it on the log beside him.
He felt very comfortable, though he hardly gave the fact a thought,
so intently did he listen for any sound from the front which might
have a menacing significance--a shout, a shot, or the footfall of one
of his sergeants coming to apprise him of something worth knowing.
From the vast, invisible ocean of moonlight overhead fell, here and
there, a slender, broken stream that seemed to plash against the
intercepting branches and trickle to earth, forming small white pools
among the clumps of laurel.  But these leaks were few and served only
to accentuate the blackness of his environment, which his imagination
found it easy to people with all manner of unfamiliar shapes,
menacing, uncanny, or merely grotesque.

He to whom the portentous conspiracy of night and solitude and
silence in the heart of a great forest is not an unknown experience
needs not to be told what another world it all is--how even the most
commonplace and familiar objects take on another character.  The
trees group themselves differently; they draw closer together, as if
in fear.  The very silence has another quality than the silence of
the day.  And it is full of half-heard whispers--whispers that
startle--ghosts of sounds long dead.  There are living sounds, too,
such as are never heard under other conditions:  notes of strange
night-birds, the cries of small animals in sudden encounters with
stealthy foes or in their dreams, a rustling in the dead leaves--it
may be the leap of a wood-rat, it may be the footfall of a panther.
What caused the breaking of that twig?--what the low, alarmed
twittering in that bushful of birds?  There are sounds without a
name, forms without substance, translations in space of objects which
have not been seen to move, movements wherein nothing is observed to
change its place.  Ah, children of the sunlight and the gaslight, how
little you know of the world in which you live!

Surrounded at a little distance by armed and watchful friends, Byring
felt utterly alone.  Yielding himself to the solemn and mysterious
spirit of the time and place, he had forgotten the nature of his
connection with the visible and audible aspects and phases of the
night.  The forest was boundless; men and the habitations of men did
not exist.  The universe was one primeval mystery of darkness,
without form and void, himself the sole, dumb questioner of its
eternal secret.  Absorbed in thoughts born of this mood, he suffered
the time to slip away unnoted.  Meantime the infrequent patches of
white light lying amongst the tree-trunks had undergone changes of
size, form and place.  In one of them near by, just at the roadside,
his eye fell upon an object that he had not previously observed.  It
was almost before his face as he sat; he could have sworn that it had
not before been there.  It was partly covered in shadow, but he could
see that it was a human figure.  Instinctively he adjusted the clasp
of his sword-belt and laid hold of his pistol--again he was in a
world of war, by occupation an assassin.

The figure did not move.  Rising, pistol in hand, he approached.  The
figure lay upon its back, its upper part in shadow, but standing
above it and looking down upon the face, he saw that it was a dead
body.  He shuddered and turned from it with a feeling of sickness and
disgust, resumed his seat upon the log, and forgetting military
prudence struck a match and lit a cigar.  In the sudden blackness
that followed the extinction of the flame he felt a sense of relief;
he could no longer see the object of his aversion.  Nevertheless, he
kept his eyes set in that direction until it appeared again with
growing distinctness.  It seemed to have moved a trifle nearer.

"Damn the thing!" he muttered.  "What does it want?"

It did not appear to be in need of anything but a soul.

Byring turned away his eyes and began humming a tune, but he broke
off in the middle of a bar and looked at the dead body.  Its presence
annoyed him, though he could hardly have had a quieter neighbor.  He
was conscious, too, of a vague, indefinable feeling that was new to
him.  It was not fear, but rather a sense of the supernatural--in
which he did not at all believe.

"I have inherited it," he said to himself.  "I suppose it will
require a thousand ages--perhaps ten thousand--for humanity to
outgrow this feeling.  Where and when did it originate?  Away back,
probably, in what is called the cradle of the human race--the plains
of Central Asia.  What we inherit as a superstition our barbarous
ancestors must have held as a reasonable conviction.  Doubtless they
believed themselves justified by facts whose nature we cannot even
conjecture in thinking a dead body a malign thing endowed with some
strange power of mischief, with perhaps a will and a purpose to exert
it.  Possibly they had some awful form of religion of which that was
one of the chief doctrines, sedulously taught by their priesthood, as
ours teach the immortality of the soul.  As the Aryans moved slowly
on, to and through the Caucasus passes, and spread over Europe, new
conditions of life must have resulted in the formulation of new
religions.  The old belief in the malevolence of the dead body was
lost from the creeds and even perished from tradition, but it left
its heritage of terror, which is transmitted from generation to
generation--is as much a part of us as are our blood and bones."

In following out his thought he had forgotten that which suggested
it; but now his eye fell again upon the corpse.  The shadow had now
altogether uncovered it.  He saw the sharp profile, the chin in the
air, the whole face, ghastly white in the moonlight.  The clothing
was gray, the uniform of a Confederate soldier.  The coat and
waistcoat, unbuttoned, had fallen away on each side, exposing the
white shirt.  The chest seemed unnaturally prominent, but the abdomen
had sunk in, leaving a sharp projection at the line of the lower
ribs.  The arms were extended, the left knee was thrust upward.  The
whole posture impressed Byring as having been studied with a view to
the horrible.

"Bah!" he exclaimed; "he was an actor--he knows how to be dead."

He drew away his eyes, directing them resolutely along one of the
roads leading to the front, and resumed his philosophizing where he
had left off.

"It may be that our Central Asian ancestors had not the custom of
burial.  In that case it is easy to understand their fear of the
dead, who really were a menace and an evil.  They bred pestilences.
Children were taught to avoid the places where they lay, and to run
away if by inadvertence they came near a corpse.  I think, indeed,
I'd better go away from this chap."

He half rose to do so, then remembered that he had told his men in
front and the officer in the rear who was to relieve him that he
could at any time be found at that spot.  It was a matter of pride,
too.  If he abandoned his post he feared they would think he feared
the corpse.  He was no coward and he was unwilling to incur anybody's
ridicule.  So he again seated himself, and to prove his courage
looked boldly at the body.  The right arm--the one farthest from him-
-was now in shadow.  He could barely see the hand which, he had
before observed, lay at the root of a clump of laurel.  There had
been no change, a fact which gave him a certain comfort, he could not
have said why.  He did not at once remove his eyes; that which we do
not wish to see has a strange fascination, sometimes irresistible.
Of the woman who covers her eyes with her hands and looks between the
fingers let it be said that the wits have dealt with her not
altogether justly.

Byring suddenly became conscious of a pain in his right hand.  He
withdrew his eyes from his enemy and looked at it.  He was grasping
the hilt of his drawn sword so tightly that it hurt him.  He
observed, too, that he was leaning forward in a strained attitude--
crouching like a gladiator ready to spring at the throat of an
antagonist.  His teeth were clenched and he was breathing hard.  This
matter was soon set right, and as his muscles relaxed and he drew a
long breath he felt keenly enough the ludicrousness of the incident.
It affected him to laughter.  Heavens! what sound was that? what
mindless devil was uttering an unholy glee in mockery of human
merriment?  He sprang to his feet and looked about him, not
recognizing his own laugh.

He could no longer conceal from himself the horrible fact of his
cowardice; he was thoroughly frightened!  He would have run from the
spot, but his legs refused their office; they gave way beneath him
and he sat again upon the log, violently trembling.  His face was
wet, his whole body bathed in a chill perspiration.  He could not
even cry out.  Distinctly he heard behind him a stealthy tread, as of
some wild animal, and dared not look over his shoulder.  Had the
soulless living joined forces with the soulless dead?--was it an
animal?  Ah, if he could but be assured of that!  But by no effort of
will could he now unfix his gaze from the face of the dead man.

I repeat that Lieutenant Byring was a brave and intelligent man.  But
what would you have?  Shall a man cope, single-handed, with so
monstrous an alliance as that of night and solitude and silence and
the dead,--while an incalculable host of his own ancestors shriek
into the ear of his spirit their coward counsel, sing their doleful
death-songs in his heart, and disarm his very blood of all its iron?
The odds are too great--courage was not made for so rough use as
that.

One sole conviction now had the man in possession:  that the body had
moved.  It lay nearer to the edge of its plot of light--there could
be no doubt of it.  It had also moved its arms, for, look, they are
both in the shadow!  A breath of cold air struck Byring full in the
face; the boughs of trees above him stirred and moaned.  A strongly
defined shadow passed across the face of the dead, left it luminous,
passed back upon it and left it half obscured.  The horrible thing
was visibly moving!  At that moment a single shot rang out upon the
picket-line--a lonelier and louder, though more distant, shot than
ever had been heard by mortal ear!  It broke the spell of that
enchanted man; it slew the silence and the solitude, dispersed the
hindering host from Central Asia and released his modern manhood.
With a cry like that of some great bird pouncing upon its prey he
sprang forward, hot-hearted for action!

Shot after shot now came from the front.  There were shoutings and
confusion, hoof-beats and desultory cheers.  Away to the rear, in the
sleeping camp, were a singing of bugles and grumble of drums.
Pushing through the thickets on either side the roads came the
Federal pickets, in full retreat, firing backward at random as they
ran.  A straggling group that had followed back one of the roads, as
instructed, suddenly sprang away into the bushes as half a hundred
horsemen thundered by them, striking wildly with their sabres as they
passed.  At headlong speed these mounted madmen shot past the spot
where Byring had sat, and vanished round an angle of the road,
shouting and firing their pistols.  A moment later there was a roar
of musketry, followed by dropping shots--they had encountered the
reserve-guard in line; and back they came in dire confusion, with
here and there an empty saddle and many a maddened horse, bullet-
stung, snorting and plunging with pain.  It was all over--"an affair
of outposts."

The line was reestablished with fresh men, the roll called, the
stragglers were reformed.  The Federal commander with a part of his
staff, imperfectly clad, appeared upon the scene, asked a few
questions, looked exceedingly wise and retired.  After standing at
arms for an hour the brigade in camp "swore a prayer or two" and went
to bed.

Early the next morning a fatigue-party, commanded by a captain and
accompanied by a surgeon, searched the ground for dead and wounded.
At the fork of the road, a little to one side, they found two bodies
lying close together--that of a Federal officer and that of a
Confederate private.  The officer had died of a sword-thrust through
the heart, but not, apparently, until he had inflicted upon his enemy
no fewer than five dreadful wounds.  The dead officer lay on his face
in a pool of blood, the weapon still in his breast.  They turned him
on his back and the surgeon removed it.

"Gad!" said the captain--"It is Byring!"--adding, with a glance at
the other, "They had a tough tussle."

The surgeon was examining the sword.  It was that of a line officer
of Federal infantry--exactly like the one worn by the captain.  It
was, in fact, Byring's own.  The only other weapon discovered was an
undischarged revolver in the dead officer's belt.

The surgeon laid down the sword and approached the other body.  It
was frightfully gashed and stabbed, but there was no blood.  He took
hold of the left foot and tried to straighten the leg.  In the effort
the body was displaced.  The dead do not wish to be moved--it
protested with a faint, sickening odor.  Where it had lain were a few
maggots, manifesting an imbecile activity.

The surgeon looked at the captain.  The captain looked at the
surgeon.



ONE OF TWINS
A LETTER FOUND AMONG THE PAPERS OF THE LATE MORTIMER BARR



You ask me if in my experience as one of a pair of twins I ever
observed anything unaccountable by the natural laws with which we
have acquaintance.  As to that you shall judge; perhaps we have not
all acquaintance with the same natural laws.  You may know some that
I do not, and what is to me unaccountable may be very clear to you.

You knew my brother John--that is, you knew him when you knew that I
was not present; but neither you nor, I believe, any human being
could distinguish between him and me if we chose to seem alike.  Our
parents could not; ours is the only instance of which I have any
knowledge of so close resemblance as that.  I speak of my brother
John, but I am not at all sure that his name was not Henry and mine
John.  We were regularly christened, but afterward, in the very act
of tattooing us with small distinguishing marks, the operator lost
his reckoning; and although I bear upon my forearm a small "H" and he
bore a "J," it is by no means certain that the letters ought not to
have been transposed.  During our boyhood our parents tried to
distinguish us more obviously by our clothing and other simple
devices, but we would so frequently exchange suits and otherwise
circumvent the enemy that they abandoned all such ineffectual
attempts, and during all the years that we lived together at home
everybody recognized the difficulty of the situation and made the
best of it by calling us both "Jehnry."  I have often wondered at my
father's forbearance in not branding us conspicuously upon our
unworthy brows, but as we were tolerably good boys and used our power
of embarrassment and annoyance with commendable moderation, we
escaped the iron.  My father was, in fact, a singularly good-natured
man, and I think quietly enjoyed nature's practical joke.

Soon after we had come to California, and settled at San Jose (where
the only good fortune that awaited us was our meeting with so kind a
friend as you) the family, as you know, was broken up by the death of
both my parents in the same week.  My father died insolvent and the
homestead was sacrificed to pay his debts.  My sisters returned to
relatives in the East, but owing to your kindness John and I, then
twenty-two years of age, obtained employment in San Francisco, in
different quarters of the town.  Circumstances did not permit us to
live together, and we saw each other infrequently, sometimes not
oftener than once a week.  As we had few acquaintances in common, the
fact of our extraordinary likeness was little known.  I come now to
the matter of your inquiry.

One day soon after we had come to this city I was walking down Market
street late in the afternoon, when I was accosted by a well-dressed
man of middle age, who after greeting me cordially said:  "Stevens, I
know, of course, that you do not go out much, but I have told my wife
about you, and she would be glad to see you at the house.  I have a
notion, too, that my girls are worth knowing.  Suppose you come out
to-morrow at six and dine with us, en famille; and then if the ladies
can't amuse you afterward I'll stand in with a few games of
billiards."

This was said with so bright a smile and so engaging a manner that I
had not the heart to refuse, and although I had never seen the man in
my life I promptly replied:  "You are very good, sir, and it will
give me great pleasure to accept the invitation.  Please present my
compliments to Mrs. Margovan and ask her to expect me."

With a shake of the hand and a pleasant parting word the man passed
on.  That he had mistaken me for my brother was plain enough.  That
was an error to which I was accustomed and which it was not my habit
to rectify unless the matter seemed important.  But how had I known
that this man's name was Margovan?  It certainly is not a name that
one would apply to a man at random, with a probability that it would
be right.  In point of fact, the name was as strange to me as the
man.

The next morning I hastened to where my brother was employed and met
him coming out of the office with a number of bills that he was to
collect.  I told him how I had "committed" him and added that if he
didn't care to keep the engagement I should be delighted to continue
the impersonation.

"That's queer," he said thoughtfully.  "Margovan is the only man in
the office here whom I know well and like.  When he came in this
morning and we had passed the usual greetings some singular impulse
prompted me to say:  'Oh, I beg your pardon, Mr. Margovan, but I
neglected to ask your address.'  I got the address, but what under
the sun I was to do with it, I did not know until now.  It's good of
you to offer to take the consequence of your impudence, but I'll eat
that dinner myself, if you please."

He ate a number of dinners at the same place--more than were good for
him, I may add without disparaging their quality; for he fell in love
with Miss Margovan, proposed marriage to her and was heartlessly
accepted.

Several weeks after I had been informed of the engagement, but before
it had been convenient for me to make the acquaintance of the young
woman and her family, I met one day on Kearney street a handsome but
somewhat dissipated-looking man whom something prompted me to follow
and watch, which I did without any scruple whatever.  He turned up
Geary street and followed it until he came to Union square.  There he
looked at his watch, then entered the square.  He loitered about the
paths for some time, evidently waiting for someone.  Presently he was
joined by a fashionably dressed and beautiful young woman and the two
walked away up Stockton street, I following.  I now felt the
necessity of extreme caution, for although the girl was a stranger it
seemed to me that she would recognize me at a glance.  They made
several turns from one street to another and finally, after both had
taken a hasty look all about--which I narrowly evaded by stepping
into a doorway--they entered a house of which I do not care to state
the location.  Its location was better than its character.

I protest that my action in playing the spy upon these two strangers
was without assignable motive.  It was one of which I might or might
not be ashamed, according to my estimate of the character of the
person finding it out.  As an essential part of a narrative educed by
your question it is related here without hesitancy or shame.

A week later John took me to the house of his prospective father-in-
law, and in Miss Margovan, as you have already surmised, but to my
profound astonishment, I recognized the heroine of that discreditable
adventure.  A gloriously beautiful heroine of a discreditable
adventure I must in justice admit that she was; but that fact has
only this importance:  her beauty was such a surprise to me that it
cast a doubt upon her identity with the young woman I had seen
before; how could the marvelous fascination of her face have failed
to strike me at that time?  But no--there was no possibility of
error; the difference was due to costume, light and general
surroundings.

John and I passed the evening at the house, enduring, with the
fortitude of long experience, such delicate enough banter as our
likeness naturally suggested.  When the young lady and I were left
alone for a few minutes I looked her squarely in the face and said
with sudden gravity:

"You, too, Miss Margovan, have a double:  I saw her last Tuesday
afternoon in Union square."

She trained her great gray eyes upon me for a moment, but her glance
was a trifle less steady than my own and she withdrew it, fixing it
on the tip of her shoe.

"Was she very like me?" she asked, with an indifference which I
thought a little overdone.

"So like," said I, "that I greatly admired her, and being unwilling
to lose sight of her I confess that I followed her until--Miss
Margovan, are you sure that you understand?"

She was now pale, but entirely calm.  She again raised her eyes to
mine, with a look that did not falter.

"What do you wish me to do?" she asked.  "You need not fear to name
your terms.  I accept them."

It was plain, even in the brief time given me for reflection, that in
dealing with this girl ordinary methods would not do, and ordinary
exactions were needless.

"Miss Margovan," I said, doubtless with something of the compassion
in my voice that I had in my heart, "it is impossible not to think
you the victim of some horrible compulsion.  Rather than impose new
embarrassments upon you I would prefer to aid you to regain your
freedom."

She shook her head, sadly and hopelessly, and I continued, with
agitation:

"Your beauty unnerves me.  I am disarmed by your frankness and your
distress.  If you are free to act upon conscience you will, I
believe, do what you conceive to be best; if you are not--well,
Heaven help us all!  You have nothing to fear from me but such
opposition to this marriage as I can try to justify on--on other
grounds."

These were not my exact words, but that was the sense of them, as
nearly as my sudden and conflicting emotions permitted me to express
it.  I rose and left her without another look at her, met the others
as they reentered the room and said, as calmly as I could:  "I have
been bidding Miss Margovan good evening; it is later than I thought."

John decided to go with me.  In the street he asked if I had observed
anything singular in Julia's manner.

"I thought her ill," I replied; "that is why I left."  Nothing more
was said.

The next evening I came late to my lodgings.  The events of the
previous evening had made me nervous and ill; I had tried to cure
myself and attain to clear thinking by walking in the open air, but I
was oppressed with a horrible presentiment of evil--a presentiment
which I could not formulate.  It was a chill, foggy night; my
clothing and hair were damp and I shook with cold.  In my dressing-
gown and slippers before a blazing grate of coals I was even more
uncomfortable.  I no longer shivered but shuddered--there is a
difference.  The dread of some impending calamity was so strong and
dispiriting that I tried to drive it away by inviting a real sorrow--
tried to dispel the conception of a terrible future by substituting
the memory of a painful past.  I recalled the death of my parents and
endeavored to fix my mind upon the last sad scenes at their bedsides
and their graves.  It all seemed vague and unreal, as having occurred
ages ago and to another person.  Suddenly, striking through my
thought and parting it as a tense cord is parted by the stroke of
steel--I can think of no other comparison--I heard a sharp cry as of
one in mortal agony!  The voice was that of my brother and seemed to
come from the street outside my window.  I sprang to the window and
threw it open.  A street lamp directly opposite threw a wan and
ghastly light upon the wet pavement and the fronts of the houses.  A
single policeman, with upturned collar, was leaning against a
gatepost, quietly smoking a cigar.  No one else was in sight.  I
closed the window and pulled down the shade, seated myself before the
fire and tried to fix my mind upon my surroundings.  By way of
assisting, by performance of some familiar act, I looked at my watch;
it marked half-past eleven.  Again I heard that awful cry!  It seemed
in the room--at my side.  I was frightened and for some moments had
not the power to move.  A few minutes later--I have no recollection
of the intermediate time--I found myself hurrying along an unfamiliar
street as fast as I could walk.  I did not know where I was, nor
whither I was going, but presently sprang up the steps of a house
before which were two or three carriages and in which were moving
lights and a subdued confusion of voices.  It was the house of Mr.
Margovan.

You know, good friend, what had occurred there.  In one chamber lay
Julia Margovan, hours dead by poison; in another John Stevens,
bleeding from a pistol wound in the chest, inflicted by his own hand.
As I burst into the room, pushed aside the physicians and laid my
hand upon his forehead he unclosed his eyes, stared blankly, closed
them slowly and died without a sign.

I knew no more until six weeks afterward, when I had been nursed back
to life by your own saintly wife in your own beautiful home.  All of
that you know, but what you do not know is this--which, however, has
no bearing upon the subject of your psychological researches--at
least not upon that branch of them in which, with a delicacy and
consideration all your own, you have asked for less assistance than I
think I have given you:

One moonlight night several years afterward I was passing through
Union square.  The hour was late and the square deserted.  Certain
memories of the past naturally came into my mind as I came to the
spot where I had once witnessed that fateful assignation, and with
that unaccountable perversity which prompts us to dwell upon thoughts
of the most painful character I seated myself upon one of the benches
to indulge them.  A man entered the square and came along the walk
toward me.  His hands were clasped behind him, his head was bowed; he
seemed to observe nothing.  As he approached the shadow in which I
sat I recognized him as the man whom I had seen meet Julia Margovan
years before at that spot.  But he was terribly altered--gray, worn
and haggard.  Dissipation and vice were in evidence in every look;
illness was no less apparent.  His clothing was in disorder, his hair
fell across his forehead in a derangement which was at once uncanny
and picturesque.  He looked fitter for restraint than liberty--the
restraint of a hospital.

With no defined purpose I rose and confronted him.  He raised his
head and looked me full in the face.  I have no words to describe the
ghastly change that came over his own; it was a look of unspeakable
terror--he thought himself eye to eye with a ghost.  But he was a
courageous man.  "Damn you, John Stevens!" he cried, and lifting his
trembling arm he dashed his fist feebly at my face and fell headlong
upon the gravel as I walked away.

Somebody found him there, stone-dead.  Nothing more is known of him,
not even his name.  To know of a man that he is dead should be
enough.



THE HAUNTED VALLEY



I--HOW TREES ARE FELLED IN CHINA

A half-mile north from Jo. Dunfer's, on the road from Hutton's to
Mexican Hill, the highway dips into a sunless ravine which opens out
on either hand in a half-confidential manner, as if it had a secret
to impart at some more convenient season.  I never used to ride
through it without looking first to the one side and then to the
other, to see if the time had arrived for the revelation.  If I saw
nothing--and I never did see anything--there was no feeling of
disappointment, for I knew the disclosure was merely withheld
temporarily for some good reason which I had no right to question.
That I should one day be taken into full confidence I no more doubted
than I doubted the existence of Jo. Dunfer himself, through whose
premises the ravine ran.

It was said that Jo. had once undertaken to erect a cabin in some
remote part of it, but for some reason had abandoned the enterprise
and constructed his present hermaphrodite habitation, half residence
and half groggery, at the roadside, upon an extreme corner of his
estate; as far away as possible, as if on purpose to show how
radically he had changed his mind.

This Jo. Dunfer--or, as he was familiarly known in the neighborhood,
Whisky Jo.--was a very important personage in those parts.  He was
apparently about forty years of age, a long, shock-headed fellow,
with a corded face, a gnarled arm and a knotty hand like a bunch of
prison-keys.  He was a hairy man, with a stoop in his walk, like that
of one who is about to spring upon something and rend it.

Next to the peculiarity to which he owed his local appellation, Mr.
Dunfer's most obvious characteristic was a deep-seated antipathy to
the Chinese.  I saw him once in a towering rage because one of his
herdsmen had permitted a travel-heated Asian to slake his thirst at
the horse-trough in front of the saloon end of Jo.'s establishment.
I ventured faintly to remonstrate with Jo. for his unchristian
spirit, but he merely explained that there was nothing about Chinamen
in the New Testament, and strode away to wreak his displeasure upon
his dog, which also, I suppose, the inspired scribes had overlooked.

Some days afterward, finding him sitting alone in his barroom, I
cautiously approached the subject, when, greatly to my relief, the
habitual austerity of his expression visibly softened into something
that I took for condescension.

"You young Easterners," he said, "are a mile-and-a-half too good for
this country, and you don't catch on to our play.  People who don't
know a Chileno from a Kanaka can afford to hang out liberal ideas
about Chinese immigration, but a fellow that has to fight for his
bone with a lot of mongrel coolies hasn't any time for foolishness."

This long consumer, who had probably never done an honest day's-work
in his life, sprung the lid of a Chinese tobacco-box and with thumb
and forefinger forked out a wad like a small haycock.  Holding this
reinforcement within supporting distance he fired away with renewed
confidence.

"They're a flight of devouring locusts, and they're going for
everything green in this God blest land, if you want to know."

Here he pushed his reserve into the breach and when his gabble-gear
was again disengaged resumed his uplifting discourse.

"I had one of them on this ranch five years ago, and I'll tell you
about it, so that you can see the nub of this whole question.  I
didn't pan out particularly well those days--drank more whisky than
was prescribed for me and didn't seem to care for my duty as a
patriotic American citizen; so I took that pagan in, as a kind of
cook.  But when I got religion over at the Hill and they talked of
running me for the Legislature it was given to me to see the light.
But what was I to do?  If I gave him the go somebody else would take
him, and mightn't treat him white.  WHAT was I to do?  What would any
good Christian do, especially one new to the trade and full to the
neck with the brotherhood of Man and the fatherhood of God?"

Jo. paused for a reply, with an expression of unstable satisfaction,
as of one who has solved a problem by a distrusted method.  Presently
he rose and swallowed a glass of whisky from a full bottle on the
counter, then resumed his story.

"Besides, he didn't count for much--didn't know anything and gave
himself airs.  They all do that.  I said him nay, but he muled it
through on that line while he lasted; but after turning the other
cheek seventy and seven times I doctored the dice so that he didn't
last forever.  And I'm almighty glad I had the sand to do it.

Jo.'s gladness, which somehow did not impress me, was duly and
ostentatiously celebrated at the bottle.

"About five years ago I started in to stick up a shack.  That was
before this one was built, and I put it in another place.  I set Ah
Wee and a little cuss named Gopher to cutting the timber.  Of course
I didn't expect Ah Wee to help much, for he had a face like a day in
June and big black eyes--I guess maybe they were the damn'dest eyes
in this neck o' woods."

While delivering this trenchant thrust at common sense Mr. Dunfer
absently regarded a knot-hole in the thin board partition separating
the bar from the living-room, as if that were one of the eyes whose
size and color had incapacitated his servant for good service.

"Now you Eastern galoots won't believe anything against the yellow
devils," he suddenly flamed out with an appearance of earnestness not
altogether convincing, "but I tell you that Chink was the perversest
scoundrel outside San Francisco.  The miserable pigtail Mongolian
went to hewing away at the saplings all round the stems, like a worm
o' the dust gnawing a radish.  I pointed out his error as patiently
as I knew how, and showed him how to cut them on two sides, so as to
make them fall right; but no sooner would I turn my back on him, like
this"--and he turned it on me, amplifying the illustration by taking
some more liquor--"than he was at it again.  It was just this way:
while I looked at him, SO"--regarding me rather unsteadily and with
evident complexity of vision--"he was all right; but when I looked
away, SO"--taking a long pull at the bottle--"he defied me.  Then I'd
gaze at him reproachfully, SO, and butter wouldn't have melted in his
mouth."

Doubtless Mr. Dunfer honestly intended the look that he fixed upon me
to be merely reproachful, but it was singularly fit to arouse the
gravest apprehension in any unarmed person incurring it; and as I had
lost all interest in his pointless and interminable narrative, I rose
to go.  Before I had fairly risen, he had again turned to the
counter, and with a barely audible "so," had emptied the bottle at a
gulp.

Heavens! what a yell!  It was like a Titan in his last, strong agony.
Jo. staggered back after emitting it, as a cannon recoils from its
own thunder, and then dropped into his chair, as if he had been
"knocked in the head" like a beef--his eyes drawn sidewise toward the
wall, with a stare of terror.  Looking in the same direction, I saw
that the knot-hole in the wall had indeed become a human eye--a full,
black eye, that glared into my own with an entire lack of expression
more awful than the most devilish glitter.  I think I must have
covered my face with my hands to shut out the horrible illusion, if
such it was, and Jo.'s little white man-of-all-work coming into the
room broke the spell, and I walked out of the house with a sort of
dazed fear that delirium tremens might be infectious.  My horse was
hitched at the watering-trough, and untying him I mounted and gave
him his head, too much troubled in mind to note whither he took me.

I did not know what to think of all this, and like every one who does
not know what to think I thought a great deal, and to little purpose.
The only reflection that seemed at all satisfactory, was, that on the
morrow I should be some miles away, with a strong probability of
never returning.

A sudden coolness brought me out of my abstraction, and looking up I
found myself entering the deep shadows of the ravine.  The day was
stifling; and this transition from the pitiless, visible heat of the
parched fields to the cool gloom, heavy with pungency of cedars and
vocal with twittering of the birds that had been driven to its leafy
asylum, was exquisitely refreshing.  I looked for my mystery, as
usual, but not finding the ravine in a communicative mood,
dismounted, led my sweating animal into the undergrowth, tied him
securely to a tree and sat down upon a rock to meditate.

I began bravely by analyzing my pet superstition about the place.
Having resolved it into its constituent elements I arranged them in
convenient troops and squadrons, and collecting all the forces of my
logic bore down upon them from impregnable premises with the thunder
of irresistible conclusions and a great noise of chariots and general
intellectual shouting.  Then, when my big mental guns had overturned
all opposition, and were growling almost inaudibly away on the
horizon of pure speculation, the routed enemy straggled in upon their
rear, massed silently into a solid phalanx, and captured me, bag and
baggage.  An indefinable dread came upon me.  I rose to shake it off,
and began threading the narrow dell by an old, grass-grown cow-path
that seemed to flow along the bottom, as a substitute for the brook
that Nature had neglected to provide.

The trees among which the path straggled were ordinary, well-behaved
plants, a trifle perverted as to trunk and eccentric as to bough, but
with nothing unearthly in their general aspect.  A few loose
bowlders, which had detached themselves from the sides of the
depression to set up an independent existence at the bottom, had
dammed up the pathway, here and there, but their stony repose had
nothing in it of the stillness of death.  There was a kind of death-
chamber hush in the valley, it is true, and a mysterious whisper
above:  the wind was just fingering the tops of the trees--that was
all.

I had not thought of connecting Jo. Dunfer's drunken narrative with
what I now sought, and only when I came into a clear space and
stumbled over the level trunks of some small trees did I have the
revelation.  This was the site of the abandoned "shack."  The
discovery was verified by noting that some of the rotting stumps were
hacked all round, in a most unwoodmanlike way, while others were cut
straight across, and the butt ends of the corresponding trunks had
the blunt wedge-form given by the axe of a master.

The opening among the trees was not more than thirty paces across.
At one side was a little knoll--a natural hillock, bare of shrubbery
but covered with wild grass, and on this, standing out of the grass,
the headstone of a grave!

I do not remember that I felt anything like surprise at this
discovery.  I viewed that lonely grave with something of the feeling
that Columbus must have had when he saw the hills and headlands of
the new world.  Before approaching it I leisurely completed my survey
of the surroundings.  I was even guilty of the affectation of winding
my watch at that unusual hour, and with needless care and
deliberation.  Then I approached my mystery.

The grave--a rather short one--was in somewhat better repair than was
consistent with its obvious age and isolation, and my eyes, I dare
say, widened a trifle at a clump of unmistakable garden flowers
showing evidence of recent watering.  The stone had clearly enough
done duty once as a doorstep.  In its front was carved, or rather
dug, an inscription.  It read thus:


AH WEE--CHINAMAN.

Age unknown.  Worked for Jo. Dunfer.
This monument is erected by him to keep the Chink's memory green.
Likewise as a warning to Celestials not to take on airs.  Devil take
'em!
She Was a Good Egg.


I cannot adequately relate my astonishment at this uncommon
inscription!  The meagre but sufficient identification of the
deceased; the impudent candor of confession; the brutal anathema; the
ludicrous change of sex and sentiment--all marked this record as the
work of one who must have been at least as much demented as bereaved.
I felt that any further disclosure would be a paltry anti-climax, and
with an unconscious regard for dramatic effect turned squarely about
and walked away.  Nor did I return to that part of the county for
four years.


II--WHO DRIVES SANE OXEN SHOULD HIMSELF BE SANE


"Gee-up, there, old Fuddy-Duddy!"

This unique adjuration came from the lips of a queer little man
perched upon a wagonful of firewood, behind a brace of oxen that were
hauling it easily along with a simulation of mighty effort which had
evidently not imposed on their lord and master.  As that gentleman
happened at the moment to be staring me squarely in the face as I
stood by the roadside it was not altogether clear whether he was
addressing me or his beasts; nor could I say if they were named Fuddy
and Duddy and were both subjects of the imperative verb "to gee-up."
Anyhow the command produced no effect on us, and the queer little man
removed his eyes from mine long enough to spear Fuddy and Duddy
alternately with a long pole, remarking, quietly but with feeling:
"Dern your skin," as if they enjoyed that integument in common.
Observing that my request for a ride took no attention, and finding
myself falling slowly astern, I placed one foot upon the inner
circumference of a hind wheel and was slowly elevated to the level of
the hub, whence I boarded the concern, sans ceremonie, and scrambling
forward seated myself beside the driver--who took no notice of me
until he had administered another indiscriminate castigation to his
cattle, accompanied with the advice to "buckle down, you derned
Incapable!"  Then, the master of the outfit (or rather the former
master, for I could not suppress a whimsical feeling that the entire
establishment was my lawful prize) trained his big, black eyes upon
me with an expression strangely, and somewhat unpleasantly, familiar,
laid down his rod--which neither blossomed nor turned into a serpent,
as I half expected--folded his arms, and gravely demanded, "W'at did
you do to W'isky?"

My natural reply would have been that I drank it, but there was
something about the query that suggested a hidden significance, and
something about the man that did not invite a shallow jest.  And so,
having no other answer ready, I merely held my tongue, but felt as if
I were resting under an imputation of guilt, and that my silence was
being construed into a confession.

Just then a cold shadow fell upon my cheek, and caused me to look up.
We were descending into my ravine!  I cannot describe the sensation
that came upon me:  I had not seen it since it unbosomed itself four
years before, and now I felt like one to whom a friend has made some
sorrowing confession of crime long past, and who has basely deserted
him in consequence.  The old memories of Jo. Dunfer, his fragmentary
revelation, and the unsatisfying explanatory note by the headstone,
came back with singular distinctness.  I wondered what had become of
Jo., and--I turned sharply round and asked my prisoner.  He was
intently watching his cattle, and without withdrawing his eyes
replied:

"Gee-up, old Terrapin!  He lies aside of Ah Wee up the gulch.  Like
to see it?  They always come back to the spot--I've been expectin'
you.  H-woa!"

At the enunciation of the aspirate, Fuddy-Duddy, the incapable
terrapin, came to a dead halt, and before the vowel had died away up
the ravine had folded up all his eight legs and lain down in the
dusty road, regardless of the effect upon his derned skin.  The queer
little man slid off his seat to the ground and started up the dell
without deigning to look back to see if I was following.  But I was.

It was about the same season of the year, and at near the same hour
of the day, of my last visit.  The jays clamored loudly, and the
trees whispered darkly, as before; and I somehow traced in the two
sounds a fanciful analogy to the open boastfulness of Mr. Jo.
Dunfer's mouth and the mysterious reticence of his manner, and to the
mingled hardihood and tenderness of his sole literary production--the
epitaph.  All things in the valley seemed unchanged, excepting the
cow-path, which was almost wholly overgrown with weeds.  When we came
out into the "clearing," however, there was change enough.  Among the
stumps and trunks of the fallen saplings, those that had been hacked
"China fashion" were no longer distinguishable from those that were
cut "'Melican way."  It was as if the Old-World barbarism and the
New-World civilization had reconciled their differences by the
arbitration of an impartial decay--as is the way of civilizations.
The knoll was there, but the Hunnish brambles had overrun and all but
obliterated its effete grasses; and the patrician garden-violet had
capitulated to his plebeian brother--perhaps had merely reverted to
his original type.  Another grave--a long, robust mound--had been
made beside the first, which seemed to shrink from the comparison;
and in the shadow of a new headstone the old one lay prostrate, with
its marvelous inscription illegible by accumulation of leaves and
soil.  In point of literary merit the new was inferior to the old--
was even repulsive in its terse and savage jocularity:


JO. DUNFER.  DONE FOR.


I turned from it with indifference, and brushing away the leaves from
the tablet of the dead pagan restored to light the mocking words
which, fresh from their long neglect, seemed to have a certain
pathos.  My guide, too, appeared to take on an added seriousness as
he read it, and I fancied that I could detect beneath his whimsical
manner something of manliness, almost of dignity.  But while I looked
at him his former aspect, so subtly inhuman, so tantalizingly
familiar, crept back into his big eyes, repellant and attractive.  I
resolved to make an end of the mystery if possible.

"My friend," I said, pointing to the smaller grave, "did Jo. Dunfer
murder that Chinaman?"

He was leaning against a tree and looking across the open space into
the top of another, or into the blue sky beyond.  He neither withdrew
his eyes, nor altered his posture as he slowly replied:

"No, sir; he justifiably homicided him."

"Then he really did kill him."

"Kill 'im?  I should say he did, rather.  Doesn't everybody know
that?  Didn't he stan' up before the coroner's jury and confess it?
And didn't they find a verdict of 'Came to 'is death by a wholesome
Christian sentiment workin' in the Caucasian breast'?  An' didn't the
church at the Hill turn W'isky down for it?  And didn't the sovereign
people elect him Justice of the Peace to get even on the gospelers?
I don't know where you were brought up."

"But did Jo. do that because the Chinaman did not, or would n'ot,
learn to cut down trees like a white man?"

"Sure!--it stan's so on the record, which makes it true an' legal.
My knowin' better doesn't make any difference with legal truth; it
wasn't my funeral and I wasn't invited to deliver an oration.  But
the fact is, W'isky was jealous o' ME"--and the little wretch
actually swelled out like a turkeycock and made a pretense of
adjusting an imaginary neck-tie, noting the effect in the palm of his
hand, held up before him to represent a mirror.

"Jealous of YOU!" I repeated with ill-mannered astonishment.

"That's what I said.  Why not?--don't I look all right?"

He assumed a mocking attitude of studied grace, and twitched the
wrinkles out of his threadbare waistcoat.  Then, suddenly dropping
his voice to a low pitch of singular sweetness, he continued:

"W'isky thought a lot o' that Chink; nobody but me knew how 'e doted
on 'im.  Couldn't bear 'im out of 'is sight, the derned protoplasm!
And w'en 'e came down to this clear-in' one day an' found him an' me
neglectin' our work--him asleep an' me grapplin a tarantula out of
'is sleeve--W'isky laid hold of my axe and let us have it, good an'
hard!  I dodged just then, for the spider bit me, but Ah Wee got it
bad in the side an' tumbled about like anything.  W'isky was just
weigh-in' me out one w'en 'e saw the spider fastened on my finger;
then 'e knew he'd made a jack ass of 'imself.  He threw away the axe
and got down on 'is knees alongside of Ah Wee, who gave a last little
kick and opened 'is eyes--he had eyes like mine--an' puttin' up 'is
hands drew down W'isky's ugly head and held it there w'ile 'e stayed.
That wasn't long, for a tremblin' ran through 'im and 'e gave a bit
of a moan an' beat the game."

During the progress of the story the narrator had become
transfigured.  The comic, or rather, the sardonic element was all out
of him, and as he painted that strange scene it was with difficulty
that I kept my composure.  And this consummate actor had somehow so
managed me that the sympathy due to his dramatis persone was given to
himself.  I stepped forward to grasp his hand, when suddenly a broad
grin danced across his face and with a light, mocking laugh he
continued:

"W'en W'isky got 'is nut out o' that 'e was a sight to see!  All his
fine clothes--he dressed mighty blindin' those days--were spoiled
everlastin'! 'Is hair was towsled and his face--what I could see of
it--was whiter than the ace of lilies. 'E stared once at me, and
looked away as if I didn't count; an' then there were shootin' pains
chasin' one another from my bitten finger into my head, and it was
Gopher to the dark.  That's why I wasn't at the inquest."

"But why did you hold your tongue afterward?" I asked.

"It's that kind of tongue," he replied, and not another word would he
say about it.

"After that W'isky took to drinkin' harder an' harder, and was
rabider an' rabider anti-coolie, but I don't think 'e was ever
particularly glad that 'e dispelled Ah Wee.  He didn't put on so much
dog about it w'en we were alone as w'en he had the ear of a derned
Spectacular Extravaganza like you. 'E put up that headstone and
gouged the inscription accordin' to his varyin' moods.  It took 'im
three weeks, workin' between drinks.  I gouged his in one day."

"When did Jo. die?" I asked rather absently.  The answer took my
breath:

"Pretty soon after I looked at him through that knot-hole, w'en you
had put something in his w'isky, you derned Borgia!"

Recovering somewhat from my surprise at this astounding charge, I was
half-minded to throttle the audacious accuser, but was restrained by
a sudden conviction that came to me in the light of a revelation.  I
fixed a grave look upon him and asked, as calmly as I could:  "And
when did you go luny?"

"Nine years ago!" he shrieked, throwing out his clenched hands--"nine
years ago, w'en that big brute killed the woman who loved him better
than she did me!--me who had followed 'er from San Francisco, where
'e won 'er at draw poker!--me who had watched over 'er for years w'en
the scoundrel she belonged to was ashamed to acknowledge 'er and
treat 'er white!--me who for her sake kept 'is cussed secret till it
ate 'im up!--me who w'en you poisoned the beast fulfilled 'is last
request to lay 'im alongside 'er and give 'im a stone to the head of
'im!  And I've never since seen 'er grave till now, for I didn't want
to meet 'im here."

"Meet him?  Why, Gopher, my poor fellow, he is dead!"

"That's why I'm afraid of 'im."

I followed the little wretch back to his wagon and wrung his hand at
parting.  It was now nightfall, and as I stood there at the roadside
in the deepening gloom, watching the blank outlines of the receding
wagon, a sound was borne to me on the evening wind--a sound as of a
series of vigorous thumps--and a voice came out of the night:

"Gee-up, there, you derned old Geranium."



A JUG OF SIRUP



This narrative begins with the death of its hero.  Silas Deemer died
on the 16th day of July, 1863, and two days later his remains were
buried.  As he had been personally known to every man, woman and
well-grown child in the village, the funeral, as the local newspaper
phrased it, "was largely attended."  In accordance with a custom of
the time and place, the coffin was opened at the graveside and the
entire assembly of friends and neighbors filed past, taking a last
look at the face of the dead.  And then, before the eyes of all,
Silas Deemer was put into the ground.  Some of the eyes were a trifle
dim, but in a general way it may be said that at that interment there
was lack of neither observance nor observation; Silas was indubitably
dead, and none could have pointed out any ritual delinquency that
would have justified him in coming back from the grave.  Yet if human
testimony is good for anything (and certainly it once put an end to
witchcraft in and about Salem) he came back.

I forgot to state that the death and burial of Silas Deemer occurred
in the little village of Hillbrook, where he had lived for thirty-one
years.  He had been what is known in some parts of the Union (which
is admittedly a free country) as a "merchant"; that is to say, he
kept a retail shop for the sale of such things as are commonly sold
in shops of that character.  His honesty had never been questioned,
so far as is known, and he was held in high esteem by all.  The only
thing that could be urged against him by the most censorious was a
too close attention to business.  It was not urged against him,
though many another, who manifested it in no greater degree, was less
leniently judged.  The business to which Silas was devoted was mostly
his own--that, possibly, may have made a difference.

At the time of Deemer's death nobody could recollect a single day,
Sundays excepted, that he had not passed in his "store," since he had
opened it more than a quarter-century before.  His health having been
perfect during all that time, he had been unable to discern any
validity in whatever may or might have been urged to lure him astray
from his counter and it is related that once when he was summoned to
the county seat as a witness in an important law case and did not
attend, the lawyer who had the hardihood to move that he be
"admonished" was solemnly informed that the Court regarded the
proposal with "surprise."  Judicial surprise being an emotion that
attorneys are not commonly ambitious to arouse, the motion was
hastily withdrawn and an agreement with the other side effected as to
what Mr. Deemer would have said if he had been there--the other side
pushing its advantage to the extreme and making the supposititious
testimony distinctly damaging to the interests of its proponents.  In
brief, it was the general feeling in all that region that Silas
Deemer was the one immobile verity of Hillbrook, and that his
translation in space would precipitate some dismal public ill or
strenuous calamity.

Mrs. Deemer and two grown daughters occupied the upper rooms of the
building, but Silas had never been known to sleep elsewhere than on a
cot behind the counter of the store.  And there, quite by accident,
he was found one night, dying, and passed away just before the time
for taking down the shutters.  Though speechless, he appeared
conscious, and it was thought by those who knew him best that if the
end had unfortunately been delayed beyond the usual hour for opening
the store the effect upon him would have been deplorable.

Such had been Silas Deemer--such the fixity and invariety of his life
and habit, that the village humorist (who had once attended college)
was moved to bestow upon him the sobriquet of "Old Ibidem," and, in
the first issue of the local newspaper after the death, to explain
without offence that Silas had taken "a day off."  It was more than a
day, but from the record it appears that well within a month Mr.
Deemer made it plain that he had not the leisure to be dead.

One of Hillbrook's most respected citizens was Alvan Creede, a
banker.  He lived in the finest house in town, kept a carriage and
was a most estimable man variously.  He knew something of the
advantages of travel, too, having been frequently in Boston, and
once, it was thought, in New York, though he modestly disclaimed that
glittering distinction.  The matter is mentioned here merely as a
contribution to an understanding of Mr. Creede's worth, for either
way it is creditable to him--to his intelligence if he had put
himself, even temporarily, into contact with metropolitan culture; to
his candor if he had not.

One pleasant summer evening at about the hour of ten Mr. Creede,
entering at his garden gate, passed up the gravel walk, which looked
very white in the moonlight, mounted the stone steps of his fine
house and pausing a moment inserted his latchkey in the door.  As he
pushed this open he met his wife, who was crossing the passage from
the parlor to the library.  She greeted him pleasantly and pulling
the door further back held it for him to enter.  Instead he turned
and, looking about his feet in front of the threshold, uttered an
exclamation of surprise.

"Why!--what the devil," he said, "has become of that jug?"

"What jug, Alvan?" his wife inquired, not very sympathetically.

"A jug of maple sirup--I brought it along from the store and set it
down here to open the door.  What the--"

"There, there, Alvan, please don't swear again," said the lady,
interrupting.  Hillbrook, by the way, is not the only place in
Christendom where a vestigial polytheism forbids the taking in vain
of the Evil One's name.

The jug of maple sirup which the easy ways of village life had
permitted Hillbrook's foremost citizen to carry home from the store
was not there.

"Are you quite sure, Alvan?"

"My dear, do you suppose a man does not know when he is carrying a
jug?  I bought that sirup at Deemer's as I was passing.  Deemer
himself drew it and lent me the jug, and I--"

The sentence remains to this day unfinished.  Mr. Creede staggered
into the house, entered the parlor and dropped into an armchair,
trembling in every limb.  He had suddenly remembered that Silas
Deemer was three weeks dead.

Mrs. Creede stood by her husband, regarding him with surprise and
anxiety.

"For Heaven's sake," she said, "what ails you?"

Mr. Creede's ailment having no obvious relation to the interests of
the better land he did not apparently deem it necessary to expound it
on that demand; he said nothing--merely stared.  There were long
moments of silence broken by nothing but the measured ticking of the
clock, which seemed somewhat slower than usual, as if it were civilly
granting them an extension of time in which to recover their wits.

"Jane, I have gone mad--that is it."  He spoke thickly and hurriedly.
"You should have told me; you must have observed my symptoms before
they became so pronounced that I have observed them myself.  I
thought I was passing Deemer's store; it was open and lit up--that is
what I thought; of course it is never open now.  Silas Deemer stood
at his desk behind the counter.  My God, Jane, I saw him as
distinctly as I see you.  Remembering that you had said you wanted
some maple sirup, I went in and bought some--that is all--I bought
two quarts of maple sirup from Silas Deemer, who is dead and
underground, but nevertheless drew that sirup from a cask and handed
it to me in a jug.  He talked with me, too, rather gravely, I
remember, even more so than was his way, but not a word of what he
said can I now recall.  But I saw him--good Lord, I saw and talked
with him--and he is dead!  So I thought, but I'm mad, Jane, I'm as
crazy as a beetle; and you have kept it from me."

This monologue gave the woman time to collect what faculties she had.

"Alvan," she said, "you have given no evidence of insanity, believe
me.  This was undoubtedly an illusion--how should it be anything
else?  That would be too terrible!  But there is no insanity; you are
working too hard at the bank.  You should not have attended the
meeting of directors this evening; any one could see that you were
ill; I knew something would occur."

It may have seemed to him that the prophecy had lagged a bit,
awaiting the event, but he said nothing of that, being concerned with
his own condition.  He was calm now, and could think coherently.

"Doubtless the phenomenon was subjective," he said, with a somewhat
ludicrous transition to the slang of science.  "Granting the
possibility of spiritual apparition and even materialization, yet the
apparition and materialization of a half-gallon brown clay jug--a
piece of coarse, heavy pottery evolved from nothing--that is hardly
thinkable."

As he finished speaking, a child ran into the room--his little
daughter.  She was clad in a bedgown.  Hastening to her father she
threw her arms about his neck, saying:  "You naughty papa, you forgot
to come in and kiss me.  We heard you open the gate and got up and
looked out.  And, papa dear, Eddy says mayn't he have the little jug
when it is empty?"

As the full import of that revelation imparted itself to Alvan
Creede's understanding he visibly shuddered.  For the child could not
have heard a word of the conversation.

The estate of Silas Deemer being in the hands of an administrator who
had thought it best to dispose of the "business" the store had been
closed ever since the owner's death, the goods having been removed by
another "merchant" who had purchased them en bloc.  The rooms above
were vacant as well, for the widow and daughters had gone to another
town.

On the evening immediately after Alvan Creede's adventure (which had
somehow "got out") a crowd of men, women and children thronged the
sidewalk opposite the store.  That the place was haunted by the
spirit of the late Silas Deemer was now well known to every resident
of Hillbrook, though many affected disbelief.  Of these the hardiest,
and in a general way the youngest, threw stones against the front of
the building, the only part accessible, but carefully missed the
unshuttered windows.  Incredulity had not grown to malice.  A few
venturesome souls crossed the street and rattled the door in its
frame; struck matches and held them near the window; attempted to
view the black interior.  Some of the spectators invited attention to
their wit by shouting and groaning and challenging the ghost to a
footrace.

After a considerable time had elapsed without any manifestation, and
many of the crowd had gone away, all those remaining began to observe
that the interior of the store was suffused with a dim, yellow light.
At this all demonstrations ceased; the intrepid souls about the door
and windows fell back to the opposite side of the street and were
merged in the crowd; the small boys ceased throwing stones.  Nobody
spoke above his breath; all whispered excitedly and pointed to the
now steadily growing light.  How long a time had passed since the
first faint glow had been observed none could have guessed, but
eventually the illumination was bright enough to reveal the whole
interior of the store; and there, standing at his desk behind the
counter, Silas Deemer was distinctly visible!

The effect upon the crowd was marvelous.  It began rapidly to melt
away at both flanks, as the timid left the place.  Many ran as fast
as their legs would let them; others moved off with greater dignity,
turning occasionally to look backward over the shoulder.  At last a
score or more, mostly men, remained where they were, speechless,
staring, excited.  The apparition inside gave them no attention; it
was apparently occupied with a book of accounts.

Presently three men left the crowd on the sidewalk as if by a common
impulse and crossed the street.  One of them, a heavy man, was about
to set his shoulder against the door when it opened, apparently
without human agency, and the courageous investigators passed in.  No
sooner had they crossed the threshold than they were seen by the awed
observers outside to be acting in the most unaccountable way.  They
thrust out their hands before them, pursued devious courses, came
into violent collision with the counter, with boxes and barrels on
the floor, and with one another.  They turned awkwardly hither and
thither and seemed trying to escape, but unable to retrace their
steps.  Their voices were heard in exclamations and curses.  But in
no way did the apparition of Silas Deemer manifest an interest in
what was going on.

By what impulse the crowd was moved none ever recollected, but the
entire mass--men, women, children, dogs--made a simultaneous and
tumultuous rush for the entrance.  They congested the doorway,
pushing for precedence--resolving themselves at length into a line
and moving up step by step.  By some subtle spiritual or physical
alchemy observation had been transmuted into action--the sightseers
had become participants in the spectacle--the audience had usurped
the stage.

To the only spectator remaining on the other side of the street--
Alvan Creede, the banker--the interior of the store with its
inpouring crowd continued in full illumination; all the strange
things going on there were clearly visible.  To those inside all was
black darkness.  It was as if each person as he was thrust in at the
door had been stricken blind, and was maddened by the mischance.
They groped with aimless imprecision, tried to force their way out
against the current, pushed and elbowed, struck at random, fell and
were trampled, rose and trampled in their turn.  They seized one
another by the garments, the hair, the beard--fought like animals,
cursed, shouted, called one another opprobrious and obscene names.
When, finally, Alvan Creede had seen the last person of the line pass
into that awful tumult the light that had illuminated it was suddenly
quenched and all was as black to him as to those within.  He turned
away and left the place.

In the early morning a curious crowd had gathered about "Deemer's."
It was composed partly of those who had run away the night before,
but now had the courage of sunshine, partly of honest folk going to
their daily toil.  The door of the store stood open; the place was
vacant, but on the walls, the floor, the furniture, were shreds of
clothing and tangles of hair.  Hillbrook militant had managed somehow
to pull itself out and had gone home to medicine its hurts and swear
that it had been all night in bed.  On the dusty desk, behind the
counter, was the sales-book.  The entries in it, in Deemer's
handwriting, had ceased on the 16th day of July, the last of his
life.  There was no record of a later sale to Alvan Creede.

That is the entire story--except that men's passions having subsided
and reason having resumed its immemorial sway, it was confessed in
Hillbrook that, considering the harmless and honorable character of
his first commercial transaction under the new conditions, Silas
Deemer, deceased, might properly have been suffered to resume
business at the old stand without mobbing.  In that judgment the
local historian from whose unpublished work these facts are compiled
had the thoughtfulness to signify his concurrence.



STALEY FLEMING'S HALLUCINATION



Of two men who were talking one was a physician.

"I sent for you, Doctor," said the other, "but I don't think you can
do me any good.  May be you can recommend a specialist in
psychopathy.  I fancy I'm a bit loony."

"You look all right," the physician said.

"You shall judge--I have hallucinations.  I wake every night and see
in my room, intently watching me, a big black Newfoundland dog with a
white forefoot."

"You say you wake; are you sure about that?  'Hallucinations' are
sometimes only dreams."

"Oh, I wake, all right.  Sometimes I lie still a long time, looking
at the dog as earnestly as the dog looks at me--I always leave the
light going.  When I can't endure it any longer I sit up in bed--and
nothing is there!"

"'M, 'm--what is the beast's expression?"

"It seems to me sinister.  Of course I know that, except in art, an
animal's face in repose has always the same expression.  But this is
not a real animal.  Newfoundland dogs are pretty mild looking, you
know; what's the matter with this one?"

"Really, my diagnosis would have no value:  I am not going to treat
the dog."

The physician laughed at his own pleasantry, but narrowly watched his
patient from the corner of his eye.  Presently he said:  "Fleming,
your description of the beast fits the dog of the late Atwell
Barton."

Fleming half-rose from his chair, sat again and made a visible
attempt at indifference.  "I remember Barton," he said; "I believe he
was--it was reported that--wasn't there something suspicious in his
death?"

Looking squarely now into the eyes of his patient, the physician
said:  "Three years ago the body of your old enemy, Atwell Barton,
was found in the woods near his house and yours.  He had been stabbed
to death.  There have been no arrests; there was no clew.  Some of us
had 'theories.'  I had one.  Have you?"

"I?  Why, bless your soul, what could I know about it?  You remember
that I left for Europe almost immediately afterward--a considerable
time afterward.  In the few weeks since my return you could not
expect me to construct a 'theory.'  In fact, I have not given the
matter a thought.  What about his dog?"

"It was first to find the body.  It died of starvation on his grave."

We do not know the inexorable law underlying coincidences.  Staley
Fleming did not, or he would perhaps not have sprung to his feet as
the night wind brought in through the open window the long wailing
howl of a distant dog.  He strode several times across the room in
the steadfast gaze of the physician; then, abruptly confronting him,
almost shouted:  "What has all this to do with my trouble, Dr.
Halderman?  You forget why you were sent for."

Rising, the physician laid his hand upon his patient's arm and said,
gently:  "Pardon me.  I cannot diagnose your disorder off-hand--to-
morrow, perhaps.  Please go to bed, leaving your door unlocked; I
will pass the night here with your books.  Can you call me without
rising?"

"Yes, there is an electric bell."

"Good.  If anything disturbs you push the button without sitting up.
Good night."

Comfortably installed in an armchair the man of medicine stared into
the glowing coals and thought deeply and long, but apparently to
little purpose, for he frequently rose and opening a door leading to
the staircase, listened intently; then resumed his seat.  Presently,
however, he fell asleep, and when he woke it was past midnight.  He
stirred the failing fire, lifted a book from the table at his side
and looked at the title.  It was Denneker's "Meditations."  He opened
it at random and began to read:

"Forasmuch as it is ordained of God that all flesh hath spirit and
thereby taketh on spiritual powers, so, also, the spirit hath powers
of the flesh, even when it is gone out of the flesh and liveth as a
thing apart, as many a violence performed by wraith and lemure
sheweth.  And there be who say that man is not single in this, but
the beasts have the like evil inducement, and--"

The reading was interrupted by a shaking of the house, as by the fall
of a heavy object.  The reader flung down the book, rushed from the
room and mounted the stairs to Fleming's bed-chamber.  He tried the
door, but contrary to his instructions it was locked.  He set his
shoulder against it with such force that it gave way.  On the floor
near the disordered bed, in his night clothes, lay Fleming gasping
away his life.

The physician raised the dying man's head from the floor and observed
a wound in the throat.  "I should have thought of this," he said,
believing it suicide.

When the man was dead an examination disclosed the unmistakable marks
of an animal's fangs deeply sunken into the jugular vein.

But there was no animal.



A RESUMED IDENTITY



I--THE REVIEW AS A FORM OF WELCOME

One summer night a man stood on a low hill overlooking a wide expanse
of forest and field.  By the full moon hanging low in the west he
knew what he might not have known otherwise:  that it was near the
hour of dawn.  A light mist lay along the earth, partly veiling the
lower features of the landscape, but above it the taller trees showed
in well-defined masses against a clear sky.  Two or three farmhouses
were visible through the haze, but in none of them, naturally, was a
light.  Nowhere, indeed, was any sign or suggestion of life except
the barking of a distant dog, which, repeated with mechanical
iteration, served rather to accentuate than dispel the loneliness of
the scene.

The man looked curiously about him on all sides, as one who among
familiar surroundings is unable to determine his exact place and part
in the scheme of things.  It is so, perhaps, that we shall act when,
risen from the dead, we await the call to judgment.

A hundred yards away was a straight road, showing white in the
moonlight.  Endeavoring to orient himself, as a surveyor or navigator
might say, the man moved his eyes slowly along its visible length and
at a distance of a quarter-mile to the south of his station saw, dim
and gray in the haze, a group of horsemen riding to the north.
Behind them were men afoot, marching in column, with dimly gleaming
rifles aslant above their shoulders.  They moved slowly and in
silence.  Another group of horsemen, another regiment of infantry,
another and another--all in unceasing motion toward the man's point
of view, past it, and beyond.  A battery of artillery followed, the
cannoneers riding with folded arms on limber and caisson.  And still
the interminable procession came out of the obscurity to south and
passed into the obscurity to north, with never a sound of voice, nor
hoof, nor wheel.

The man could not rightly understand:  he thought himself deaf; said
so, and heard his own voice, although it had an unfamiliar quality
that almost alarmed him; it disappointed his ear's expectancy in the
matter of timbre and resonance.  But he was not deaf, and that for
the moment sufficed.

Then he remembered that there are natural phenomena to which some one
has given the name "acoustic shadows."  If you stand in an acoustic
shadow there is one direction from which you will hear nothing.  At
the battle of Gaines's Mill, one of the fiercest conflicts of the
Civil War, with a hundred guns in play, spectators a mile and a half
away on the opposite side of the Chickahominy valley heard nothing of
what they clearly saw.  The bombardment of Port Royal, heard and felt
at St.  Augustine, a hundred and fifty miles to the south, was
inaudible two miles to the north in a still atmosphere.  A few days
before the surrender at Appomattox a thunderous engagement between
the commands of Sheridan and Pickett was unknown to the latter
commander, a mile in the rear of his own line.

These instances were not known to the man of whom we write, but less
striking ones of the same character had not escaped his observation.
He was profoundly disquieted, but for another reason than the uncanny
silence of that moonlight march.

"Good Lord!" he said to himself--and again it was as if another had
spoken his thought--"if those people are what I take them to be we
have lost the battle and they are moving on Nashville!"

Then came a thought of self--an apprehension--a strong sense of
personal peril, such as in another we call fear.  He stepped quickly
into the shadow of a tree.  And still the silent battalions moved
slowly forward in the haze.

The chill of a sudden breeze upon the back of his neck drew his
attention to the quarter whence it came, and turning to the east he
saw a faint gray light along the horizon--the first sign of returning
day.  This increased his apprehension.

"I must get away from here," he thought, "or I shall be discovered
and taken."

He moved out of the shadow, walking rapidly toward the graying east.
From the safer seclusion of a clump of cedars he looked back.  The
entire column had passed out of sight:  the straight white road lay
bare and desolate in the moonlight!

Puzzled before, he was now inexpressibly astonished.  So swift a
passing of so slow an army!--he could not comprehend it.  Minute
after minute passed unnoted; he had lost his sense of time.  He
sought with a terrible earnestness a solution of the mystery, but
sought in vain.  When at last he roused himself from his abstraction
the sun's rim was visible above the hills, but in the new conditions
he found no other light than that of day; his understanding was
involved as darkly in doubt as before.

On every side lay cultivated fields showing no sign of war and war's
ravages.  From the chimneys of the farmhouses thin ascensions of blue
smoke signaled preparations for a day's peaceful toil.  Having
stilled its immemorial allocution to the moon, the watch-dog was
assisting a negro who, prefixing a team of mules to the plow, was
flatting and sharping contentedly at his task.  The hero of this tale
stared stupidly at the pastoral picture as if he had never seen such
a thing in all his life; then he put his hand to his head, passed it
through his hair and, withdrawing it, attentively considered the
palm--a singular thing to do.  Apparently reassured by the act, he
walked confidently toward the road.


II--WHEN YOU HAVE LOST YOUR LIFE CONSULT A PHYSICIAN


Dr. Stilling Malson, of Murfreesboro, having visited a patient six or
seven miles away, on the Nashville road, had remained with him all
night.  At daybreak he set out for home on horseback, as was the
custom of doctors of the time and region.  He had passed into the
neighborhood of Stone's River battlefield when a man approached him
from the roadside and saluted in the military fashion, with a
movement of the right hand to the hat-brim.  But the hat was not a
military hat, the man was not in uniform and had not a martial
bearing.  The doctor nodded civilly, half thinking that the
stranger's uncommon greeting was perhaps in deference to the historic
surroundings.  As the stranger evidently desired speech with him he
courteously reined in his horse and waited.

"Sir," said the stranger, "although a civilian, you are perhaps an
enemy."

"I am a physician," was the non-committal reply.

"Thank you," said the other.  "I am a lieutenant, of the staff of
General Hazen."  He paused a moment and looked sharply at the person
whom he was addressing, then added, "Of the Federal army."

The physician merely nodded.

"Kindly tell me," continued the other, "what has happened here.
Where are the armies?  Which has won the battle?"

The physician regarded his questioner curiously with half-shut eyes.
After a professional scrutiny, prolonged to the limit of politeness,
"Pardon me," he said; "one asking information should be willing to
impart it.  Are you wounded?" he added, smiling.

"Not seriously--it seems."

The man removed the unmilitary hat, put his hand to his head, passed
it through his hair and, withdrawing it, attentively considered the
palm.

"I was struck by a bullet and have been unconscious.  It must have
been a light, glancing blow:  I find no blood and feel no pain.  I
will not trouble you for treatment, but will you kindly direct me to
my command--to any part of the Federal army--if you know?"

Again the doctor did not immediately reply:  he was recalling much
that is recorded in the books of his profession--something about lost
identity and the effect of familiar scenes in restoring it.  At
length he looked the man in the face, smiled, and said:

"Lieutenant, you are not wearing the uniform of your rank and
service."

At this the man glanced down at his civilian attire, lifted his eyes,
and said with hesitation:

"That is true.  I--I don't quite understand."

Still regarding him sharply but not unsympathetically the man of
science bluntly inquired:

"How old are you?"

"Twenty-three--if that has anything to do with it."

"You don't look it; I should hardly have guessed you to be just
that."

The man was growing impatient.  "We need not discuss that," he said;
"I want to know about the army.  Not two hours ago I saw a column of
troops moving northward on this road.  You must have met them.  Be
good enough to tell me the color of their clothing, which I was
unable to make out, and I'll trouble you no more."

"You are quite sure that you saw them?"

"Sure?  My God, sir, I could have counted them!"

"Why, really," said the physician, with an amusing consciousness of
his own resemblance to the loquacious barber of the Arabian Nights,
"this is very interesting.  I met no troops."

The man looked at him coldly, as if he had himself observed the
likeness to the barber.  "It is plain," he said, "that you do not
care to assist me.  Sir, you may go to the devil!"

He turned and strode away, very much at random, across the dewy
fields, his half-penitent tormentor quietly watching him from his
point of vantage in the saddle till he disappeared beyond an array of
trees.


III--THE DANGER OF LOOKING INTO A POOL OF WATER


After leaving the road the man slackened his pace, and now went
forward, rather deviously, with a distinct feeling of fatigue.  He
could not account for this, though truly the interminable loquacity
of that country doctor offered itself in explanation.  Seating
himself upon a rock, he laid one hand upon his knee, back upward, and
casually looked at it.  It was lean and withered.  He lifted both
hands to his face.  It was seamed and furrowed; he could trace the
lines with the tips of his fingers.  How strange!--a mere bullet-
stroke and a brief unconsciousness should not make one a physical
wreck.

"I must have been a long time in hospital," he said aloud.  "Why,
what a fool I am!  The battle was in December, and it is now summer!"
He laughed.  "No wonder that fellow thought me an escaped lunatic.
He was wrong:  I am only an escaped patient."

At a little distance a small plot of ground enclosed by a stone wall
caught his attention.  With no very definite intent he rose and went
to it.  In the center was a square, solid monument of hewn stone.  It
was brown with age, weather-worn at the angles, spotted with moss and
lichen.  Between the massive blocks were strips of grass the leverage
of whose roots had pushed them apart.  In answer to the challenge of
this ambitious structure Time had laid his destroying hand upon it,
and it would soon be "one with Nineveh and Tyre."  In an inscription
on one side his eye caught a familiar name.  Shaking with excitement,
he craned his body across the wall and read:


HAZEN'S BRIGADE
to
The Memory of Its Soldiers
who fell at
Stone River, Dec. 31, 1862.


The man fell back from the wall, faint and sick.  Almost within an
arm's length was a little depression in the earth; it had been filled
by a recent rain--a pool of clear water.  He crept to it to revive
himself, lifted the upper part of his body on his trembling arms,
thrust forward his head and saw the reflection of his face, as in a
mirror.  He uttered a terrible cry.  His arms gave way; he fell, face
downward, into the pool and yielded up the life that had spanned
another life.



A BABY TRAMP



If you had seen little Jo standing at the street corner in the rain,
you would hardly have admired him.  It was apparently an ordinary
autumn rainstorm, but the water which fell upon Jo (who was hardly
old enough to be either just or unjust, and so perhaps did not come
under the law of impartial distribution) appeared to have some
property peculiar to itself:  one would have said it was dark and
adhesive--sticky.  But that could hardly be so, even in Blackburg,
where things certainly did occur that were a good deal out of the
common.

For example, ten or twelve years before, a shower of small frogs had
fallen, as is credibly attested by a contemporaneous chronicle, the
record concluding with a somewhat obscure statement to the effect
that the chronicler considered it good growing-weather for Frenchmen.

Some years later Blackburg had a fall of crimson snow; it is cold in
Blackburg when winter is on, and the snows are frequent and deep.
There can be no doubt of it--the snow in this instance was of the
color of blood and melted into water of the same hue, if water it
was, not blood.  The phenomenon had attracted wide attention, and
science had as many explanations as there were scientists who knew
nothing about it.  But the men of Blackburg--men who for many years
had lived right there where the red snow fell, and might be supposed
to know a good deal about the matter--shook their heads and said
something would come of it.

And something did, for the next summer was made memorable by the
prevalence of a mysterious disease--epidemic, endemic, or the Lord
knows what, though the physicians didn't--which carried away a full
half of the population.  Most of the other half carried themselves
away and were slow to return, but finally came back, and were now
increasing and multiplying as before, but Blackburg had not since
been altogether the same.

Of quite another kind, though equally "out of the common," was the
incident of Hetty Parlow's ghost.  Hetty Parlow's maiden name had
been Brownon, and in Blackburg that meant more than one would think.

The Brownons had from time immemorial--from the very earliest of the
old colonial days--been the leading family of the town.  It was the
richest and it was the best, and Blackburg would have shed the last
drop of its plebeian blood in defense of the Brownon fair fame.  As
few of the family's members had ever been known to live permanently
away from Blackburg, although most of them were educated elsewhere
and nearly all had traveled, there was quite a number of them.  The
men held most of the public offices, and the women were foremost in
all good works.  Of these latter, Hetty was most beloved by reason of
the sweetness of her disposition, the purity of her character and her
singular personal beauty.  She married in Boston a young scapegrace
named Parlow, and like a good Brownon brought him to Blackburg
forthwith and made a man and a town councilman of him.  They had a
child which they named Joseph and dearly loved, as was then the
fashion among parents in all that region.  Then they died of the
mysterious disorder already mentioned, and at the age of one whole
year Joseph set up as an orphan.

Unfortunately for Joseph the disease which had cut off his parents
did not stop at that; it went on and extirpated nearly the whole
Brownon contingent and its allies by marriage; and those who fled did
not return.  The tradition was broken, the Brownon estates passed
into alien hands and the only Brownons remaining in that place were
underground in Oak Hill Cemetery, where, indeed, was a colony of them
powerful enough to resist the encroachment of surrounding tribes and
hold the best part of the grounds.  But about the ghost:

One night, about three years after the death of Hetty Parlow, a
number of the young people of Blackburg were passing Oak Hill
Cemetery in a wagon--if you have been there you will remember that
the road to Greenton runs alongside it on the south.  They had been
attending a May Day festival at Greenton; and that serves to fix the
date.  Altogether there may have been a dozen, and a jolly party they
were, considering the legacy of gloom left by the town's recent
somber experiences.  As they passed the cemetery the man driving
suddenly reined in his team with an exclamation of surprise.  It was
sufficiently surprising, no doubt, for just ahead, and almost at the
roadside, though inside the cemetery, stood the ghost of Hetty
Parlow.  There could be no doubt of it, for she had been personally
known to every youth and maiden in the party.  That established the
thing's identity; its character as ghost was signified by all the
customary signs--the shroud, the long, undone hair, the "far-away
look"--everything.  This disquieting apparition was stretching out
its arms toward the west, as if in supplication for the evening star,
which, certainly, was an alluring object, though obviously out of
reach.  As they all sat silent (so the story goes) every member of
that party of merrymakers--they had merry-made on coffee and lemonade
only--distinctly heard that ghost call the name "Joey, Joey!"  A
moment later nothing was there.  Of course one does not have to
believe all that.

Now, at that moment, as was afterward ascertained, Joey was wandering
about in the sage-brush on the opposite side of the continent, near
Winnemucca, in the State of Nevada.  He had been taken to that town
by some good persons distantly related to his dead father, and by
them adopted and tenderly cared for.  But on that evening the poor
child had strayed from home and was lost in the desert.

His after history is involved in obscurity and has gaps which
conjecture alone can fill.  It is known that he was found by a family
of Piute Indians, who kept the little wretch with them for a time and
then sold him--actually sold him for money to a woman on one of the
east-bound trains, at a station a long way from Winnemucca.  The
woman professed to have made all manner of inquiries, but all in
vain:  so, being childless and a widow, she adopted him herself.  At
this point of his career Jo seemed to be getting a long way from the
condition of orphanage; the interposition of a multitude of parents
between himself and that woeful state promised him a long immunity
from its disadvantages.

Mrs. Darnell, his newest mother, lived in Cleveland, Ohio.  But her
adopted son did not long remain with her.  He was seen one afternoon
by a policeman, new to that beat, deliberately toddling away from her
house, and being questioned answered that he was "a doin' home."  He
must have traveled by rail, somehow, for three days later he was in
the town of Whiteville, which, as you know, is a long way from
Blackburg.  His clothing was in pretty fair condition, but he was
sinfully dirty.  Unable to give any account of himself he was
arrested as a vagrant and sentenced to imprisonment in the Infants'
Sheltering Home--where he was washed.

Jo ran away from the Infants' Sheltering Home at Whiteville--just
took to the woods one day, and the Home knew him no more forever.

We find him next, or rather get back to him, standing forlorn in the
cold autumn rain at a suburban street corner in Blackburg; and it
seems right to explain now that the raindrops falling upon him there
were really not dark and gummy; they only failed to make his face and
hands less so.  Jo was indeed fearfully and wonderfully besmirched,
as by the hand of an artist.  And the forlorn little tramp had no
shoes; his feet were bare, red, and swollen, and when he walked he
limped with both legs.  As to clothing--ah, you would hardly have had
the skill to name any single garment that he wore, or say by what
magic he kept it upon him.  That he was cold all over and all through
did not admit of a doubt; he knew it himself.  Anyone would have been
cold there that evening; but, for that reason, no one else was there.
How Jo came to be there himself, he could not for the flickering
little life of him have told, even if gifted with a vocabulary
exceeding a hundred words.  From the way he stared about him one
could have seen that he had not the faintest notion of where (nor
why) he was.

Yet he was not altogether a fool in his day and generation; being
cold and hungry, and still able to walk a little by bending his knees
very much indeed and putting his feet down toes first, he decided to
enter one of the houses which flanked the street at long intervals
and looked so bright and warm.  But when he attempted to act upon
that very sensible decision a burly dog came bowsing out and disputed
his right.  Inexpressibly frightened and believing, no doubt (with
some reason, too) that brutes without meant brutality within, he
hobbled away from all the houses, and with gray, wet fields to right
of him and gray, wet fields to left of him--with the rain half
blinding him and the night coming in mist and darkness, held his way
along the road that leads to Greenton.  That is to say, the road
leads those to Greenton who succeed in passing the Oak Hill Cemetery.
A considerable number every year do not.

Jo did not.

They found him there the next morning, very wet, very cold, but no
longer hungry.  He had apparently entered the cemetery gate--hoping,
perhaps, that it led to a house where there was no dog--and gone
blundering about in the darkness, falling over many a grave, no
doubt, until he had tired of it all and given up.  The little body
lay upon one side, with one soiled cheek upon one soiled hand, the
other hand tucked away among the rags to make it warm, the other
cheek washed clean and white at last, as for a kiss from one of God's
great angels.  It was observed--though nothing was thought of it at
the time, the body being as yet unidentified--that the little fellow
was lying upon the grave of Hetty Parlow.  The grave, however, had
not opened to receive him.  That is a circumstance which, without
actual irreverence, one may wish had been ordered otherwise.



THE NIGHT-DOINGS AT "DEADMAN'S"
A STORY THAT IS UNTRUE



It was a singularly sharp night, and clear as the heart of a diamond.
Clear nights have a trick of being keen.  In darkness you may be cold
and not know it; when you see, you suffer.  This night was bright
enough to bite like a serpent.  The moon was moving mysteriously
along behind the giant pines crowning the South Mountain, striking a
cold sparkle from the crusted snow, and bringing out against the
black west the ghostly outlines of the Coast Range, beyond which lay
the invisible Pacific.  The snow had piled itself, in the open spaces
along the bottom of the gulch, into long ridges that seemed to heave,
and into hills that appeared to toss and scatter spray.  The spray
was sunlight, twice reflected:  dashed once from the moon, once from
the snow.

In this snow many of the shanties of the abandoned mining camp were
obliterated, (a sailor might have said they had gone down) and at
irregular intervals it had overtopped the tall trestles which had
once supported a river called a flume; for, of course, "flume" is
flumen.  Among the advantages of which the mountains cannot deprive
the gold-hunter is the privilege of speaking Latin.  He says of his
dead neighbor, "He has gone up the flume."  This is not a bad way to
say, "His life has returned to the Fountain of Life."

While putting on its armor against the assaults of the wind, this
snow had neglected no coign of vantage.  Snow pursued by the wind is
not wholly unlike a retreating army.  In the open field it ranges
itself in ranks and battalions; where it can get a foothold it makes
a stand; where it can take cover it does so.  You may see whole
platoons of snow cowering behind a bit of broken wall.  The devious
old road, hewn out of the mountain side, was full of it.  Squadron
upon squadron had struggled to escape by this line, when suddenly
pursuit had ceased.  A more desolate and dreary spot than Deadman's
Gulch in a winter midnight it is impossible to imagine.  Yet Mr.
Hiram Beeson elected to live there, the sole inhabitant.

Away up the side of the North Mountain his little pine-log shanty
projected from its single pane of glass a long, thin beam of light,
and looked not altogether unlike a black beetle fastened to the
hillside with a bright new pin.  Within it sat Mr. Beeson himself,
before a roaring fire, staring into its hot heart as if he had never
before seen such a thing in all his life.  He was not a comely man.
He was gray; he was ragged and slovenly in his attire; his face was
wan and haggard; his eyes were too bright.  As to his age, if one had
attempted to guess it, one might have said forty-seven, then
corrected himself and said seventy-four.  He was really twenty-eight.
Emaciated he was; as much, perhaps, as he dared be, with a needy
undertaker at Bentley's Flat and a new and enterprising coroner at
Sonora.  Poverty and zeal are an upper and a nether millstone.  It is
dangerous to make a third in that kind of sandwich.

As Mr. Beeson sat there, with his ragged elbows on his ragged knees,
his lean jaws buried in his lean hands, and with no apparent
intention of going to bed, he looked as if the slightest movement
would tumble him to pieces.  Yet during the last hour he had winked
no fewer than three times.

There was a sharp rapping at the door.  A rap at that time of night
and in that weather might have surprised an ordinary mortal who had
dwelt two years in the gulch without seeing a human face, and could
not fail to know that the country was impassable; but Mr. Beeson did
not so much as pull his eyes out of the coals.  And even when the
door was pushed open he only shrugged a little more closely into
himself, as one does who is expecting something that he would rather
not see.  You may observe this movement in women when, in a mortuary
chapel, the coffin is borne up the aisle behind them.

But when a long old man in a blanket overcoat, his head tied up in a
handkerchief and nearly his entire face in a muffler, wearing green
goggles and with a complexion of glittering whiteness where it could
be seen, strode silently into the room, laying a hard, gloved hand on
Mr. Beeson's shoulder, the latter so far forgot himself as to look up
with an appearance of no small astonishment; whomever he may have
been expecting, he had evidently not counted on meeting anyone like
this.  Nevertheless, the sight of this unexpected guest produced in
Mr. Beeson the following sequence:  a feeling of astonishment; a
sense of gratification; a sentiment of profound good will.  Rising
from his seat, he took the knotty hand from his shoulder, and shook
it up and down with a fervor quite unaccountable; for in the old
man's aspect was nothing to attract, much to repel.  However,
attraction is too general a property for repulsion to be without it.
The most attractive object in the world is the face we instinctively
cover with a cloth.  When it becomes still more attractive--
fascinating--we put seven feet of earth above it.

"Sir," said Mr. Beeson, releasing the old man's hand, which fell
passively against his thigh with a quiet clack, "it is an extremely
disagreeable night.  Pray be seated; I am very glad to see you."

Mr. Beeson spoke with an easy good breeding that one would hardly
have expected, considering all things.  Indeed, the contrast between
his appearance and his manner was sufficiently surprising to be one
of the commonest of social phenomena in the mines.  The old man
advanced a step toward the fire, glowing cavernously in the green
goggles.  Mr. Beeson resumed:

"You bet your life I am!"

Mr. Beeson's elegance was not too refined; it had made reasonable
concessions to local taste.  He paused a moment, letting his eyes
drop from the muffled head of his guest, down along the row of moldy
buttons confining the blanket overcoat, to the greenish cowhide boots
powdered with snow, which had begun to melt and run along the floor
in little rills.  He took an inventory of his guest, and appeared
satisfied.  Who would not have been?  Then he continued:

"The cheer I can offer you is, unfortunately, in keeping with my
surroundings; but I shall esteem myself highly favored if it is your
pleasure to partake of it, rather than seek better at Bentley's
Flat."

With a singular refinement of hospitable humility Mr. Beeson spoke as
if a sojourn in his warm cabin on such a night, as compared with
walking fourteen miles up to the throat in snow with a cutting crust,
would be an intolerable hardship.  By way of reply, his guest
unbuttoned the blanket overcoat.  The host laid fresh fuel on the
fire, swept the hearth with the tail of a wolf, and added:

"But _I_ think you'd better skedaddle."

The old man took a seat by the fire, spreading his broad soles to the
heat without removing his hat.  In the mines the hat is seldom
removed except when the boots are.  Without further remark Mr. Beeson
also seated himself in a chair which had been a barrel, and which,
retaining much of its original character, seemed to have been
designed with a view to preserving his dust if it should please him
to crumble.  For a moment there was silence; then, from somewhere
among the pines, came the snarling yelp of a coyote; and
simultaneously the door rattled in its frame.  There was no other
connection between the two incidents than that the coyote has an
aversion to storms, and the wind was rising; yet there seemed somehow
a kind of supernatural conspiracy between the two, and Mr. Beeson
shuddered with a vague sense of terror.  He recovered himself in a
moment and again addressed his guest.

"There are strange doings here.  I will tell you everything, and then
if you decide to go I shall hope to accompany you over the worst of
the way; as far as where Baldy Peterson shot Ben Hike--I dare say you
know the place."

The old man nodded emphatically, as intimating not merely that he
did, but that he did indeed.

"Two years ago," began Mr. Beeson, "I, with two companions, occupied
this house; but when the rush to the Flat occurred we left, along
with the rest.  In ten hours the Gulch was deserted.  That evening,
however, I discovered I had left behind me a valuable pistol (that is
it) and returned for it, passing the night here alone, as I have
passed every night since.  I must explain that a few days before we
left, our Chinese domestic had the misfortune to die while the ground
was frozen so hard that it was impossible to dig a grave in the usual
way.  So, on the day of our hasty departure, we cut through the floor
there, and gave him such burial as we could.  But before putting him
down I had the extremely bad taste to cut off his pigtail and spike
it to that beam above his grave, where you may see it at this moment,
or, preferably, when warmth has given you leisure for observation.

"I stated, did I not, that the Chinaman came to his death from
natural causes?  I had, of course, nothing to do with that, and
returned through no irresistible attraction, or morbid fascination,
but only because I had forgotten a pistol.  This is clear to you, is
it not, sir?"

The visitor nodded gravely.  He appeared to be a man of few words, if
any.  Mr. Beeson continued:

"According to the Chinese faith, a man is like a kite:  he cannot go
to heaven without a tail.  Well, to shorten this tedious story--
which, however, I thought it my duty to relate--on that night, while
I was here alone and thinking of anything but him, that Chinaman came
back for his pigtail.

"He did not get it."

At this point Mr. Beeson relapsed into blank silence.  Perhaps he was
fatigued by the unwonted exercise of speaking; perhaps he had
conjured up a memory that demanded his undivided attention.  The wind
was now fairly abroad, and the pines along the mountainside sang with
singular distinctness.  The narrator continued:

"You say you do not see much in that, and I must confess I do not
myself.

"But he keeps coming!"

There was another long silence, during which both stared into the
fire without the movement of a limb.  Then Mr. Beeson broke out,
almost fiercely, fixing his eyes on what he could see of the
impassive face of his auditor:

"Give it him?  Sir, in this matter I have no intention of troubling
anyone for advice.  You will pardon me, I am sure"--here he became
singularly persuasive--"but I have ventured to nail that pigtail
fast, and have assumed the somewhat onerous obligation of guarding
it.  So it is quite impossible to act on your considerate suggestion.

"Do you play me for a Modoc?"

Nothing could exceed the sudden ferocity with which he thrust this
indignant remonstrance into the ear of his guest.  It was as if he
had struck him on the side of the head with a steel gauntlet.  It was
a protest, but it was a challenge.  To be mistaken for a coward--to
be played for a Modoc:  these two expressions are one.  Sometimes it
is a Chinaman.  Do you play me for a Chinaman? is a question
frequently addressed to the ear of the suddenly dead.

Mr. Beeson's buffet produced no effect, and after a moment's pause,
during which the wind thundered in the chimney like the sound of
clods upon a coffin, he resumed:

"But, as you say, it is wearing me out.  I feel that the life of the
last two years has been a mistake--a mistake that corrects itself;
you see how.  The grave!  No; there is no one to dig it.  The ground
is frozen, too.  But you are very welcome.  You may say at Bentley's-
-but that is not important.  It was very tough to cut:  they braid
silk into their pigtails.  Kwaagh."

Mr. Beeson was speaking with his eyes shut, and he wandered.  His
last word was a snore.  A moment later he drew a long breath, opened
his eyes with an effort, made a single remark, and fell into a deep
sleep.  What he said was this:

"They are swiping my dust!"

Then the aged stranger, who had not uttered one word since his
arrival, arose from his seat and deliberately laid off his outer
clothing, looking as angular in his flannels as the late Signorina
Festorazzi, an Irish woman, six feet in height, and weighing fifty-
six pounds, who used to exhibit herself in her chemise to the people
of San Francisco.  He then crept into one of the "bunks," having
first placed a revolver in easy reach, according to the custom of the
country.  This revolver he took from a shelf, and it was the one
which Mr. Beeson had mentioned as that for which he had returned to
the Gulch two years before.

In a few moments Mr. Beeson awoke, and seeing that his guest had
retired he did likewise.  But before doing so he approached the long,
plaited wisp of pagan hair and gave it a powerful tug, to assure
himself that it was fast and firm.  The two beds--mere shelves
covered with blankets not overclean--faced each other from opposite
sides of the room, the little square trapdoor that had given access
to the Chinaman's grave being midway between.  This, by the way, was
crossed by a double row of spike-heads.  In his resistance to the
supernatural, Mr. Beeson had not disdained the use of material
precautions.

The fire was now low, the flames burning bluely and petulantly, with
occasional flashes, projecting spectral shadows on the walls--shadows
that moved mysteriously about, now dividing, now uniting.  The shadow
of the pendent queue, however, kept moodily apart, near the roof at
the further end of the room, looking like a note of admiration.  The
song of the pines outside had now risen to the dignity of a triumphal
hymn.  In the pauses the silence was dreadful.

It was during one of these intervals that the trap in the floor began
to lift.  Slowly and steadily it rose, and slowly and steadily rose
the swaddled head of the old man in the bunk to observe it.  Then,
with a clap that shook the house to its foundation, it was thrown
clean back, where it lay with its unsightly spikes pointing
threateningly upward.  Mr. Beeson awoke, and without rising, pressed
his fingers into his eyes.  He shuddered; his teeth chattered.  His
guest was now reclining on one elbow, watching the proceedings with
the goggles that glowed like lamps.

Suddenly a howling gust of wind swooped down the chimney, scattering
ashes and smoke in all directions, for a moment obscuring everything.
When the firelight again illuminated the room there was seen, sitting
gingerly on the edge of a stool by the hearthside, a swarthy little
man of prepossessing appearance and dressed with faultless taste,
nodding to the old man with a friendly and engaging smile.  "From San
Francisco, evidently," thought Mr. Beeson, who having somewhat
recovered from his fright was groping his way to a solution of the
evening's events.

But now another actor appeared upon the scene.  Out of the square
black hole in the middle of the floor protruded the head of the
departed Chinaman, his glassy eyes turned upward in their angular
slits and fastened on the dangling queue above with a look of
yearning unspeakable.  Mr. Beeson groaned, and again spread his hands
upon his face.  A mild odor of opium pervaded the place.  The
phantom, clad only in a short blue tunic quilted and silken but
covered with grave-mold, rose slowly, as if pushed by a weak spiral
spring.  Its knees were at the level of the floor, when with a quick
upward impulse like the silent leaping of a flame it grasped the
queue with both hands, drew up its body and took the tip in its
horrible yellow teeth.  To this it clung in a seeming frenzy,
grimacing ghastly, surging and plunging from side to side in its
efforts to disengage its property from the beam, but uttering no
sound.  It was like a corpse artificially convulsed by means of a
galvanic battery.  The contrast between its superhuman activity and
its silence was no less than hideous!

Mr. Beeson cowered in his bed.  The swarthy little gentleman
uncrossed his legs, beat an impatient tattoo with the toe of his boot
and consulted a heavy gold watch.  The old man sat erect and quietly
laid hold of the revolver.

Bang!

Like a body cut from the gallows the Chinaman plumped into the black
hole below, carrying his tail in his teeth.  The trapdoor turned
over, shutting down with a snap.  The swarthy little gentleman from
San Francisco sprang nimbly from his perch, caught something in the
air with his hat, as a boy catches a butterfly, and vanished into the
chimney as if drawn up by suction.

From away somewhere in the outer darkness floated in through the open
door a faint, far cry--a long, sobbing wail, as of a child death-
strangled in the desert, or a lost soul borne away by the Adversary.
It may have been the coyote.

In the early days of the following spring a party of miners on their
way to new diggings passed along the Gulch, and straying through the
deserted shanties found in one of them the body of Hiram Beeson,
stretched upon a bunk, with a bullet hole through the heart.  The
ball had evidently been fired from the opposite side of the room, for
in one of the oaken beams overhead was a shallow blue dint, where it
had struck a knot and been deflected downward to the breast of its
victim.  Strongly attached to the same beam was what appeared to be
an end of a rope of braided horsehair, which had been cut by the
bullet in its passage to the knot.  Nothing else of interest was
noted, excepting a suit of moldy and incongruous clothing, several
articles of which were afterward identified by respectable witnesses
as those in which certain deceased citizens of Deadman's had been
buried years before.  But it is not easy to understand how that could
be, unless, indeed, the garments had been worn as a disguise by Death
himself--which is hardly credible.



BEYOND THE WALL



Many years ago, on my way from Hongkong to New York, I assed a week
in San Francisco.  A long time had gone by since I had been in that
city, during which my ventures in the Orient had prospered beyond my
hope; I was rich and could afford to revisit my own country to renew
my friendship with such of the companions of my youth as still lived
and remembered me with the old affection.  Chief of these, I hoped,
was Mohun Dampier, an old schoolmate with whom I had held a desultory
correspondence which had long ceased, as is the way of correspondence
between men.  You may have observed that the indisposition to write a
merely social letter is in the ratio of the square of the distance
between you and your correspondent.  It is a law.

I remembered Dampier as a handsome, strong young fellow of scholarly
tastes, with an aversion to work and a marked indifference to many of
the things that the world cares for, including wealth, of which,
however, he had inherited enough to put him beyond the reach of want.
In his family, one of the oldest and most aristocratic in the
country, it was, I think, a matter of pride that no member of it had
ever been in trade nor politics, nor suffered any kind of
distinction.  Mohun was a trifle sentimental, and had in him a
singular element of superstition, which led him to the study of all
manner of occult subjects, although his sane mental health
safeguarded him against fantastic and perilous faiths.  He made
daring incursions into the realm of the unreal without renouncing his
residence in the partly surveyed and charted region of what we are
pleased to call certitude.

The night of my visit to him was stormy.  The Californian winter was
on, and the incessant rain plashed in the deserted streets, or,
lifted by irregular gusts of wind, was hurled against the houses with
incredible fury.  With no small difficulty my cabman found the right
place, away out toward the ocean beach, in a sparsely populated
suburb.  The dwelling, a rather ugly one, apparently, stood in the
center of its grounds, which as nearly as I could make out in the
gloom were destitute of either flowers or grass.  Three or four
trees, writhing and moaning in the torment of the tempest, appeared
to be trying to escape from their dismal environment and take the
chance of finding a better one out at sea.  The house was a two-story
brick structure with a tower, a story higher, at one corner.  In a
window of that was the only visible light.  Something in the
appearance of the place made me shudder, a performance that may have
been assisted by a rill of rain-water down my back as I scuttled to
cover in the doorway.

In answer to my note apprising him of my wish to call, Dampier had
written, "Don't ring--open the door and come up."  I did so.  The
staircase was dimly lighted by a single gas-jet at the top of the
second flight.  I managed to reach the landing without disaster and
entered by an open door into the lighted square room of the tower.
Dampier came forward in gown and slippers to receive me, giving me
the greeting that I wished, and if I had held a thought that it might
more fitly have been accorded me at the front door the first look at
him dispelled any sense of his inhospitality.

He was not the same.  Hardly past middle age, he had gone gray and
had acquired a pronounced stoop.  His figure was thin and angular,
his face deeply lined, his complexion dead-white, without a touch of
color.  His eyes, unnaturally large, glowed with a fire that was
almost uncanny.

He seated me, proffered a cigar, and with grave and obvious sincerity
assured me of the pleasure that it gave him to meet me.  Some
unimportant conversation followed, but all the while I was dominated
by a melancholy sense of the great change in him.  This he must have
perceived, for he suddenly said with a bright enough smile, "You are
disappointed in me--non sum qualis eram."

I hardly knew what to reply, but managed to say:  "Why, really, I
don't know:  your Latin is about the same."

He brightened again.  "No," he said, "being a dead language, it grows
in appropriateness.  But please have the patience to wait:  where I
am going there is perhaps a better tongue.  Will you care to have a
message in it?"

The smile faded as he spoke, and as he concluded he was looking into
my eyes with a gravity that distressed me.  Yet I would not surrender
myself to his mood, nor permit him to see how deeply his prescience
of death affected me.

"I fancy that it will be long," I said, "before human speech will
cease to serve our need; and then the need, with its possibilities of
service, will have passed."

He made no reply, and I too was silent, for the talk had taken a
dispiriting turn, yet I knew not how to give it a more agreeable
character.  Suddenly, in a pause of the storm, when the dead silence
was almost startling by contrast with the previous uproar, I heard a
gentle tapping, which appeared to come from the wall behind my chair.
The sound was such as might have been made by a human hand, not as
upon a door by one asking admittance, but rather, I thought, as an
agreed signal, an assurance of someone's presence in an adjoining
room; most of us, I fancy, have had more experience of such
communications than we should care to relate.  I glanced at Dampier.
If possibly there was something of amusement in the look he did not
observe it.  He appeared to have forgotten my presence, and was
staring at the wall behind me with an expression in his eyes that I
am unable to name, although my memory of it is as vivid to-day as was
my sense of it then.  The situation was embarrassing; I rose to take
my leave.  At this he seemed to recover himself.

"Please be seated," he said; "it is nothing--no one is there."

But the tapping was repeated, and with the same gentle, slow
insistence as before.

"Pardon me," I said, "it is late.  May I call to-morrow?"

He smiled--a little mechanically, I thought.  "It is very delicate of
you," said he, "but quite needless.  Really, this is the only room in
the tower, and no one is there.  At least--" He left the sentence
incomplete, rose, and threw up a window, the only opening in the wall
from which the sound seemed to come.  "See."

Not clearly knowing what else to do I followed him to the window and
looked out.  A street-lamp some little distance away gave enough
light through the murk of the rain that was again falling in torrents
to make it entirely plain that "no one was there."  In truth there
was nothing but the sheer blank wall of the tower.

Dampier closed the window and signing me to my seat resumed his own.

The incident was not in itself particularly mysterious; any one of a
dozen explanations was possible (though none has occurred to me), yet
it impressed me strangely, the more, perhaps, from my friend's effort
to reassure me, which seemed to dignify it with a certain
significance and importance.  He had proved that no one was there,
but in that fact lay all the interest; and he proffered no
explanation.  His silence was irritating and made me resentful.

"My good friend," I said, somewhat ironically, I fear, "I am not
disposed to question your right to harbor as many spooks as you find
agreeable to your taste and consistent with your notions of
companionship; that is no business of mine.  But being just a plain
man of affairs, mostly of this world, I find spooks needless to my
peace and comfort.  I am going to my hotel, where my fellow-guests
are still in the flesh."

It was not a very civil speech, but he manifested no feeling about
it.  "Kindly remain," he said.  "I am grateful for your presence
here.  What you have heard to-night I believe myself to have heard
twice before.  Now I KNOW it was no illusion.  That is much to me--
more than you know.  Have a fresh cigar and a good stock of patience
while I tell you the story."

The rain was now falling more steadily, with a low, monotonous
susurration, interrupted at long intervals by the sudden slashing of
the boughs of the trees as the wind rose and failed.  The night was
well advanced, but both sympathy and curiosity held me a willing
listener to my friend's monologue, which I did not interrupt by a
single word from beginning to end.

"Ten years ago," he said, "I occupied a ground-floor apartment in one
of a row of houses, all alike, away at the other end of the town, on
what we call Rincon Hill.  This had been the best quarter of San
Francisco, but had fallen into neglect and decay, partly because the
primitive character of its domestic architecture no longer suited the
maturing tastes of our wealthy citizens, partly because certain
public improvements had made a wreck of it.  The row of dwellings in
one of which I lived stood a little way back from the street, each
having a miniature garden, separated from its neighbors by low iron
fences and bisected with mathematical precision by a box-bordered
gravel walk from gate to door.

"One morning as I was leaving my lodging I observed a young girl
entering the adjoining garden on the left.  It was a warm day in
June, and she was lightly gowned in white.  From her shoulders hung a
broad straw hat profusely decorated with flowers and wonderfully
beribboned in the fashion of the time.  My attention was not long
held by the exquisite simplicity of her costume, for no one could
look at her face and think of anything earthly.  Do not fear; I shall
not profane it by description; it was beautiful exceedingly.  All
that I had ever seen or dreamed of loveliness was in that matchless
living picture by the hand of the Divine Artist.  So deeply did it
move me that, without a thought of the impropriety of the act, I
unconsciously bared my head, as a devout Catholic or well-bred
Protestant uncovers before an image of the Blessed Virgin.  The
maiden showed no displeasure; she merely turned her glorious dark
eyes upon me with a look that made me catch my breath, and without
other recognition of my act passed into the house.  For a moment I
stood motionless, hat in hand, painfully conscious of my rudeness,
yet so dominated by the emotion inspired by that vision of
incomparable beauty that my penitence was less poignant than it
should have been.  Then I went my way, leaving my heart behind.  In
the natural course of things I should probably have remained away
until nightfall, but by the middle of the afternoon I was back in the
little garden, affecting an interest in the few foolish flowers that
I had never before observed.  My hope was vain; she did not appear.

"To a night of unrest succeeded a day of expectation and
disappointment, but on the day after, as I wandered aimlessly about
the neighborhood, I met her.  Of course I did not repeat my folly of
uncovering, nor venture by even so much as too long a look to
manifest an interest in her; yet my heart was beating audibly.  I
trembled and consciously colored as she turned her big black eyes
upon me with a look of obvious recognition entirely devoid of
boldness or coquetry.

"I will not weary you with particulars; many times afterward I met
the maiden, yet never either addressed her or sought to fix her
attention.  Nor did I take any action toward making her acquaintance.
Perhaps my forbearance, requiring so supreme an effort of self-
denial, will not be entirely clear to you.  That I was heels over
head in love is true, but who can overcome his habit of thought, or
reconstruct his character?

"I was what some foolish persons are pleased to call, and others,
more foolish, are pleased to be called--an aristocrat; and despite
her beauty, her charms and graces, the girl was not of my class.  I
had learned her name--which it is needless to speak--and something of
her family.  She was an orphan, a dependent niece of the impossible
elderly fat woman in whose lodging-house she lived.  My income was
small and I lacked the talent for marrying; it is perhaps a gift.  An
alliance with that family would condemn me to its manner of life,
part me from my books and studies, and in a social sense reduce me to
the ranks.  It is easy to deprecate such considerations as these and
I have not retained myself for the defense.  Let judgment be entered
against me, but in strict justice all my ancestors for generations
should be made co-defendants and I be permitted to plead in
mitigation of punishment the imperious mandate of heredity.  To a
mesalliance of that kind every globule of my ancestral blood spoke in
opposition.  In brief, my tastes, habits, instinct, with whatever of
reason my love had left me--all fought against it.  Moreover, I was
an irreclaimable sentimentalist, and found a subtle charm in an
impersonal and spiritual relation which acquaintance might vulgarize
and marriage would certainly dispel.  No woman, I argued, is what
this lovely creature seems.  Love is a delicious dream; why should I
bring about my own awakening?

"The course dictated by all this sense and sentiment was obvious.
Honor, pride, prudence, preservation of my ideals--all commanded me
to go away, but for that I was too weak.  The utmost that I could do
by a mighty effort of will was to cease meeting the girl, and that I
did.  I even avoided the chance encounters of the garden, leaving my
lodging only when I knew that she had gone to her music lessons, and
returning after nightfall.  Yet all the while I was as one in a
trance, indulging the most fascinating fancies and ordering my entire
intellectual life in accordance with my dream.  Ah, my friend, as one
whose actions have a traceable relation to reason, you cannot know
the fool's paradise in which I lived.

"One evening the devil put it into my head to be an unspeakable
idiot.  By apparently careless and purposeless questioning I learned
from my gossipy landlady that the young woman's bedroom adjoined my
own, a party-wall between.  Yielding to a sudden and coarse impulse I
gently rapped on the wall.  There was no response, naturally, but I
was in no mood to accept a rebuke.  A madness was upon me and I
repeated the folly, the offense, but again ineffectually, and I had
the decency to desist.

"An hour later, while absorbed in some of my infernal studies, I
heard, or thought I heard, my signal answered.  Flinging down my
books I sprang to the wall and as steadily as my beating heart would
permit gave three slow taps upon it.  This time the response was
distinct, unmistakable:  one, two, three--an exact repetition of my
signal.  That was all I could elicit, but it was enough--too much.

"The next evening, and for many evenings afterward, that folly went
on, I always having 'the last word.'  During the whole period I was
deliriously happy, but with the perversity of my nature I persevered
in my resolution not to see her.  Then, as I should have expected, I
got no further answers.  'She is disgusted,' I said to myself, 'with
what she thinks my timidity in making no more definite advances'; and
I resolved to seek her and make her acquaintance and--what?  I did
not know, nor do I now know, what might have come of it.  I know only
that I passed days and days trying to meet her, and all in vain; she
was invisible as well as inaudible.  I haunted the streets where we
had met, but she did not come.  From my window I watched the garden
in front of her house, but she passed neither in nor out.  I fell
into the deepest dejection, believing that she had gone away, yet
took no steps to resolve my doubt by inquiry of my landlady, to whom,
indeed, I had taken an unconquerable aversion from her having once
spoken of the girl with less of reverence than I thought befitting.

"There came a fateful night.  Worn out with emotion, irresolution and
despondency, I had retired early and fallen into such sleep as was
still possible to me.  In the middle of the night something--some
malign power bent upon the wrecking of my peace forever--caused me to
open my eyes and sit up, wide awake and listening intently for I knew
not what.  Then I thought I heard a faint tapping on the wall--the
mere ghost of the familiar signal.  In a few moments it was repeated:
one, two, three--no louder than before, but addressing a sense alert
and strained to receive it.  I was about to reply when the Adversary
of Peace again intervened in my affairs with a rascally suggestion of
retaliation.  She had long and cruelly ignored me; now I would ignore
her.  Incredible fatuity--may God forgive it!  All the rest of the
night I lay awake, fortifying my obstinacy with shameless
justifications and--listening.

"Late the next morning, as I was leaving the house, I met my
landlady, entering.

"'Good morning, Mr. Dampier,' she said.  'Have you heard the news?'

"I replied in words that I had heard no news; in manner, that I did
not care to hear any.  The manner escaped her observation.

"'About the sick young lady next door,' she babbled on.  'What! you
did not know?  Why, she has been ill for weeks.  And now--'

"I almost sprang upon her.  'And now,' I cried, 'now what?'

"'She is dead.'

"That is not the whole story.  In the middle of the night, as I
learned later, the patient, awakening from a long stupor after a week
of delirium, had asked--it was her last utterance--that her bed be
moved to the opposite side of the room.  Those in attendance had
thought the request a vagary of her delirium, but had complied.  And
there the poor passing soul had exerted its failing will to restore a
broken connection--a golden thread of sentiment between its innocence
and a monstrous baseness owning a blind, brutal allegiance to the Law
of Self.

"What reparation could I make?  Are there masses that can be said for
the repose of souls that are abroad such nights as this--spirits
'blown about by the viewless winds'--coming in the storm and darkness
with signs and portents, hints of memory and presages of doom?

"This is the third visitation.  On the first occasion I was too
skeptical to do more than verify by natural methods the character of
the incident; on the second, I responded to the signal after it had
been several times repeated, but without result.  To-night's
recurrence completes the 'fatal triad' expounded by Parapelius
Necromantius.  There is no more to tell."

When Dampier had finished his story I could think of nothing relevant
that I cared to say, and to question him would have been a hideous
impertinence.  I rose and bade him good night in a way to convey to
him a sense of my sympathy, which he silently acknowledged by a
pressure of the hand.  That night, alone with his sorrow and remorse,
he passed into the Unknown.



A PSYCHOLOGICAL SHIPWRECK



In the summer of 1874 I was in Liverpool, whither I had gone on
business for the mercantile house of Bronson & Jarrett, New York.  I
am William Jarrett; my partner was Zenas Bronson.  The firm failed
last year, and unable to endure the fall from affluence to poverty he
died.

Having finished my business, and feeling the lassitude and exhaustion
incident to its dispatch, I felt that a protracted sea voyage would
be both agreeable and beneficial, so instead of embarking for my
return on one of the many fine passenger steamers I booked for New
York on the sailing vessel Morrow, upon which I had shipped a large
and valuable invoice of the goods I had bought.  The Morrow was an
English ship with, of course, but little accommodation for
passengers, of whom there were only myself, a young woman and her
servant, who was a middle-aged negress.  I thought it singular that a
traveling English girl should be so attended, but she afterward
explained to me that the woman had been left with her family by a man
and his wife from South Carolina, both of whom had died on the same
day at the house of the young lady's father in Devonshire--a
circumstance in itself sufficiently uncommon to remain rather
distinctly in my memory, even had it not afterward transpired in
conversation with the young lady that the name of the man was William
Jarrett, the same as my own.  I knew that a branch of my family had
settled in South Carolina, but of them and their history I was
ignorant.

The Morrow sailed from the mouth of the Mersey on the 15th of June
and for several weeks we had fair breezes and unclouded skies.  The
skipper, an admirable seaman but nothing more, favored us with very
little of his society, except at his table; and the young woman, Miss
Janette Harford, and I became very well acquainted.  We were, in
truth, nearly always together, and being of an introspective turn of
mind I often endeavored to analyze and define the novel feeling with
which she inspired me--a secret, subtle, but powerful attraction
which constantly impelled me to seek her; but the attempt was
hopeless.  I could only be sure that at least it was not love.
Having assured myself of this and being certain that she was quite as
whole-hearted, I ventured one evening (I remember it was on the 3d of
July) as we sat on deck to ask her, laughingly, if she could assist
me to resolve my psychological doubt.

For a moment she was silent, with averted face, and I began to fear I
had been extremely rude and indelicate; then she fixed her eyes
gravely on my own.  In an instant my mind was dominated by as strange
a fancy as ever entered human consciousness.  It seemed as if she
were looking at me, not WITH, but THROUGH, those eyes--from an
immeasurable distance behind them--and that a number of other
persons, men, women and children, upon whose faces I caught strangely
familiar evanescent expressions, clustered about her, struggling with
gentle eagerness to look at me through the same orbs.  Ship, ocean,
sky--all had vanished.  I was conscious of nothing but the figures in
this extraordinary and fantastic scene.  Then all at once darkness
fell upon me, and anon from out of it, as to one who grows accustomed
by degrees to a dimmer light, my former surroundings of deck and mast
and cordage slowly resolved themselves.  Miss Harford had closed her
eyes and was leaning back in her chair, apparently asleep, the book
she had been reading open in her lap.  Impelled by surely I cannot
say what motive, I glanced at the top of the page; it was a copy of
that rare and curious work, "Denneker's Meditations," and the lady's
index finger rested on this passage:

"To sundry it is given to be drawn away, and to be apart from the
body for a season; for, as concerning rills which would flow across
each other the weaker is borne along by the stronger, so there be
certain of kin whose paths intersecting, their souls do bear company,
the while their bodies go fore-appointed ways, unknowing."


Miss Harford arose, shuddering; the sun had sunk below the horizon,
but it was not cold.  There was not a breath of wind; there were no
clouds in the sky, yet not a star was visible.  A hurried tramping
sounded on the deck; the captain, summoned from below, joined the
first officer, who stood looking at the barometer.  "Good God!" I
heard him exclaim.

An hour later the form of Janette Harford, invisible in the darkness
and spray, was torn from my grasp by the cruel vortex of the sinking
ship, and I fainted in the cordage of the floating mast to which I
had lashed myself.

It was by lamplight that I awoke.  I lay in a berth amid the familiar
surroundings of the stateroom of a steamer.  On a couch opposite sat
a man, half undressed for bed, reading a book.  I recognized the face
of my friend Gordon Doyle, whom I had met in Liverpool on the day of
my embarkation, when he was himself about to sail on the steamer City
of Prague, on which he had urged me to accompany him.

After some moments I now spoke his name.  He simply said, "Well," and
turned a leaf in his book without removing his eyes from the page.

"Doyle," I repeated, "did they save HER?"

He now deigned to look at me and smiled as if amused.  He evidently
thought me but half awake.

"Her?  Whom do you mean?"

"Janette Harford."

His amusement turned to amazement; he stared at me fixedly, saying
nothing.

"You will tell me after a while," I continued; "I suppose you will
tell me after a while."

A moment later I asked:  "What ship is this?"

Doyle stared again.  "The steamer City of Prague, bound from
Liverpool to New York, three weeks out with a broken shaft.
Principal passenger, Mr. Gordon Doyle; ditto lunatic, Mr. William
Jarrett.  These two distinguished travelers embarked together, but
they are about to part, it being the resolute intention of the former
to pitch the latter overboard."

I sat bolt upright.  "Do you mean to say that I have been for three
weeks a passenger on this steamer?"

"Yes, pretty nearly; this is the 3d of July."

"Have I been ill?"

"Right as a trivet all the time, and punctual at your meals."

"My God!  Doyle, there is some mystery here; do have the goodness to
be serious.  Was I not rescued from the wreck of the ship Morrow?"

Doyle changed color, and approaching me, laid his fingers on my
wrist.  A moment later, "What do you know of Janette Harford?" he
asked very calmly.

"First tell me what YOU know of her?"

Mr. Doyle gazed at me for some moments as if thinking what to do,
then seating himself again on the couch, said:

"Why should I not?  I am engaged to marry Janette Harford, whom I met
a year ago in London.  Her family, one of the wealthiest in
Devonshire, cut up rough about it, and we eloped--are eloping rather,
for on the day that you and I walked to the landing stage to go
aboard this steamer she and her faithful servant, a negress, passed
us, driving to the ship Morrow.  She would not consent to go in the
same vessel with me, and it had been deemed best that she take a
sailing vessel in order to avoid observation and lessen the risk of
detection.  I am now alarmed lest this cursed breaking of our
machinery may detain us so long that the Morrow will get to New York
before us, and the poor girl will not know where to go."

I lay still in my berth--so still I hardly breathed.  But the subject
was evidently not displeasing to Doyle, and after a short pause he
resumed:

"By the way, she is only an adopted daughter of the Harfords.  Her
mother was killed at their place by being thrown from a horse while
hunting, and her father, mad with grief, made away with himself the
same day.  No one ever claimed the child, and after a reasonable time
they adopted her.  She has grown up in the belief that she is their
daughter."

"Doyle, what book are you reading?"

"Oh, it's called 'Denneker's Meditations.'  It's a rum lot, Janette
gave it to me; she happened to have two copies.  Want to see it?"

He tossed me the volume, which opened as it fell.  On one of the
exposed pages was a marked passage:

"To sundry it is given to be drawn away, and to be apart from the
body for a season; for, as concerning rills which would flow across
each other the weaker is borne along by the stronger, so there be
certain of kin whose paths intersecting, their souls do bear company,
the while their bodies go fore-appointed ways, unknowing."

"She had--she has--a singular taste in reading," I managed to say,
mastering my agitation.

"Yes.  And now perhaps you will have the kindness to explain how you
knew her name and that of the ship she sailed in."

"You talked of her in your sleep," I said.

A week later we were towed into the port of New York.  But the Morrow
was never heard from.



THE MIDDLE TOE OF THE RIGHT FOOT



I

It is well known that the old Manton house is haunted.  In all the
rural district near about, and even in the town of Marshall, a mile
away, not one person of unbiased mind entertains a doubt of it;
incredulity is confined to those opinionated persons who will be
called "cranks" as soon as the useful word shall have penetrated the
intellectual demesne of the Marshall Advance.  The evidence that the
house is haunted is of two kinds:  the testimony of disinterested
witnesses who have had ocular proof, and that of the house itself.
The former may be disregarded and ruled out on any of the various
grounds of objection which may be urged against it by the ingenious;
but facts within the observation of all are material and controlling.

In the first place, the Manton house has been unoccupied by mortals
for more than ten years, and with its outbuildings is slowly falling
into decay--a circumstance which in itself the judicious will hardly
venture to ignore.  It stands a little way off the loneliest reach of
the Marshall and Harriston road, in an opening which was once a farm
and is still disfigured with strips of rotting fence and half covered
with brambles overrunning a stony and sterile soil long unacquainted
with the plow.  The house itself is in tolerably good condition,
though badly weather-stained and in dire need of attention from the
glazier, the smaller male population of the region having attested in
the manner of its kind its disapproval of dwelling without dwellers.
It is two stories in height, nearly square, its front pierced by a
single doorway flanked on each side by a window boarded up to the
very top.  Corresponding windows above, not protected, serve to admit
light and rain to the rooms of the upper floor.  Grass and weeds grow
pretty rankly all about, and a few shade trees, somewhat the worse
for wind, and leaning all in one direction, seem to be making a
concerted effort to run away.  In short, as the Marshall town
humorist explained in the columns of the Advance, "the proposition
that the Manton house is badly haunted is the only logical conclusion
from the premises."  The fact that in this dwelling Mr. Manton
thought it expedient one night some ten years ago to rise and cut the
throats of his wife and two small children, removing at once to
another part of the country, has no doubt done its share in directing
public attention to the fitness of the place for supernatural
phenomena.

To this house, one summer evening, came four men in a wagon.  Three
of them promptly alighted, and the one who had been driving hitched
the team to the only remaining post of what had been a fence.  The
fourth remained seated in the wagon.  "Come," said one of his
companions, approaching him, while the others moved away in the
direction of the dwelling--"this is the place."

The man addressed did not move.  "By God!" he said harshly, "this is
a trick, and it looks to me as if you were in it."

"Perhaps I am," the other said, looking him straight in the face and
speaking in a tone which had something of contempt in it.  "You will
remember, however, that the choice of place was with your own assent
left to the other side.  Of course if you are afraid of spooks--"

"I am afraid of nothing," the man interrupted with another oath, and
sprang to the ground.  The two then joined the others at the door,
which one of them had already opened with some difficulty, caused by
rust of lock and hinge.  All entered.  Inside it was dark, but the
man who had unlocked the door produced a candle and matches and made
a light.  He then unlocked a door on their right as they stood in the
passage.  This gave them entrance to a large, square room that the
candle but dimly lighted.  The floor had a thick carpeting of dust,
which partly muffled their footfalls.  Cobwebs were in the angles of
the walls and depended from the ceiling like strips of rotting lace,
making undulatory movements in the disturbed air.  The room had two
windows in adjoining sides, but from neither could anything be seen
except the rough inner surfaces of boards a few inches from the
glass.  There was no fireplace, no furniture; there was nothing:
besides the cobwebs and the dust, the four men were the only objects
there which were not a part of the structure.

Strange enough they looked in the yellow light of the candle.  The
one who had so reluctantly alighted was especially spectacular--he
might have been called sensational.  He was of middle age, heavily
built, deep chested and broad shouldered.  Looking at his figure, one
would have said that he had a giant's strength; at his features, that
he would use it like a giant.  He was clean shaven, his hair rather
closely cropped and gray.  His low forehead was seamed with wrinkles
above the eyes, and over the nose these became vertical.  The heavy
black brows followed the same law, saved from meeting only by an
upward turn at what would otherwise have been the point of contact.
Deeply sunken beneath these, glowed in the obscure light a pair of
eyes of uncertain color, but obviously enough too small.  There was
something forbidding in their expression, which was not bettered by
the cruel mouth and wide jaw.  The nose was well enough, as noses go;
one does not expect much of noses.  All that was sinister in the
man's face seemed accentuated by an unnatural pallor--he appeared
altogether bloodless.

The appearance of the other men was sufficiently commonplace:  they
were such persons as one meets and forgets that he met.  All were
younger than the man described, between whom and the eldest of the
others, who stood apart, there was apparently no kindly feeling.
They avoided looking at each other.

"Gentlemen," said the man holding the candle and keys, "I believe
everything is right.  Are you ready, Mr. Rosser?"

The man standing apart from the group bowed and smiled.

"And you, Mr. Grossmith?"

The heavy man bowed and scowled.

"You will be pleased to remove your outer clothing."

Their hats, coats, waistcoats and neckwear were soon removed and
thrown outside the door, in the passage.  The man with the candle now
nodded, and the fourth man--he who had urged Grossmith to leave the
wagon--produced from the pocket of his overcoat two long, murderous-
looking bowie-knives, which he drew now from their leather scabbards.

"They are exactly alike," he said, presenting one to each of the two
principals--for by this time the dullest observer would have
understood the nature of this meeting.  It was to be a duel to the
death.

Each combatant took a knife, examined it critically near the candle
and tested the strength of blade and handle across his lifted knee.
Their persons were then searched in turn, each by the second of the
other.

"If it is agreeable to you, Mr. Grossmith," said the man holding the
light, "you will place yourself in that corner."

He indicated the angle of the room farthest from the door, whither
Grossmith retired, his second parting from him with a grasp of the
hand which had nothing of cordiality in it.  In the angle nearest the
door Mr. Rosser stationed himself, and after a whispered consultation
his second left him, joining the other near the door.  At that moment
the candle was suddenly extinguished, leaving all in profound
darkness.  This may have been done by a draught from the opened door;
whatever the cause, the effect was startling.

"Gentlemen," said a voice which sounded strangely unfamiliar in the
altered condition affecting the relations of the senses--"gentlemen,
you will not move until you hear the closing of the outer door."

A sound of trampling ensued, then the closing of the inner door; and
finally the outer one closed with a concussion which shook the entire
building.

A few minutes afterward a belated farmer's boy met a light wagon
which was being driven furiously toward the town of Marshall.  He
declared that behind the two figures on the front seat stood a third,
with its hands upon the bowed shoulders of the others, who appeared
to struggle vainly to free themselves from its grasp.  This figure,
unlike the others, was clad in white, and had undoubtedly boarded the
wagon as it passed the haunted house.  As the lad could boast a
considerable former experience with the supernatural thereabouts his
word had the weight justly due to the testimony of an expert.  The
story (in connection with the next day's events) eventually appeared
in the Advance, with some slight literary embellishments and a
concluding intimation that the gentlemen referred to would be allowed
the use of the paper's columns for their version of the night's
adventure.  But the privilege remained without a claimant.

II

The events that led up to this "duel in the dark" were simple enough.
One evening three young men of the town of Marshall were sitting in a
quiet corner of the porch of the village hotel, smoking and
discussing such matters as three educated young men of a Southern
village would naturally find interesting.  Their names were King,
Sancher and Rosser.  At a little distance, within easy hearing, but
taking no part in the conversation, sat a fourth.  He was a stranger
to the others.  They merely knew that on his arrival by the stage-
coach that afternoon he had written in the hotel register the name
Robert Grossmith.  He had not been observed to speak to anyone except
the hotel clerk.  He seemed, indeed, singularly fond of his own
company--or, as the PERSONNEL of the Advance expressed it, "grossly
addicted to evil associations."  But then it should be said in
justice to the stranger that the PERSONNEL was himself of a too
convivial disposition fairly to judge one differently gifted, and
had, moreover, experienced a slight rebuff in an effort at an
"interview."

"I hate any kind of deformity in a woman," said King, "whether
natural or--acquired.  I have a theory that any physical defect has
its correlative mental and moral defect."

"I infer, then," said Rosser, gravely, "that a lady lacking the moral
advantage of a nose would find the struggle to become Mrs. King an
arduous enterprise."

"Of course you may put it that way," was the reply; "but, seriously,
I once threw over a most charming girl on learning quite accidentally
that she had suffered amputation of a toe.  My conduct was brutal if
you like, but if I had married that girl I should have been miserable
for life and should have made her so."

"Whereas," said Sancher, with a light laugh, "by marrying a gentleman
of more liberal views she escaped with a parted throat."

"Ah, you know to whom I refer.  Yes, she married Manton, but I don't
know about his liberality; I'm not sure but he cut her throat because
he discovered that she lacked that excellent thing in woman, the
middle toe of the right foot."

"Look at that chap!" said Rosser in a low voice, his eyes fixed upon
the stranger.

That chap was obviously listening intently to the conversation.

"Damn his impudence!" muttered King--"what ought we to do?"

"That's an easy one," Rosser replied, rising.  "Sir," he continued,
addressing the stranger, "I think it would be better if you would
remove your chair to the other end of the veranda.  The presence of
gentlemen is evidently an unfamiliar situation to you."

The man sprang to his feet and strode forward with clenched hands,
his face white with rage.  All were now standing.  Sancher stepped
between the belligerents.

"You are hasty and unjust," he said to Rosser; "this gentleman has
done nothing to deserve such language."

But Rosser would not withdraw a word.  By the custom of the country
and the time there could be but one outcome to the quarrel.

"I demand the satisfaction due to a gentleman," said the stranger,
who had become more calm.  "I have not an acquaintance in this
region.  Perhaps you, sir," bowing to Sancher, "will be kind enough
to represent me in this matter."

Sancher accepted the trust--somewhat reluctantly it must be
confessed, for the man's appearance and manner were not at all to his
liking.  King, who during the colloquy had hardly removed his eyes
from the stranger's face and had not spoken a word, consented with a
nod to act for Rosser, and the upshot of it was that, the principals
having retired, a meeting was arranged for the next evening.  The
nature of the arrangements has been already disclosed.  The duel with
knives in a dark room was once a commoner feature of Southwestern
life than it is likely to be again.  How thin a veneering of
"chivalry" covered the essential brutality of the code under which
such encounters were possible we shall see.

III

In the blaze of a midsummer noonday the old Manton house was hardly
true to its traditions.  It was of the earth, earthy.  The sunshine
caressed it warmly and affectionately, with evident disregard of its
bad reputation.  The grass greening all the expanse in its front
seemed to grow, not rankly, but with a natural and joyous exuberance,
and the weeds blossomed quite like plants.  Full of charming lights
and shadows and populous with pleasant-voiced birds, the neglected
shade trees no longer struggled to run away, but bent reverently
beneath their burdens of sun and song.  Even in the glassless upper
windows was an expression of peace and contentment, due to the light
within.  Over the stony fields the visible heat danced with a lively
tremor incompatible with the gravity which is an attribute of the
supernatural.

Such was the aspect under which the place presented itself to Sheriff
Adams and two other men who had come out from Marshall to look at it.
One of these men was Mr. King, the sheriff's deputy; the other, whose
name was Brewer, was a brother of the late Mrs. Manton.  Under a
beneficent law of the State relating to property which has been for a
certain period abandoned by an owner whose residence cannot be
ascertained, the sheriff was legal custodian of the Manton farm and
appurtenances thereunto belonging.  His present visit was in mere
perfunctory compliance with some order of a court in which Mr. Brewer
had an action to get possession of the property as heir to his
deceased sister.  By a mere coincidence, the visit was made on the
day after the night that Deputy King had unlocked the house for
another and very different purpose.  His presence now was not of his
own choosing:  he had been ordered to accompany his superior and at
the moment could think of nothing more prudent than simulated
alacrity in obedience to the command.

Carelessly opening the front door, which to his surprise was not
locked, the sheriff was amazed to see, lying on the floor of the
passage into which it opened, a confused heap of men's apparel.
Examination showed it to consist of two hats, and the same number of
coats, waistcoats and scarves, all in a remarkably good state of
preservation, albeit somewhat defiled by the dust in which they lay.
Mr. Brewer was equally astonished, but Mr. King's emotion is not of
record.  With a new and lively interest in his own actions the
sheriff now unlatched and pushed open a door on the right, and the
three entered.  The room was apparently vacant--no; as their eyes
became accustomed to the dimmer light something was visible in the
farthest angle of the wall.  It was a human figure--that of a man
crouching close in the corner.  Something in the attitude made the
intruders halt when they had barely passed the threshold.  The figure
more and more clearly defined itself.  The man was upon one knee, his
back in the angle of the wall, his shoulders elevated to the level of
his ears, his hands before his face, palms outward, the fingers
spread and crooked like claws; the white face turned upward on the
retracted neck had an expression of unutterable fright, the mouth
half open, the eyes incredibly expanded.  He was stone dead.  Yet,
with the exception of a bowie-knife, which had evidently fallen from
his own hand, not another object was in the room.

In thick dust that covered the floor were some confused footprints
near the door and along the wall through which it opened.  Along one
of the adjoining walls, too, past the boarded-up windows, was the
trail made by the man himself in reaching his corner.  Instinctively
in approaching the body the three men followed that trail.  The
sheriff grasped one of the outthrown arms; it was as rigid as iron,
and the application of a gentle force rocked the entire body without
altering the relation of its parts.  Brewer, pale with excitement,
gazed intently into the distorted face.  "God of mercy!" he suddenly
cried, "it is Manton!"

"You are right," said King, with an evident attempt at calmness:  "I
knew Manton.  He then wore a full beard and his hair long, but this
is he."

He might have added:  "I recognized him when he challenged Rosser.  I
told Rosser and Sancher who he was before we played him this horrible
trick.  When Rosser left this dark room at our heels, forgetting his
outer clothing in the excitement, and driving away with us in his
shirt sleeves--all through the discreditable proceedings we knew whom
we were dealing with, murderer and coward that he was!"

But nothing of this did Mr. King say.  With his better light he was
trying to penetrate the mystery of the man's death.  That he had not
once moved from the corner where he had been stationed; that his
posture was that of neither attack nor defense; that he had dropped
his weapon; that he had obviously perished of sheer horror of
something that he saw--these were circumstances which Mr. King's
disturbed intelligence could not rightly comprehend.

Groping in intellectual darkness for a clew to his maze of doubt, his
gaze, directed mechanically downward in the way of one who ponders
momentous matters, fell upon something which, there, in the light of
day and in the presence of living companions, affected him with
terror.  In the dust of years that lay thick upon the floor--leading
from the door by which they had entered, straight across the room to
within a yard of Manton's crouching corpse--were three parallel lines
of footprints--light but definite impressions of bare feet, the outer
ones those of small children, the inner a woman's.  From the point at
which they ended they did not return; they pointed all one way.
Brewer, who had observed them at the same moment, was leaning forward
in an attitude of rapt attention, horribly pale.

"Look at that!" he cried, pointing with both hands at the nearest
print of the woman's right foot, where she had apparently stopped and
stood.  "The middle toe is missing--it was Gertrude!"

Gertrude was the late Mrs. Manton, sister to Mr. Brewer.



JOHN MORTONSON'S FUNERAL {1}



John Mortonson was dead:  his lines in "the tragedy 'Man'" had all
been spoken and he had left the stage.

The body rested in a fine mahogany coffin fitted with a plate of
glass.  All arrangements for the funeral had been so well attended to
that had the deceased known he would doubtless have approved.  The
face, as it showed under the glass, was not disagreeable to look
upon:  it bore a faint smile, and as the death had been painless, had
not been distorted beyond the repairing power of the undertaker.  At
two o'clock of the afternoon the friends were to assemble to pay
their last tribute of respect to one who had no further need of
friends and respect.  The surviving members of the family came
severally every few minutes to the casket and wept above the placid
features beneath the glass.  This did them no good; it did no good to
John Mortonson; but in the presence of death reason and philosophy
are silent.

As the hour of two approached the friends began to arrive and after
offering such consolation to the stricken relatives as the
proprieties of the occasion required, solemnly seated themselves
about the room with an augmented consciousness of their importance in
the scheme funereal.  Then the minister came, and in that
overshadowing presence the lesser lights went into eclipse.  His
entrance was followed by that of the widow, whose lamentations filled
the room.  She approached the casket and after leaning her face
against the cold glass for a moment was gently led to a seat near her
daughter.  Mournfully and low the man of God began his eulogy of the
dead, and his doleful voice, mingled with the sobbing which it was
its purpose to stimulate and sustain, rose and fell, seemed to come
and go, like the sound of a sullen sea.  The gloomy day grew darker
as he spoke; a curtain of cloud underspread the sky and a few drops
of rain fell audibly.  It seemed as if all nature were weeping for
John Mortonson.

When the minister had finished his eulogy with prayer a hymn was sung
and the pall-bearers took their places beside the bier.  As the last
notes of the hymn died away the widow ran to the coffin, cast herself
upon it and sobbed hysterically.  Gradually, however, she yielded to
dissuasion, becoming more composed; and as the minister was in the
act of leading her away her eyes sought the face of the dead beneath
the glass.  She threw up her arms and with a shriek fell backward
insensible.

The mourners sprang forward to the coffin, the friends followed, and
as the clock on the mantel solemnly struck three all were staring
down upon the face of John Mortonson, deceased.

They turned away, sick and faint.  One man, trying in his terror to
escape the awful sight, stumbled against the coffin so heavily as to
knock away one of its frail supports.  The coffin fell to the floor,
the glass was shattered to bits by the concussion.

From the opening crawled John Mortonson's cat, which lazily leapt to
the floor, sat up, tranquilly wiped its crimson muzzle with a
forepaw, then walked with dignity from the room.



THE REALM OF THE UNREAL



For a part of the distance between Auburn and Newcastle the road--
first on one side of a creek and then on the other--occupies the
whole bottom of the ravine, being partly cut out of the steep
hillside, and partly built up with bowlders removed from the creek-
bed by the miners.  The hills are wooded, the course of the ravine is
sinuous.  In a dark night careful driving is required in order not to
go off into the water.  The night that I have in memory was dark, the
creek a torrent, swollen by a recent storm.  I had driven up from
Newcastle and was within about a mile of Auburn in the darkest and
narrowest part of the ravine, looking intently ahead of my horse for
the roadway.  Suddenly I saw a man almost under the animal's nose,
and reined in with a jerk that came near setting the creature upon
its haunches.

"I beg your pardon," I said; "I did not see you, sir."

"You could hardly be expected to see me," the man replied, civilly,
approaching the side of the vehicle; "and the noise of the creek
prevented my hearing you."

I at once recognized the voice, although five years had passed since
I had heard it.  I was not particularly well pleased to hear it now.

"You are Dr. Dorrimore, I think," said I.

"Yes; and you are my good friend Mr. Manrich.  I am more than glad to
see you--the excess," he added, with a light laugh, "being due to the
fact that I am going your way, and naturally expect an invitation to
ride with you."

"Which I extend with all my heart."

That was not altogether true.

Dr. Dorrimore thanked me as he seated himself beside me, and I drove
cautiously forward, as before.  Doubtless it is fancy, but it seems
to me now that the remaining distance was made in a chill fog; that I
was uncomfortably cold; that the way was longer than ever before, and
the town, when we reached it, cheerless, forbidding, and desolate.
It must have been early in the evening, yet I do not recollect a
light in any of the houses nor a living thing in the streets.
Dorrimore explained at some length how he happened to be there, and
where he had been during the years that had elapsed since I had seen
him.  I recall the fact of the narrative, but none of the facts
narrated.  He had been in foreign countries and had returned--this is
all that my memory retains, and this I already knew.  As to myself I
cannot remember that I spoke a word, though doubtless I did.  Of one
thing I am distinctly conscious:  the man's presence at my side was
strangely distasteful and disquieting--so much so that when I at last
pulled up under the lights of the Putnam House I experienced a sense
of having escaped some spiritual peril of a nature peculiarly
forbidding.  This sense of relief was somewhat modified by the
discovery that Dr. Dorrimore was living at the same hotel.

II

In partial explanation of my feelings regarding Dr. Dorrimore I will
relate briefly the circumstances under which I had met him some years
before.  One evening a half-dozen men of whom I was one were sitting
in the library of the Bohemian Club in San Francisco.  The
conversation had turned to the subject of sleight-of-hand and the
feats of the prestidigitateurs, one of whom was then exhibiting at a
local theatre.

"These fellows are pretenders in a double sense," said one of the
party; "they can do nothing which it is worth one's while to be made
a dupe by.  The humblest wayside juggler in India could mystify them
to the verge of lunacy."

"For example, how?" asked another, lighting a cigar.

"For example, by all their common and familiar performances--throwing
large objects into the air which never come down; causing plants to
sprout, grow visibly and blossom, in bare ground chosen by
spectators; putting a man into a wicker basket, piercing him through
and through with a sword while he shrieks and bleeds, and then--the
basket being opened nothing is there; tossing the free end of a
silken ladder into the air, mounting it and disappearing."

"Nonsense!" I said, rather uncivilly, I fear.  "You surely do not
believe such things?"

"Certainly not:  I have seen them too often."

"But I do," said a journalist of considerable local fame as a
picturesque reporter.  "I have so frequently related them that
nothing but observation could shake my conviction.  Why, gentlemen, I
have my own word for it."

Nobody laughed--all were looking at something behind me.  Turning in
my seat I saw a man in evening dress who had just entered the room.
He was exceedingly dark, almost swarthy, with a thin face, black-
bearded to the lips, an abundance of coarse black hair in some
disorder, a high nose and eyes that glittered with as soulless an
expression as those of a cobra.  One of the group rose and introduced
him as Dr. Dorrimore, of Calcutta.  As each of us was presented in
turn he acknowledged the fact with a profound bow in the Oriental
manner, but with nothing of Oriental gravity.  His smile impressed me
as cynical and a trifle contemptuous.  His whole demeanor I can
describe only as disagreeably engaging.

His presence led the conversation into other channels.  He said
little--I do not recall anything of what he did say.  I thought his
voice singularly rich and melodious, but it affected me in the same
way as his eyes and smile.  In a few minutes I rose to go.  He also
rose and put on his overcoat.

"Mr. Manrich," he said, "I am going your way."

"The devil you are!" I thought.  "How do you know which way I am
going?"  Then I said, "I shall be pleased to have your company."

We left the building together.  No cabs were in sight, the street
cars had gone to bed, there was a full moon and the cool night air
was delightful; we walked up the California street hill.  I took that
direction thinking he would naturally wish to take another, toward
one of the hotels.

"You do not believe what is told of the Hindu jugglers," he said
abruptly.

"How do you know that?" I asked.

Without replying he laid his hand lightly upon my arm and with the
other pointed to the stone sidewalk directly in front.  There, almost
at our feet, lay the dead body of a man, the face upturned and white
in the moonlight!  A sword whose hilt sparkled with gems stood fixed
and upright in the breast; a pool of blood had collected on the
stones of the sidewalk.

I was startled and terrified--not only by what I saw, but by the
circumstances under which I saw it.  Repeatedly during our ascent of
the hill my eyes, I thought, had traversed the whole reach of that
sidewalk, from street to street.  How could they have been insensible
to this dreadful object now so conspicuous in the white moonlight?

As my dazed faculties cleared I observed that the body was in evening
dress; the overcoat thrown wide open revealed the dress-coat, the
white tie, the broad expanse of shirt front pierced by the sword.
And--horrible revelation!--the face, except for its pallor, was that
of my companion!  It was to the minutest detail of dress and feature
Dr. Dorrimore himself.  Bewildered and horrified, I turned to look
for the living man.  He was nowhere visible, and with an added terror
I retired from the place, down the hill in the direction whence I had
come.  I had taken but a few strides when a strong grasp upon my
shoulder arrested me.  I came near crying out with terror:  the dead
man, the sword still fixed in his breast, stood beside me!  Pulling
out the sword with his disengaged hand, he flung it from him, the
moonlight glinting upon the jewels of its hilt and the unsullied
steel of its blade.  It fell with a clang upon the sidewalk ahead
and--vanished!  The man, swarthy as before, relaxed his grasp upon my
shoulder and looked at me with the same cynical regard that I had
observed on first meeting him.  The dead have not that look--it
partly restored me, and turning my head backward, I saw the smooth
white expanse of sidewalk, unbroken from street to street.

"What is all this nonsense, you devil?" I demanded, fiercely enough,
though weak and trembling in every limb.

"It is what some are pleased to call jugglery," he answered, with a
light, hard laugh.

He turned down Dupont street and I saw him no more until we met in
the Auburn ravine.

III

On the day after my second meeting with Dr. Dorrimore I did not see
him:  the clerk in the Putnam House explained that a slight illness
confined him to his rooms.  That afternoon at the railway station I
was surprised and made happy by the unexpected arrival of Miss
Margaret Corray and her mother, from Oakland.

This is not a love story.  I am no storyteller, and love as it is
cannot be portrayed in a literature dominated and enthralled by the
debasing tyranny which "sentences letters" in the name of the Young
Girl.  Under the Young Girl's blighting reign--or rather under the
rule of those false Ministers of the Censure who have appointed
themselves to the custody of her welfare--love


   veils her sacred fires,
And, unaware, Morality expires,


famished upon the sifted meal and distilled water of a prudish
purveyance.

Let it suffice that Miss Corray and I were engaged in marriage.  She
and her mother went to the hotel at which I lived, and for two weeks
I saw her daily.  That I was happy needs hardly be said; the only bar
to my perfect enjoyment of those golden days was the presence of Dr.
Dorrimore, whom I had felt compelled to introduce to the ladies.

By them he was evidently held in favor.  What could I say?  I knew
absolutely nothing to his discredit.  His manners were those of a
cultivated and considerate gentleman; and to women a man's manner is
the man.  On one or two occasions when I saw Miss Corray walking with
him I was furious, and once had the indiscretion to protest.  Asked
for reasons, I had none to give and fancied I saw in her expression a
shade of contempt for the vagaries of a jealous mind.  In time I grew
morose and consciously disagreeable, and resolved in my madness to
return to San Francisco the next day.  Of this, however, I said
nothing.

IV

There was at Auburn an old, abandoned cemetery.  It was nearly in the
heart of the town, yet by night it was as gruesome a place as the
most dismal of human moods could crave.  The railings about the plats
were prostrate, decayed, or altogether gone.  Many of the graves were
sunken, from others grew sturdy pines, whose roots had committed
unspeakable sin.  The headstones were fallen and broken across;
brambles overran the ground; the fence was mostly gone, and cows and
pigs wandered there at will; the place was a dishonor to the living,
a calumny on the dead, a blasphemy against God.

The evening of the day on which I had taken my madman's resolution to
depart in anger from all that was dear to me found me in that
congenial spot.  The light of the half moon fell ghostly through the
foliage of trees in spots and patches, revealing much that was
unsightly, and the black shadows seemed conspiracies withholding to
the proper time revelations of darker import.  Passing along what had
been a gravel path, I saw emerging from shadow the figure of Dr.
Dorrimore.  I was myself in shadow, and stood still with clenched
hands and set teeth, trying to control the impulse to leap upon and
strangle him.  A moment later a second figure joined him and clung to
his arm.  It was Margaret Corray!

I cannot rightly relate what occurred.  I know that I sprang forward,
bent upon murder; I know that I was found in the gray of the morning,
bruised and bloody, with finger marks upon my throat.  I was taken to
the Putnam House, where for days I lay in a delirium.  All this I
know, for I have been told.  And of my own knowledge I know that when
consciousness returned with convalescence I sent for the clerk of the
hotel.

"Are Mrs. Corray and her daughter still here?" I asked.

"What name did you say?"

"Corray."

"Nobody of that name has been here."

"I beg you will not trifle with me," I said petulantly.  "You see
that I am all right now; tell me the truth."

"I give you my word," he replied with evident sincerity, "we have had
no guests of that name."

His words stupefied me.  I lay for a few moments in silence; then I
asked:  "Where is Dr. Dorrimore?"

"He left on the morning of your fight and has not been heard of
since.  It was a rough deal he gave you."

V

Such are the facts of this case.  Margaret Corray is now my wife.
She has never seen Auburn, and during the weeks whose history as it
shaped itself in my brain I have endeavored to relate, was living at
her home in Oakland, wondering where her lover was and why he did not
write.  The other day I saw in the Baltimore Sun the following
paragraph:

"Professor Valentine Dorrimore, the hypnotist, had a large audience
last night.  The lecturer, who has lived most of his life in India,
gave some marvelous exhibitions of his power, hypnotizing anyone who
chose to submit himself to the experiment, by merely looking at him.
In fact, he twice hypnotized the entire audience (reporters alone
exempted), making all entertain the most extraordinary illusions.
The most valuable feature of the lecture was the disclosure of the
methods of the Hindu jugglers in their famous performances, familiar
in the mouths of travelers.  The professor declares that these
thaumaturgists have acquired such skill in the art which he learned
at their feet that they perform their miracles by simply throwing the
'spectators' into a state of hypnosis and telling them what to see
and hear.  His assertion that a peculiarly susceptible subject may be
kept in the realm of the unreal for weeks, months, and even years,
dominated by whatever delusions and hallucinations the operator may
from time to time suggest, is a trifle disquieting."



JOHN BARTINE'S WATCH
A STORY BY A PHYSICIAN



"The exact time?  Good God! my friend, why do you insist?  One would
think--but what does it matter; it is easily bedtime--isn't that near
enough?  But, here, if you must set your watch, take mine and see for
yourself."

With that he detached his watch--a tremendously heavy, old-fashioned
one--from the chain, and handed it to me; then turned away, and
walking across the room to a shelf of books, began an examination of
their backs.  His agitation and evident distress surprised me; they
appeared reasonless.  Having set my watch by his, I stepped over to
where he stood and said, "Thank you."

As he took his timepiece and reattached it to the guard I observed
that his hands were unsteady.  With a tact upon which I greatly
prided myself, I sauntered carelessly to the sideboard and took some
brandy and water; then, begging his pardon for my thoughtlessness,
asked him to have some and went back to my seat by the fire, leaving
him to help himself, as was our custom.  He did so and presently
joined me at the hearth, as tranquil as ever.

This odd little incident occurred in my apartment, where John Bartine
was passing an evening.  We had dined together at the club, had come
home in a cab and--in short, everything had been done in the most
prosaic way; and why John Bartine should break in upon the natural
and established order of things to make himself spectacular with a
display of emotion, apparently for his own entertainment, I could
nowise understand.  The more I thought of it, while his brilliant
conversational gifts were commending themselves to my inattention,
the more curious I grew, and of course had no difficulty in
persuading myself that my curiosity was friendly solicitude.  That is
the disguise that curiosity usually assumes to evade resentment.  So
I ruined one of the finest sentences of his disregarded monologue by
cutting it short without ceremony.

"John Bartine," I said, "you must try to forgive me if I am wrong,
but with the light that I have at present I cannot concede your right
to go all to pieces when asked the time o' night.  I cannot admit
that it is proper to experience a mysterious reluctance to look your
own watch in the face and to cherish in my presence, without
explanation, painful emotions which are denied to me, and which are
none of my business."

To this ridiculous speech Bartine made no immediate reply, but sat
looking gravely into the fire.  Fearing that I had offended I was
about to apologize and beg him to think no more about the matter,
when looking me calmly in the eyes he said:

"My dear fellow, the levity of your manner does not at all disguise
the hideous impudence of your demand; but happily I had already
decided to tell you what you wish to know, and no manifestation of
your unworthiness to hear it shall alter my decision.  Be good enough
to give me your attention and you shall hear all about the matter.

"This watch," he said, "had been in my family for three generations
before it fell to me.  Its original owner, for whom it was made, was
my great-grandfather, Bramwell Olcott Bartine, a wealthy planter of
Colonial Virginia, and as stanch a Tory as ever lay awake nights
contriving new kinds of maledictions for the head of Mr. Washington,
and new methods of aiding and abetting good King George.  One day
this worthy gentleman had the deep misfortune to perform for his
cause a service of capital importance which was not recognized as
legitimate by those who suffered its disadvantages.  It does not
matter what it was, but among its minor consequences was my excellent
ancestor's arrest one night in his own house by a party of Mr.
Washington's rebels.  He was permitted to say farewell to his weeping
family, and was then marched away into the darkness which swallowed
him up forever.  Not the slenderest clew to his fate was ever found.
After the war the most diligent inquiry and the offer of large
rewards failed to turn up any of his captors or any fact concerning
his disappearance.  He had disappeared, and that was all."

Something in Bartine's manner that was not in his words--I hardly
knew what it was--prompted me to ask:

"What is your view of the matter--of the justice of it?"

"My view of it," he flamed out, bringing his clenched hand down upon
the table as if he had been in a public house dicing with
blackguards--"my view of it is that it was a characteristically
dastardly assassination by that damned traitor, Washington, and his
ragamuffin rebels!"

For some minutes nothing was said:  Bartine was recovering his
temper, and I waited.  Then I said:

"Was that all?"

"No--there was something else.  A few weeks after my great-
grandfather's arrest his watch was found lying on the porch at the
front door of his dwelling.  It was wrapped in a sheet of letter
paper bearing the name of Rupert Bartine, his only son, my
grandfather.  I am wearing that watch."

Bartine paused.  His usually restless black eyes were staring fixedly
into the grate, a point of red light in each, reflected from the
glowing coals.  He seemed to have forgotten me.  A sudden threshing
of the branches of a tree outside one of the windows, and almost at
the same instant a rattle of rain against the glass, recalled him to
a sense of his surroundings.  A storm had risen, heralded by a single
gust of wind, and in a few moments the steady plash of the water on
the pavement was distinctly heard.  I hardly know why I relate this
incident; it seemed somehow to have a certain significance and
relevancy which I am unable now to discern.  It at least added an
element of seriousness, almost solemnity.  Bartine resumed:

"I have a singular feeling toward this watch--a kind of affection for
it; I like to have it about me, though partly from its weight, and
partly for a reason I shall now explain, I seldom carry it.  The
reason is this:  Every evening when I have it with me I feel an
unaccountable desire to open and consult it, even if I can think of
no reason for wishing to know the time.  But if I yield to it, the
moment my eyes rest upon the dial I am filled with a mysterious
apprehension--a sense of imminent calamity.  And this is the more
insupportable the nearer it is to eleven o'clock--by this watch, no
matter what the actual hour may be.  After the hands have registered
eleven the desire to look is gone; I am entirely indifferent.  Then I
can consult the thing as often as I like, with no more emotion than
you feel in looking at your own.  Naturally I have trained myself not
to look at that watch in the evening before eleven; nothing could
induce me.  Your insistence this evening upset me a trifle.  I felt
very much as I suppose an opium-eater might feel if his yearning for
his special and particular kind of hell were re-enforced by
opportunity and advice.

"Now that is my story, and I have told it in the interest of your
trumpery science; but if on any evening hereafter you observe me
wearing this damnable watch, and you have the thoughtfulness to ask
me the hour, I shall beg leave to put you to the inconvenience of
being knocked down."

His humor did not amuse me.  I could see that in relating his
delusion he was again somewhat disturbed.  His concluding smile was
positively ghastly, and his eyes had resumed something more than
their old restlessness; they shifted hither and thither about the
room with apparent aimlessness and I fancied had taken on a wild
expression, such as is sometimes observed in cases of dementia.
Perhaps this was my own imagination, but at any rate I was now
persuaded that my friend was afflicted with a most singular and
interesting monomania.  Without, I trust, any abatement of my
affectionate solicitude for him as a friend, I began to regard him as
a patient, rich in possibilities of profitable study.  Why not?  Had
he not described his delusion in the interest of science?  Ah, poor
fellow, he was doing more for science than he knew:  not only his
story but himself was in evidence.  I should cure him if I could, of
course, but first I should make a little experiment in psychology--
nay, the experiment itself might be a step in his restoration.

"That is very frank and friendly of you, Bartine," I said cordially,
"and I'm rather proud of your confidence.  It is all very odd,
certainly.  Do you mind showing me the watch?"

He detached it from his waistcoat, chain and all, and passed it to me
without a word.  The case was of gold, very thick and strong, and
singularly engraved.  After closely examining the dial and observing
that it was nearly twelve o'clock, I opened it at the back and was
interested to observe an inner case of ivory, upon which was painted
a miniature portrait in that exquisite and delicate manner which was
in vogue during the eighteenth century.

"Why, bless my soul!" I exclaimed, feeling a sharp artistic delight--
"how under the sun did you get that done?  I thought miniature
painting on ivory was a lost art."

"That," he replied, gravely smiling, "is not I; it is my excellent
great-grandfather, the late Bramwell Olcott Bartine, Esquire, of
Virginia.  He was younger then than later--about my age, in fact.  It
is said to resemble me; do you think so?"

"Resemble you?  I should say so!  Barring the costume, which I
supposed you to have assumed out of compliment to the art--or for
vraisemblance, so to say--and the no mustache, that portrait is you
in every feature, line, and expression."

No more was said at that time.  Bartine took a book from the table
and began reading.  I heard outside the incessant plash of the rain
in the street.  There were occasional hurried footfalls on the
sidewalks; and once a slower, heavier tread seemed to cease at my
door--a policeman, I thought, seeking shelter in the doorway.  The
boughs of the trees tapped significantly on the window panes, as if
asking for admittance.  I remember it all through these years and
years of a wiser, graver life.

Seeing myself unobserved, I took the old-fashioned key that dangled
from the chain and quickly turned back the hands of the watch a full
hour; then, closing the case, I handed Bartine his property and saw
him replace it on his person.

"I think you said," I began, with assumed carelessness, "that after
eleven the sight of the dial no longer affects you.  As it is now
nearly twelve"--looking at my own timepiece--"perhaps, if you don't
resent my pursuit of proof, you will look at it now."

He smiled good-humoredly, pulled out the watch again, opened it, and
instantly sprang to his feet with a cry that Heaven has not had the
mercy to permit me to forget!  His eyes, their blackness strikingly
intensified by the pallor of his face, were fixed upon the watch,
which he clutched in both hands.  For some time he remained in that
attitude without uttering another sound; then, in a voice that I
should not have recognized as his, he said:

"Damn you! it is two minutes to eleven!"

I was not unprepared for some such outbreak, and without rising
replied, calmly enough:

"I beg your pardon; I must have misread your watch in setting my own
by it."

He shut the case with a sharp snap and put the watch in his pocket.
He looked at me and made an attempt to smile, but his lower lip
quivered and he seemed unable to close his mouth.  His hands, also,
were shaking, and he thrust them, clenched, into the pockets of his
sack-coat.  The courageous spirit was manifestly endeavoring to
subdue the coward body.  The effort was too great; he began to sway
from side to side, as from vertigo, and before I could spring from my
chair to support him his knees gave way and he pitched awkwardly
forward and fell upon his face.  I sprang to assist him to rise; but
when John Bartine rises we shall all rise.

The post-mortem examination disclosed nothing; every organ was normal
and sound.  But when the body had been prepared for burial a faint
dark circle was seen to have developed around the neck; at least I
was so assured by several persons who said they saw it, but of my own
knowledge I cannot say if that was true.

Nor can I set limitations to the law of heredity.  I do not know that
in the spiritual world a sentiment or emotion may not survive the
heart that held it, and seek expression in a kindred life, ages
removed.  Surely, if I were to guess at the fate of Bramwell Olcott
Bartine, I should guess that he was hanged at eleven o'clock in the
evening, and that he had been allowed several hours in which to
prepare for the change.

As to John Bartine, my friend, my patient for five minutes, and--
Heaven forgive me!--my victim for eternity, there is no more to say.
He is buried, and his watch with him--I saw to that.  May God rest
his soul in Paradise, and the soul of his Virginian ancestor, if,
indeed, they are two souls.



THE DAMNED THING



I--ONE DOES NOT ALWAYS EAT WHAT IS ON THE TABLE

By the light of a tallow candle which had been placed on one end of a
rough table a man was reading something written in a book.  It was an
old account book, greatly worn; and the writing was not, apparently,
very legible, for the man sometimes held the page close to the flame
of the candle to get a stronger light on it.  The shadow of the book
would then throw into obscurity a half of the room, darkening a
number of faces and figures; for besides the reader, eight other men
were present.  Seven of them sat against the rough log walls, silent,
motionless, and the room being small, not very far from the table.
By extending an arm any one of them could have touched the eighth
man, who lay on the table, face upward, partly covered by a sheet,
his arms at his sides.  He was dead.

The man with the book was not reading aloud, and no one spoke; all
seemed to be waiting for something to occur; the dead man only was
without expectation.  From the blank darkness outside came in,
through the aperture that served for a window, all the ever
unfamiliar noises of night in the wilderness--the long nameless note
of a distant coyote; the stilly pulsing thrill of tireless insects in
trees; strange cries of night birds, so different from those of the
birds of day; the drone of great blundering beetles, and all that
mysterious chorus of small sounds that seem always to have been but
half heard when they have suddenly ceased, as if conscious of an
indiscretion.  But nothing of all this was noted in that company; its
members were not overmuch addicted to idle interest in matters of no
practical importance; that was obvious in every line of their rugged
faces--obvious even in the dim light of the single candle.  They were
evidently men of the vicinity--farmers and woodsmen.

The person reading was a trifle different; one would have said of him
that he was of the world, worldly, albeit there was that in his
attire which attested a certain fellowship with the organisms of his
environment.  His coat would hardly have passed muster in San
Francisco; his foot-gear was not of urban origin, and the hat that
lay by him on the floor (he was the only one uncovered) was such that
if one had considered it as an article of mere personal adornment he
would have missed its meaning.  In countenance the man was rather
prepossessing, with just a hint of sternness; though that he may have
assumed or cultivated, as appropriate to one in authority.  For he
was a coroner.  It was by virtue of his office that he had possession
of the book in which he was reading; it had been found among the dead
man's effects--in his cabin, where the inquest was now taking place.

When the coroner had finished reading he put the book into his breast
pocket.  At that moment the door was pushed open and a young man
entered.  He, clearly, was not of mountain birth and breeding:  he
was clad as those who dwell in cities.  His clothing was dusty,
however, as from travel.  He had, in fact, been riding hard to attend
the inquest.

The coroner nodded; no one else greeted him.

"We have waited for you," said the coroner.  "It is necessary to have
done with this business to-night."

The young man smiled.  "I am sorry to have kept you," he said.  "I
went away, not to evade your summons, but to post to my newspaper an
account of what I suppose I am called back to relate."

The coroner smiled.

"The account that you posted to your newspaper," he said, "differs,
probably, from that which you will give here under oath."

"That," replied the other, rather hotly and with a visible flush, "is
as you please.  I used manifold paper and have a copy of what I sent.
It was not written as news, for it is incredible, but as fiction.  It
may go as a part of my testimony under oath."

"But you say it is incredible."

"That is nothing to you, sir, if I also swear that it is true."

The coroner was silent for a time, his eyes upon the floor.  The men
about the sides of the cabin talked in whispers, but seldom withdrew
their gaze from the face of the corpse.  Presently the coroner lifted
his eyes and said:  "We will resume the inquest."

The men removed their hats.  The witness was sworn.

"What is your name?" the coroner asked.

"William Harker."

"Age?"

"Twenty-seven."

"You knew the deceased, Hugh Morgan?"

"Yes."

"You were with him when he died?"

"Near him."

"How did that happen--your presence, I mean?"

"I was visiting him at this place to shoot and fish.  A part of my
purpose, however, was to study him and his odd, solitary way of life.
He seemed a good model for a character in fiction.  I sometimes write
stories."

"I sometimes read them."

"Thank you."

"Stories in general--not yours."

Some of the jurors laughed.  Against a sombre background humor shows
high lights.  Soldiers in the intervals of battle laugh easily, and a
jest in the death chamber conquers by surprise.

"Relate the circumstances of this man's death," said the coroner.
"You may use any notes or memoranda that you please."

The witness understood.  Pulling a manuscript from his breast pocket
he held it near the candle and turning the leaves until he found the
passage that he wanted began to read.

II--WHAT MAY HAPPEN IN A FIELD OF WILD OATS

" . . . The sun had hardly risen when we left the house.  We were
looking for quail, each with a shotgun, but we had only one dog.
Morgan said that our best ground was beyond a certain ridge that he
pointed out, and we crossed it by a trail through the chaparral.  On
the other side was comparatively level ground, thickly covered with
wild oats.  As we emerged from the chaparral Morgan was but a few
yards in advance.  Suddenly we heard, at a little distance to our
right and partly in front, a noise as of some animal thrashing about
in the bushes, which we could see were violently agitated.

"'We've started a deer,' I said.  'I wish we had brought a rifle.'

"Morgan, who had stopped and was intently watching the agitated
chaparral, said nothing, but had cocked both barrels of his gun and
was holding it in readiness to aim.  I thought him a trifle excited,
which surprised me, for he had a reputation for exceptional coolness,
even in moments of sudden and imminent peril.

"'O, come,' I said.  'You are not going to fill up a deer with quail-
shot, are you?'

"Still he did not reply; but catching a sight of his face as he
turned it slightly toward me I was struck by the intensity of his
look.  Then I understood that we had serious business in hand and my
first conjecture was that we had 'jumped' a grizzly.  I advanced to
Morgan's side, cocking my piece as I moved.

"The bushes were now quiet and the sounds had ceased, but Morgan was
as attentive to the place as before.

"'What is it?  What the devil is it?' I asked.

"'That Damned Thing!' he replied, without turning his head.  His
voice was husky and unnatural.  He trembled visibly.

"I was about to speak further, when I observed the wild oats near the
place of the disturbance moving in the most inexplicable way.  I can
hardly describe it.  It seemed as if stirred by a streak of wind,
which not only bent it, but pressed it down--crushed it so that it
did not rise; and this movement was slowly prolonging itself directly
toward us.

"Nothing that I had ever seen had affected me so strangely as this
unfamiliar and unaccountable phenomenon, yet I am unable to recall
any sense of fear.  I remember--and tell it here because, singularly
enough, I recollected it then--that once in looking carelessly out of
an open window I momentarily mistook a small tree close at hand for
one of a group of larger trees at a little distance away.  It looked
the same size as the others, but being more distinctly and sharply
defined in mass and detail seemed out of harmony with them.  It was a
mere falsification of the law of aerial perspective, but it startled,
almost terrified me.  We so rely upon the orderly operation of
familiar natural laws that any seeming suspension of them is noted as
a menace to our safety, a warning of unthinkable calamity.  So now
the apparently causeless movement of the herbage and the slow,
undeviating approach of the line of disturbance were distinctly
disquieting.  My companion appeared actually frightened, and I could
hardly credit my senses when I saw him suddenly throw his gun to his
shoulder and fire both barrels at the agitated grain!  Before the
smoke of the discharge had cleared away I heard a loud savage cry--a
scream like that of a wild animal--and flinging his gun upon the
ground Morgan sprang away and ran swiftly from the spot.  At the same
instant I was thrown violently to the ground by the impact of
something unseen in the smoke--some soft, heavy substance that seemed
thrown against me with great force.

"Before I could get upon my feet and recover my gun, which seemed to
have been struck from my hands, I heard Morgan crying out as if in
mortal agony, and mingling with his cries were such hoarse, savage
sounds as one hears from fighting dogs.  Inexpressibly terrified, I
struggled to my feet and looked in the direction of Morgan's retreat;
and may Heaven in mercy spare me from another sight like that!  At a
distance of less than thirty yards was my friend, down upon one knee,
his head thrown back at a frightful angle, hatless, his long hair in
disorder and his whole body in violent movement from side to side,
backward and forward.  His right arm was lifted and seemed to lack
the hand--at least, I could see none.  The other arm was invisible.
At times, as my memory now reports this extraordinary scene, I could
discern but a part of his body; it was as if he had been partly
blotted out--I cannot otherwise express it--then a shifting of his
position would bring it all into view again.

"All this must have occurred within a few seconds, yet in that time
Morgan assumed all the postures of a determined wrestler vanquished
by superior weight and strength.  I saw nothing but him, and him not
always distinctly.  During the entire incident his shouts and curses
were heard, as if through an enveloping uproar of such sounds of rage
and fury as I had never heard from the throat of man or brute!

"For a moment only I stood irresolute, then throwing down my gun I
ran forward to my friend's assistance.  I had a vague belief that he
was suffering from a fit, or some form of convulsion.  Before I could
reach his side he was down and quiet.  All sounds had ceased, but
with a feeling of such terror as even these awful events had not
inspired I now saw again the mysterious movement of the wild oats,
prolonging itself from the trampled area about the prostrate man
toward the edge of a wood.  It was only when it had reached the wood
that I was able to withdraw my eyes and look at my companion.  He was
dead."

III--A MAN THOUGH NAKED MAY BE IN RAGS

The coroner rose from his seat and stood beside the dead man.
Lifting an edge of the sheet he pulled it away, exposing the entire
body, altogether naked and showing in the candle-light a claylike
yellow.  It had, however, broad maculations of bluish black,
obviously caused by extravasated blood from contusions.  The chest
and sides looked as if they had been beaten with a bludgeon.  There
were dreadful lacerations; the skin was torn in strips and shreds.

The coroner moved round to the end of the table and undid a silk
handkerchief which had been passed under the chin and knotted on the
top of the head.  When the handkerchief was drawn away it exposed
what had been the throat.  Some of the jurors who had risen to get a
better view repented their curiosity and turned away their faces.
Witness Harker went to the open window and leaned out across the
sill, faint and sick.  Dropping the handkerchief upon the dead man's
neck the coroner stepped to an angle of the room and from a pile of
clothing produced one garment after another, each of which he held up
a moment for inspection.  All were torn, and stiff with blood.  The
jurors did not make a closer inspection.  They seemed rather
uninterested.  They had, in truth, seen all this before; the only
thing that was new to them being Harker's testimony.

"Gentlemen," the coroner said, "we have no more evidence, I think.
Your duty has been already explained to you; if there is nothing you
wish to ask you may go outside and consider your verdict."

The foreman rose--a tall, bearded man of sixty, coarsely clad.

"I should like to ask one question, Mr. Coroner," he said.  "What
asylum did this yer last witness escape from?"

"Mr. Harker," said the coroner, gravely and tranquilly, "from what
asylum did you last escape?"

Harker flushed crimson again, but said nothing, and the seven jurors
rose and solemnly filed out of the cabin.

"If you have done insulting me, sir," said Harker, as soon as he and
the officer were left alone with the dead man, "I suppose I am at
liberty to go?"

"Yes."

Harker started to leave, but paused, with his hand on the door latch.
The habit of his profession was strong in him--stronger than his
sense of personal dignity.  He turned about and said:

"The book that you have there--I recognize it as Morgan's diary.  You
seemed greatly interested in it; you read in it while I was
testifying.  May I see it?  The public would like--"

"The book will cut no figure in this matter," replied the official,
slipping it into his coat pocket; "all the entries in it were made
before the writer's death."

As Harker passed out of the house the jury reentered and stood about
the table, on which the now covered corpse showed under the sheet
with sharp definition.  The foreman seated himself near the candle,
produced from his breast pocket a pencil and scrap of paper and wrote
rather laboriously the following verdict, which with various degrees
of effort all signed:

"We, the jury, do find that the remains come to their death at the
hands of a mountain lion, but some of us thinks, all the same, they
had fits."

IV--AN EXPLANATION FROM THE TOMB

In the diary of the late Hugh Morgan are certain interesting entries
having, possibly, a scientific value as suggestions.  At the inquest
upon his body the book was not put in evidence; possibly the coroner
thought it not worth while to confuse the jury.  The date of the
first of the entries mentioned cannot be ascertained; the upper part
of the leaf is torn away; the part of the entry remaining follows:

" . . . would run in a half-circle, keeping his head turned always
toward the centre, and again he would stand still, barking furiously.
At last he ran away into the brush as fast as he could go.  I thought
at first that he had gone mad, but on returning to the house found no
other alteration in his manner than what was obviously due to fear of
punishment.

"Can a dog see with his nose?  Do odors impress some cerebral centre
with images of the thing that emitted them? . . .

"Sept. 2.--Looking at the stars last night as they rose above the
crest of the ridge east of the house, I observed them successively
disappear--from left to right.  Each was eclipsed but an instant, and
only a few at the same time, but along the entire length of the ridge
all that were within a degree or two of the crest were blotted out.
It was as if something had passed along between me and them; but I
could not see it, and the stars were not thick enough to define its
outline.  Ugh!  I don't like this." . . .

Several weeks' entries are missing, three leaves being torn from the
book.

"Sept. 27.--It has been about here again--I find evidences of its
presence every day.  I watched again all last night in the same
cover, gun in hand, double-charged with buckshot.  In the morning the
fresh footprints were there, as before.  Yet I would have sworn that
I did not sleep--indeed, I hardly sleep at all.  It is terrible,
insupportable!  If these amazing experiences are real I shall go mad;
if they are fanciful I am mad already.

"Oct. 3.--I shall not go--it shall not drive me away.  No, this is MY
house, MY land.  God hates a coward . . .

"Oct. 5.--I can stand it no longer; I have invited Harker to pass a
few weeks with me--he has a level head.  I can judge from his manner
if he thinks me mad.

"Oct. 7.--I have the solution of the mystery; it came to me last
night--suddenly, as by revelation.  How simple--how terribly simple!

"There are sounds that we cannot hear.  At either end of the scale
are notes that stir no chord of that imperfect instrument, the human
ear.  They are too high or too grave.  I have observed a flock of
blackbirds occupying an entire tree-top--the tops of several trees--
and all in full song.  Suddenly--in a moment--at absolutely the same
instant--all spring into the air and fly away.  How?  They could not
all see one another--whole tree-tops intervened.  At no point could a
leader have been visible to all.  There must have been a signal of
warning or command, high and shrill above the din, but by me unheard.
I have observed, too, the same simultaneous flight when all were
silent, among not only blackbirds, but other birds--quail, for
example, widely separated by bushes--even on opposite sides of a
hill.

"It is known to seamen that a school of whales basking or sporting on
the surface of the ocean, miles apart, with the convexity of the
earth between, will sometimes dive at the same instant--all gone out
of sight in a moment.  The signal has been sounded--too grave for the
ear of the sailor at the masthead and his comrades on the deck--who
nevertheless feel its vibrations in the ship as the stones of a
cathedral are stirred by the bass of the organ.

"As with sounds, so with colors.  At each end of the solar spectrum
the chemist can detect the presence of what are known as 'actinic'
rays.  They represent colors--integral colors in the composition of
light--which we are unable to discern.  The human eye is an imperfect
instrument; its range is but a few octaves of the real 'chromatic
scale.'  I am not mad; there are colors that we cannot see.

"And, God help me! the Damned Thing is of such a color!"



HAITA THE SHEPHERD



In the heart of Haita the illusions of youth had not been supplanted
by those of age and experience.  His thoughts were pure and pleasant,
for his life was simple and his soul devoid of ambition.  He rose
with the sun and went forth to pray at the shrine of Hastur, the god
of shepherds, who heard and was pleased.  After performance of this
pious rite Haita unbarred the gate of the fold and with a cheerful
mind drove his flock afield, eating his morning meal of curds and oat
cake as he went, occasionally pausing to add a few berries, cold with
dew, or to drink of the waters that came away from the hills to join
the stream in the middle of the valley and be borne along with it, he
knew not whither.

During the long summer day, as his sheep cropped the good grass which
the gods had made to grow for them, or lay with their forelegs
doubled under their breasts and chewed the cud, Haita, reclining in
the shadow of a tree, or sitting upon a rock, played so sweet music
upon his reed pipe that sometimes from the corner of his eye he got
accidental glimpses of the minor sylvan deities, leaning forward out
of the copse to hear; but if he looked at them directly they
vanished.  From this--for he must be thinking if he would not turn
into one of his own sheep--he drew the solemn inference that
happiness may come if not sought, but if looked for will never be
seen; for next to the favor of Hastur, who never disclosed himself,
Haita most valued the friendly interest of his neighbors, the shy
immortals of the wood and stream.  At nightfall he drove his flock
back to the fold, saw that the gate was secure and retired to his
cave for refreshment and for dreams.

So passed his life, one day like another, save when the storms
uttered the wrath of an offended god.  Then Haita cowered in his
cave, his face hidden in his hands, and prayed that he alone might be
punished for his sins and the world saved from destruction.
Sometimes when there was a great rain, and the stream came out of its
banks, compelling him to urge his terrified flock to the uplands, he
interceded for the people in the cities which he had been told lay in
the plain beyond the two blue hills forming the gateway of his
valley.

"It is kind of thee, O Hastur," so he prayed, "to give me mountains
so near to my dwelling and my fold that I and my sheep can escape the
angry torrents; but the rest of the world thou must thyself deliver
in some way that I know not of, or I will no longer worship thee."

And Hastur, knowing that Haita was a youth who kept his word, spared
the cities and turned the waters into the sea.

So he had lived since he could remember.  He could not rightly
conceive any other mode of existence.  The holy hermit who dwelt at
the head of the valley, a full hour's journey away, from whom he had
heard the tale of the great cities where dwelt people--poor souls!--
who had no sheep, gave him no knowledge of that early time, when, so
he reasoned, he must have been small and helpless like a lamb.

It was through thinking on these mysteries and marvels, and on that
horrible change to silence and decay which he felt sure must some
time come to him, as he had seen it come to so many of his flock--as
it came to all living things except the birds--that Haita first
became conscious how miserable and hopeless was his lot.

"It is necessary," he said, "that I know whence and how I came; for
how can one perform his duties unless able to judge what they are by
the way in which he was intrusted with them?  And what contentment
can I have when I know not how long it is going to last?  Perhaps
before another sun I may be changed, and then what will become of the
sheep?  What, indeed, will have become of me?"

Pondering these things Haita became melancholy and morose.  He no
longer spoke cheerfully to his flock, nor ran with alacrity to the
shrine of Hastur.  In every breeze he heard whispers of malign
deities whose existence he now first observed.  Every cloud was a
portent signifying disaster, and the darkness was full of terrors.
His reed pipe when applied to his lips gave out no melody, but a
dismal wail; the sylvan and riparian intelligences no longer thronged
the thicket-side to listen, but fled from the sound, as he knew by
the stirred leaves and bent flowers.  He relaxed his vigilance and
many of his sheep strayed away into the hills and were lost.  Those
that remained became lean and ill for lack of good pasturage, for he
would not seek it for them, but conducted them day after day to the
same spot, through mere abstraction, while puzzling about life and
death--of immortality he knew not.

One day while indulging in the gloomiest reflections he suddenly
sprang from the rock upon which he sat, and with a determined gesture
of the right hand exclaimed:  "I will no longer be a suppliant for
knowledge which the gods withhold.  Let them look to it that they do
me no wrong.  I will do my duty as best I can and if I err upon their
own heads be it!"

Suddenly, as he spoke, a great brightness fell about him, causing him
to look upward, thinking the sun had burst through a rift in the
clouds; but there were no clouds.  No more than an arm's length away
stood a beautiful maiden.  So beautiful she was that the flowers
about her feet folded their petals in despair and bent their heads in
token of submission; so sweet her look that the humming birds
thronged her eyes, thrusting their thirsty bills almost into them,
and the wild bees were about her lips.  And such was her brightness
that the shadows of all objects lay divergent from her feet, turning
as she moved.

Haita was entranced.  Rising, he knelt before her in adoration, and
she laid her hand upon his head.

"Come," she said in a voice that had the music of all the bells of
his flock--"come, thou art not to worship me, who am no goddess, but
if thou art truthful and dutiful I will abide with thee."

Haita seized her hand, and stammering his joy and gratitude arose,
and hand in hand they stood and smiled into each other's eyes.  He
gazed on her with reverence and rapture.  He said:  "I pray thee,
lovely maid, tell me thy name and whence and why thou comest."

At this she laid a warning finger on her lip and began to withdraw.
Her beauty underwent a visible alteration that made him shudder, he
knew not why, for still she was beautiful.  The landscape was
darkened by a giant shadow sweeping across the valley with the speed
of a vulture.  In the obscurity the maiden's figure grew dim and
indistinct and her voice seemed to come from a distance, as she said,
in a tone of sorrowful reproach:  "Presumptuous and ungrateful youth!
must I then so soon leave thee?  Would nothing do but thou must at
once break the eternal compact?"

Inexpressibly grieved, Haita fell upon his knees and implored her to
remain--rose and sought her in the deepening darkness--ran in
circles, calling to her aloud, but all in vain.  She was no longer
visible, but out of the gloom he heard her voice saying:  "Nay, thou
shalt not have me by seeking.  Go to thy duty, faithless shepherd, or
we shall never meet again."

Night had fallen; the wolves were howling in the hills and the
terrified sheep crowding about Haita's feet.  In the demands of the
hour he forgot his disappointment, drove his sheep to the fold and
repairing to the place of worship poured out his heart in gratitude
to Hastur for permitting him to save his flock, then retired to his
cave and slept.

When Haita awoke the sun was high and shone in at the cave,
illuminating it with a great glory.  And there, beside him, sat the
maiden.  She smiled upon him with a smile that seemed the visible
music of his pipe of reeds.  He dared not speak, fearing to offend
her as before, for he knew not what he could venture to say.

"Because," she said, "thou didst thy duty by the flock, and didst not
forget to thank Hastur for staying the wolves of the night, I am come
to thee again.  Wilt thou have me for a companion?"

"Who would not have thee forever?" replied Haita.  "Oh! never again
leave me until--until I--change and become silent and motionless."

Haita had no word for death.

"I wish, indeed," he continued, "that thou wert of my own sex, that
we might wrestle and run races and so never tire of being together."

At these words the maiden arose and passed out of the cave, and
Haita, springing from his couch of fragrant boughs to overtake and
detain her, observed to his astonishment that the rain was falling
and the stream in the middle of the valley had come out of its banks.
The sheep were bleating in terror, for the rising waters had invaded
their fold.  And there was danger for the unknown cities of the
distant plain.

It was many days before Haita saw the maiden again.  One day he was
returning from the head of the valley, where he had gone with ewe's
milk and oat cake and berries for the holy hermit, who was too old
and feeble to provide himself with food.

"Poor old man!" he said aloud, as he trudged along homeward.  "I will
return to-morrow and bear him on my back to my own dwelling, where I
can care for him.  Doubtless it is for this that Hastur has reared me
all these many years, and gives me health and strength."

As he spoke, the maiden, clad in glittering garments, met him in the
path with a smile that took away his breath.

"I am come again," she said, "to dwell with thee if thou wilt now
have me, for none else will.  Thou mayest have learned wisdom, and
art willing to take me as I am, nor care to know."

Haita threw himself at her feet.  "Beautiful being," he cried, "if
thou wilt but deign to accept all the devotion of my heart and soul--
after Hastur be served--it is thine forever.  But, alas! thou art
capricious and wayward.  Before to-morrow's sun I may lose thee
again.  Promise, I beseech thee, that however in my ignorance I may
offend, thou wilt forgive and remain always with me."

Scarcely had he finished speaking when a troop of bears came out of
the hills, racing toward him with crimson mouths and fiery eyes.  The
maiden again vanished, and he turned and fled for his life.  Nor did
he stop until he was in the cot of the holy hermit, whence he had set
out.  Hastily barring the door against the bears he cast himself upon
the ground and wept.

"My son," said the hermit from his couch of straw, freshly gathered
that morning by Haita's hands, "it is not like thee to weep for
bears--tell me what sorrow hath befallen thee, that age may minister
to the hurts of youth with such balms as it hath of its wisdom."

Haita told him all:  how thrice he had met the radiant maid, and
thrice she had left him forlorn.  He related minutely all that had
passed between them, omitting no word of what had been said.

When he had ended, the holy hermit was a moment silent, then said:
"My son, I have attended to thy story, and I know the maiden.  I have
myself seen her, as have many.  Know, then, that her name, which she
would not even permit thee to inquire, is Happiness.  Thou saidst the
truth to her, that she is capricious for she imposeth conditions that
man cannot fulfill, and delinquency is punished by desertion.  She
cometh only when unsought, and will not be questioned.  One
manifestation of curiosity, one sign of doubt, one expression of
misgiving, and she is away!  How long didst thou have her at any time
before she fled?"

"Only a single instant," answered Haita, blushing with shame at the
confession.  "Each time I drove her away in one moment."

"Unfortunate youth!" said the holy hermit, "but for thine
indiscretion thou mightst have had her for two."



AN INHABITANT OF CARCOSA



For there be divers sorts of death--some wherein the body remaineth;
and in some it vanisheth quite away with the spirit.  This commonly
occurreth only in solitude (such is God's will) and, none seeing the
end, we say the man is lost, or gone on a long journey--which indeed
he hath; but sometimes it hath happened in sight of many, as abundant
testimony showeth.  In one kind of death the spirit also dieth, and
this it hath been known to do while yet the body was in vigor for
many years.  Sometimes, as is veritably attested, it dieth with the
body, but after a season is raised up again in that place where the
body did decay.

Pondering these words of Hali (whom God rest) and questioning their
full meaning, as one who, having an intimation, yet doubts if there
be not something behind, other than that which he has discerned, I
noted not whither I had strayed until a sudden chill wind striking my
face revived in me a sense of my surroundings.  I observed with
astonishment that everything seemed unfamiliar.  On every side of me
stretched a bleak and desolate expanse of plain, covered with a tall
overgrowth of sere grass, which rustled and whistled in the autumn
wind with heaven knows what mysterious and disquieting suggestion.
Protruded at long intervals above it, stood strangely shaped and
somber-colored rocks, which seemed to have an understanding with one
another and to exchange looks of uncomfortable significance, as if
they had reared their heads to watch the issue of some foreseen
event.  A few blasted trees here and there appeared as leaders in
this malevolent conspiracy of silent expectation.

The day, I thought, must be far advanced, though the sun was
invisible; and although sensible that the air was raw and chill my
consciousness of that fact was rather mental than physical--I had no
feeling of discomfort.  Over all the dismal landscape a canopy of
low, lead-colored clouds hung like a visible curse.  In all this
there were a menace and a portent--a hint of evil, an intimation of
doom.  Bird, beast, or insect there was none.  The wind sighed in the
bare branches of the dead trees and the gray grass bent to whisper
its dread secret to the earth; but no other sound nor motion broke
the awful repose of that dismal place.

I observed in the herbage a number of weather-worn stones, evidently
shaped with tools.  They were broken, covered with moss and half
sunken in the earth.  Some lay prostrate, some leaned at various
angles, none was vertical.  They were obviously headstones of graves,
though the graves themselves no longer existed as either mounds or
depressions; the years had leveled all.  Scattered here and there,
more massive blocks showed where some pompous tomb or ambitious
monument had once flung its feeble defiance at oblivion.  So old
seemed these relics, these vestiges of vanity and memorials of
affection and piety, so battered and worn and stained--so neglected,
deserted, forgotten the place, that I could not help thinking myself
the discoverer of the burial-ground of a prehistoric race of men
whose very name was long extinct.

Filled with these reflections, I was for some time heedless of the
sequence of my own experiences, but soon I thought, "How came I
hither?"  A moment's reflection seemed to make this all clear and
explain at the same time, though in a disquieting way, the singular
character with which my fancy had invested all that I saw or heard.
I was ill.  I remembered now that I had been prostrated by a sudden
fever, and that my family had told me that in my periods of delirium
I had constantly cried out for liberty and air, and had been held in
bed to prevent my escape out-of-doors.  Now I had eluded the
vigilance of my attendants and had wandered hither to--to where?  I
could not conjecture.  Clearly I was at a considerable distance from
the city where I dwelt--the ancient and famous city of Carcosa.

No signs of human life were anywhere visible nor audible; no rising
smoke, no watch-dog's bark, no lowing of cattle, no shouts of
children at play--nothing but that dismal burial-place, with its air
of mystery and dread, due to my own disordered brain.  Was I not
becoming again delirious, there beyond human aid?  Was it not indeed
ALL an illusion of my madness?  I called aloud the names of my wives
and sons, reached out my hands in search of theirs, even as I walked
among the crumbling stones and in the withered grass.

A noise behind me caused me to turn about.  A wild animal--a lynx--
was approaching.  The thought came to me:  If I break down here in
the desert--if the fever return and I fail, this beast will be at my
throat.  I sprang toward it, shouting.  It trotted tranquilly by
within a hand's breadth of me and disappeared behind a rock.

A moment later a man's head appeared to rise out of the ground a
short distance away.  He was ascending the farther slope of a low
hill whose crest was hardly to be distinguished from the general
level.  His whole figure soon came into view against the background
of gray cloud.  He was half naked, half clad in skins.  His hair was
unkempt, his beard long and ragged.  In one hand he carried a bow and
arrow; the other held a blazing torch with a long trail of black
smoke.  He walked slowly and with caution, as if he feared falling
into some open grave concealed by the tall grass.  This strange
apparition surprised but did not alarm, and taking such a course as
to intercept him I met him almost face to face, accosting him with
the familiar salutation, "God keep you."

He gave no heed, nor did he arrest his pace.

"Good stranger," I continued, "I am ill and lost.  Direct me, I
beseech you, to Carcosa."

The man broke into a barbarous chant in an unknown tongue, passing on
and away.

An owl on the branch of a decayed tree hooted dismally and was
answered by another in the distance.  Looking upward, I saw through a
sudden rift in the clouds Aldebaran and the Hyades!  In all this
there was a hint of night--the lynx, the man with the torch, the owl.
Yet I saw--I saw even the stars in absence of the darkness.  I saw,
but was apparently not seen nor heard.  Under what awful spell did I
exist?

I seated myself at the root of a great tree, seriously to consider
what it were best to do.  That I was mad I could no longer doubt, yet
recognized a ground of doubt in the conviction.  Of fever I had no
trace.  I had, withal, a sense of exhilaration and vigor altogether
unknown to me--a feeling of mental and physical exaltation.  My
senses seemed all alert; I could feel the air as a ponderous
substance; I could hear the silence.

A great root of the giant tree against whose trunk I leaned as I sat
held inclosed in its grasp a slab of stone, a part of which protruded
into a recess formed by another root.  The stone was thus partly
protected from the weather, though greatly decomposed.  Its edges
were worn round, its corners eaten away, its surface deeply furrowed
and scaled.  Glittering particles of mica were visible in the earth
about it--vestiges of its decomposition.  This stone had apparently
marked the grave out of which the tree had sprung ages ago.  The
tree's exacting roots had robbed the grave and made the stone a
prisoner.

A sudden wind pushed some dry leaves and twigs from the uppermost
face of the stone; I saw the low-relief letters of an inscription and
bent to read it.  God in Heaven! MY name in full!--the date of MY
birth!--the date of MY death!

A level shaft of light illuminated the whole side of the tree as I
sprang to my feet in terror.  The sun was rising in the rosy east.  I
stood between the tree and his broad red disk--no shadow darkened the
trunk!

A chorus of howling wolves saluted the dawn.  I saw them sitting on
their haunches, singly and in groups, on the summits of irregular
mounds and tumuli filling a half of my desert prospect and extending
to the horizon.  And then I knew that these were ruins of the ancient
and famous city of Carcosa.


Such are the facts imparted to the medium Bayrolles by the spirit
Hoseib Alar Robardin.



THE STRANGER



A man stepped out of the darkness into the little illuminated circle
about our failing campfire and seated himself upon a rock.

"You are not the first to explore this region," he said, gravely.

Nobody controverted his statement; he was himself proof of its truth,
for he was not of our party and must have been somewhere near when we
camped.  Moreover, he must have companions not far away; it was not a
place where one would be living or traveling alone.  For more than a
week we had seen, besides ourselves and our animals, only such living
things as rattlesnakes and horned toads.  In an Arizona desert one
does not long coexist with only such creatures as these:  one must
have pack animals, supplies, arms--"an outfit."  And all these imply
comrades.  It was perhaps a doubt as to what manner of men this
unceremonious stranger's comrades might be, together with something
in his words interpretable as a challenge, that caused every man of
our half-dozen "gentlemen adventurers" to rise to a sitting posture
and lay his hand upon a weapon--an act signifying, in that time and
place, a policy of expectation.  The stranger gave the matter no
attention and began again to speak in the same deliberate,
uninflected monotone in which he had delivered his first sentence:

"Thirty years ago Ramon Gallegos, William Shaw, George W. Kent and
Berry Davis, all of Tucson, crossed the Santa Catalina mountains and
traveled due west, as nearly as the configuration of the country
permitted.  We were prospecting and it was our intention, if we found
nothing, to push through to the Gila river at some point near Big
Bend, where we understood there was a settlement.  We had a good
outfit but no guide--just Ramon Gallegos, William Shaw, George W.
Kent and Berry Davis."

The man repeated the names slowly and distinctly, as if to fix them
in the memories of his audience, every member of which was now
attentively observing him, but with a slackened apprehension
regarding his possible companions somewhere in the darkness that
seemed to enclose us like a black wall; in the manner of this
volunteer historian was no suggestion of an unfriendly purpose.  His
act was rather that of a harmless lunatic than an enemy.  We were not
so new to the country as not to know that the solitary life of many a
plainsman had a tendency to develop eccentricities of conduct and
character not always easily distinguishable from mental aberration.
A man is like a tree:  in a forest of his fellows he will grow as
straight as his generic and individual nature permits; alone in the
open, he yields to the deforming stresses and tortions that environ
him.  Some such thoughts were in my mind as I watched the man from
the shadow of my hat, pulled low to shut out the firelight.  A
witless fellow, no doubt, but what could he be doing there in the
heart of a desert?

Having undertaken to tell this story, I wish that I could describe
the man's appearance; that would be a natural thing to do.
Unfortunately, and somewhat strangely, I find myself unable to do so
with any degree of confidence, for afterward no two of us agreed as
to what he wore and how he looked; and when I try to set down my own
impressions they elude me.  Anyone can tell some kind of story;
narration is one of the elemental powers of the race.  But the talent
for description is a gift.

Nobody having broken silence the visitor went on to say:

"This country was not then what it is now.  There was not a ranch
between the Gila and the Gulf.  There was a little game here and
there in the mountains, and near the infrequent water-holes grass
enough to keep our animals from starvation.  If we should be so
fortunate as to encounter no Indians we might get through.  But
within a week the purpose of the expedition had altered from
discovery of wealth to preservation of life.  We had gone too far to
go back, for what was ahead could be no worse than what was behind;
so we pushed on, riding by night to avoid Indians and the intolerable
heat, and concealing ourselves by day as best we could.  Sometimes,
having exhausted our supply of wild meat and emptied our casks, we
were days without food or drink; then a water-hole or a shallow pool
in the bottom of an arroyo so restored our strength and sanity that
we were able to shoot some of the wild animals that sought it also.
Sometimes it was a bear, sometimes an antelope, a coyote, a cougar--
that was as God pleased; all were food.

"One morning as we skirted a mountain range, seeking a practicable
pass, we were attacked by a band of Apaches who had followed our
trail up a gulch--it is not far from here.  Knowing that they
outnumbered us ten to one, they took none of their usual cowardly
precautions, but dashed upon us at a gallop, firing and yelling.
Fighting was out of the question:  we urged our feeble animals up the
gulch as far as there was footing for a hoof, then threw ourselves
out of our saddles and took to the chaparral on one of the slopes,
abandoning our entire outfit to the enemy.  But we retained our
rifles, every man--Ramon Gallegos, William Shaw, George W. Kent and
Berry Davis."

"Same old crowd," said the humorist of our party.  He was an Eastern
man, unfamiliar with the decent observances of social intercourse.  A
gesture of disapproval from our leader silenced him and the stranger
proceeded with his tale:

"The savages dismounted also, and some of them ran up the gulch
beyond the point at which we had left it, cutting off further retreat
in that direction and forcing us on up the side.  Unfortunately the
chaparral extended only a short distance up the slope, and as we came
into the open ground above we took the fire of a dozen rifles; but
Apaches shoot badly when in a hurry, and God so willed it that none
of us fell.  Twenty yards up the slope, beyond the edge of the brush,
were vertical cliffs, in which, directly in front of us, was a narrow
opening.  Into that we ran, finding ourselves in a cavern about as
large as an ordinary room in a house.  Here for a time we were safe:
a single man with a repeating rifle could defend the entrance against
all the Apaches in the land.  But against hunger and thirst we had no
defense.  Courage we still had, but hope was a memory.

"Not one of those Indians did we afterward see, but by the smoke and
glare of their fires in the gulch we knew that by day and by night
they watched with ready rifles in the edge of the bush--knew that if
we made a sortie not a man of us would live to take three steps into
the open.  For three days, watching in turn, we held out before our
suffering became insupportable.  Then--it was the morning of the
fourth day--Ramon Gallegos said:

"'Senores, I know not well of the good God and what please him.  I
have live without religion, and I am not acquaint with that of you.
Pardon, senores, if I shock you, but for me the time is come to beat
the game of the Apache.'

"He knelt upon the rock floor of the cave and pressed his pistol
against his temple.  'Madre de Dios,' he said, 'comes now the soul of
Ramon Gallegos.'

"And so he left us--William Shaw, George W. Kent and Berry Davis.

"I was the leader:  it was for me to speak.

"'He was a brave man,' I said--'he knew when to die, and how.  It is
foolish to go mad from thirst and fall by Apache bullets, or be
skinned alive--it is in bad taste.  Let us join Ramon Gallegos.'

"'That is right,' said William Shaw.

"'That is right,' said George W. Kent.

"I straightened the limbs of Ramon Gallegos and put a handkerchief
over his face.  Then William Shaw said:  'I should like to look like
that--a little while.'

"And George W. Kent said that he felt that way, too.

"'It shall be so,' I said:  'the red devils will wait a week.
William Shaw and George W.  Kent, draw and kneel.'

"They did so and I stood before them.

"'Almighty God, our Father,' said I.

"'Almighty God, our Father,' said William Shaw.

"'Almighty God, our Father,' said George W. Kent.

"'Forgive us our sins,' said I.

"'Forgive us our sins,' said they.

"'And receive our souls.'

"'And receive our souls.'

"'Amen!'

"'Amen!'

"I laid them beside Ramon Gallegos and covered their faces."

There was a quick commotion on the opposite side of the campfire:
one of our party had sprung to his feet, pistol in hand.

"And you!" he shouted--"YOU dared to escape?--you dare to be alive?
You cowardly hound, I'll send you to join them if I hang for it!"

But with the leap of a panther the captain was upon him, grasping his
wrist.  "Hold it in, Sam Yountsey, hold it in!"

We were now all upon our feet--except the stranger, who sat
motionless and apparently inattentive.  Some one seized Yountsey's
other arm.

"Captain," I said, "there is something wrong here.  This fellow is
either a lunatic or merely a liar--just a plain, every-day liar whom
Yountsey has no call to kill.  If this man was of that party it had
five members, one of whom--probably himself--he has not named."

"Yes," said the captain, releasing the insurgent, who sat down,
"there is something--unusual.  Years ago four dead bodies of white
men, scalped and shamefully mutilated, were found about the mouth of
that cave.  They are buried there; I have seen the graves--we shall
all see them to-morrow."

The stranger rose, standing tall in the light of the expiring fire,
which in our breathless attention to his story we had neglected to
keep going.

"There were four," he said--"Ramon Gallegos, William Shaw, George W.
Kent and Berry Davis."

With this reiterated roll-call of the dead he walked into the
darkness and we saw him no more.

At that moment one of our party, who had been on guard, strode in
among us, rifle in hand and somewhat excited.

"Captain," he said, "for the last half-hour three men have been
standing out there on the mesa."  He pointed in the direction taken
by the stranger.  "I could see them distinctly, for the moon is up,
but as they had no guns and I had them covered with mine I thought it
was their move.  They have made none, but, damn it! they have got on
to my nerves."

"Go back to your post, and stay till you see them again," said the
captain.  "The rest of you lie down again, or I'll kick you all into
the fire."

The sentinel obediently withdrew, swearing, and did not return.  As
we were arranging our blankets the fiery Yountsey said:  "I beg your
pardon, Captain, but who the devil do you take them to be?"

"Ramon Gallegos, William Shaw and George W. Kent."

"But how about Berry Davis?  I ought to have shot him."

"Quite needless; you couldn't have made him any deader.  Go to
sleep."



Footnotes:

{1}  Rough notes of this tale were found among the papers of the late
Leigh Bierce.  It is printed here with such revision only as the
author might himself have made in transcription.





I.


A certain Persian nobleman obtained from a cow gipsy a small oyster.
Holding him up by the beard, he addressed him thus:

"You must try to forgive me for what I am about to do; and you might
as well set about it at once, for you haven't much time. I should
never think of swallowing you if it were not so easy; but opportunity
is the strongest of all temptations. Besides, I am an orphan, and very
hungry."

"Very well," replied the oyster; "it affords me genuine pleasure to
comfort the parentless and the starving. I have already done my best
for our friend here, of whom you purchased me; but although she has an
amiable and accommodating stomach, _we couldn't agree_. For this
trifling incompatibility--would you believe it?--she was about to stew
me! Saviour, benefactor, proceed."

"I think," said the nobleman, rising and laying down the oyster, "I
ought to know something more definite about your antecedents before
succouring you. If you couldn't agree with your mistress, you are
probably no better than you should be."

People who begin doing something from a selfish motive frequently drop
it when they learn that it is a real benevolence.




II.


A rat seeing a cat approaching, and finding no avenue of escape, went
boldly up to her, and said:

"Madam, I have just swallowed a dose of powerful bane, and in
accordance with instructions upon the label, have come out of my hole
to die. Will you kindly direct me to a spot where my corpse will prove
peculiarly offensive?"

"Since you are so ill," replied the cat, "I will myself transport you
to a spot which I think will suit."

So saying, she struck her teeth through the nape of his neck and
trotted away with him. This was more than he had bargained for, and he
squeaked shrilly with the pain.

"Ah!" said the cat, "a rat who knows he has but a few minutes to live,
never makes a fuss about a little agony. I don't think, my fine
fellow, you have taken poison enough to hurt either you or me."

So she made a meal of him.

If this fable does not teach that a rat gets no profit by lying, I
should be pleased to know what it does teach.




III.


A frog who had been sitting up all night in neighbourly converse with
an echo of elegant leisure, went out in the grey of the morning to
obtain a cheap breakfast. Seeing a tadpole approach,

"Halt!" he croaked, "and show cause why I should not eat you."

The tadpole stopped and displayed a fine tail.

"Enough," said the frog: "I mistook you for one of us; and if there is
anything I like, it is frog. But no frog has a tail, as a matter of
course."

While he was speaking, however, the tail ripened and dropped off, and
its owner stood revealed in his edible character.

"Aha!" ejaculated the frog, "so that is your little game! If, instead
of adopting a disguise, you had trusted to my mercy, I should have
spared you. But I am down upon all manner of deceit."

And he had him down in a moment.

Learn from this that he would have eaten him anyhow.




IV.


An old man carrying, for no obvious reason, a sheaf of sticks, met
another donkey whose cargo consisted merely of a bundle of stones.

"Suppose we swop," said the donkey.

"Very good, sir," assented the old man; "lay your load upon my
shoulders, and take off my parcel, putting it upon your own back."

The donkey complied, so far as concerned his own encumbrance, but
neglected to remove that of the other.

"How clever!" said the merry old gentleman, "I knew you would do that.
If you had done any differently there would have been no point to the
fable."

And laying down both burdens by the roadside, he trudged away as merry
as anything.




V.


An elephant meeting a mouse, reproached him for not taking a proper
interest in growth.

"It is all very well," retorted the mouse, "for people who haven't the
capacity for anything better. Let them grow if they like; but _I_
prefer toasted cheese."

The stupid elephant, not being able to make very much sense of this
remark, essayed, after the manner of persons worsted at repartee, to
set his foot upon his clever conqueror. In point of fact, he did set
his foot upon him, and there wasn't any more mouse.

The lesson imparted by this fable is open, palpable: mice and
elephants look at things each after the manner of his kind; and when
an elephant decides to occupy the standpoint of a mouse, it is
unhealthy for the latter.




VI.


A wolf was slaking his thirst at a stream, when a lamb left the side
of his shepherd, came down the creek to the wolf, passed round him
with considerable ostentation, and began drinking below.

"I beg you to observe," said the lamb, "that water does not commonly
run uphill; and my sipping here cannot possibly defile the current
where you are, even supposing my nose were no cleaner than yours,
which it is. So you have not the flimsiest pretext for slaying me."

"I am not aware, sir," replied the wolf, "that I require a pretext
for loving chops; it never occurred to me that one was necessary."

And he dined upon that lambkin with much apparent satisfaction.

This fable ought to convince any one that of two stories very similar
one needs not necessarily be a plagiarism.




VII.

[Illustration]

An old gentleman sat down, one day, upon an acorn, and finding it a
very comfortable seat, went soundly to sleep. The warmth of his body
caused the acorn to germinate, and it grew so rapidly, that when the
sleeper awoke he found himself sitting in the fork of an oak, sixty
feet from the ground.

"Ah!" said he, "I am fond of having an extended view of any landscape
which happens to please my fancy; but this one does not seem to
possess that merit. I think I will go home."

It is easier to say go home than to go.

"Well, well!" he resumed, "if I cannot compel circumstances to my
will, I can at least adapt my will to circumstances. I decide to
remain. 'Life'--as a certain eminent philosopher in England wilt say,
whenever there shall be an England to say it in--'is the definite
combination of heterogeneous changes, both simultaneous and
successive, in correspondence with external co-existences and
sequences.' I have, fortunately, a few years of this before me yet;
and I suppose I can permit my surroundings to alter me into anything I
choose."

And he did; but what a choice!

I should say that the lesson hereby imparted is one of contentment
combined with science.




VIII.


A caterpillar had crawled painfully to the top of a hop-pole, and not
finding anything there to interest him, began to think of descending.

"Now," soliloquized he, "if I only had a pair of wings, I should be
able to manage it very nicely."

So saying, he turned himself about to go down, but the heat of his
previous exertion, and that of the sun, had by this time matured him
into a butterfly.

"Just my luck!" he growled, "I never wish for anything without getting
it. I did not expect this when I came out this morning, and have
nothing prepared. But I suppose I shall have to stand it."

So he spread his pinions and made for the first open flower he saw.
But a spider happened to be spending the summer in that vegetable, and
it was not long before Mr. Butterfly was wishing himself back atop of
that pole, a simple caterpillar.

He had at last the pleasure of being denied a desire.

_Hæc fabula docet_ that it is not a good plan to call at houses
without first ascertaining who is at home there.




IX.


It is related of a certain Tartar priest that, being about to
sacrifice a pig, he observed tears in the victim's eyes.

"Now, I'd like to know what is the matter with _you_?" he asked.

"Sir," replied the pig, "if your penetration were equal to that of the
knife you hold, you would know without inquiring; but I don't mind
telling you. I weep because I know I shall be badly roasted."

"Ah," returned the priest, meditatively, having first killed the pig,
"we are all pretty much alike: it is the bad roasting that frightens
us. Mere death has no terrors."

From this narrative learn that even priests sometimes get hold of only
half a truth.




X.


A dog being very much annoyed by bees, ran, quite accidentally, into
an empty barrel lying on the ground, and looking out at the bung-hole,
addressed his tormenters thus:

"Had you been temperate, stinging me only one at a time, you might
have got a good deal of fun out of me. As it is, you have driven me
into a secure retreat; for I can snap you up as fast as you come in
through the bung-hole. Learn from this the folly of intemperate zeal."

When he had concluded, he awaited a reply. There wasn't any reply; for
the bees had never gone near the bung-hole; they went in the same way
as he did, and made it very warm for him.

The lesson of this fable is that one cannot stick to his pure reason
while quarrelling with bees.




XI.


A fox and a duck having quarrelled about the ownership of a frog,
agreed to refer the dispute to a lion. After hearing a great deal of
argument, the lion opened his mouth to speak.

"I am very well aware," interrupted the duck, "what your decision is.
It is that by our own showing the frog belongs to neither of us, and
you will eat him yourself. But please remember that lions do not like
frogs."

"To me," exclaimed the fox, "it is perfectly clear that you will give
the frog to the duck, the duck to me, and take me yourself. Allow me
to state certain objections to--"

"I was about to remark," said the lion, "that while you were
disputing, the cause of contention had hopped away. Perhaps you can
procure another frog."

To point out the moral of this fable would be to offer a gratuitous
insult to the acuteness of the reader.




XII.


An ass meeting a pair of horses, late one evening, said to them:

"It is time all honest horses were in bed. Why are you driving out at
this time of day?"

"Ah!" returned they, "if it is so very late, why are you out riding?"

"I never in my life," retorted the ass angrily, "knew a horse to
return a direct answer to a civil question."

This tale shows that this ass did not know everything.

[The implication that horses do not answer questions seems to have
irritated the worthy fabulist.--TRANSLATOR.]




XIII.


A stone being cast by the plough against a lump of earth, hastened to
open the conversation as follows:

"Virtue, which is the opposite of vice, is best fostered by the
absence of temptation!"

The lump of earth, being taken somewhat by surprise, was not prepared
with an apophthegm, and said nothing.

Since that time it has been customary to call a stupid person a
"clod."




XIV.


A river seeing a zephyr carrying off an anchor, asked him, "What are
you going to do with it?"

"I give it up," replied the zephyr, after mature reflection.

"Blow me if _I_ would!" continued the river; "you might just as well
not have taken it at all."

"Between you and me," returned the zephyr, "I only picked it up
because it is customary for zephyrs to do such things. But if you
don't mind I will carry it up to your head and drop it in your mouth."

This fable teaches such a multitude of good things that it would be
invidious to mention any.




XV.


A peasant sitting on a pile of stones saw an ostrich approaching, and
when it had got within range he began pelting it. It is hardly
probable that the bird liked this; but it never moved until a large
number of boulders had been discharged; then it fell to and ate them.

"It was very good of you, sir," then said the fowl; "pray tell me to
what virtue I am indebted for this excellent meal."

"To piety," replied the peasant, who, believing that anything able to
devour stones must be a god, was stricken with fear. "I beg you won't
think these were merely cold victuals from my table; I had just
gathered them fresh, and was intending to have them dressed for my
dinner; but I am always hospitable to the deities, and now I suppose I
shall have to go without."

"On the contrary, my pious youth," returned the ostrich, "you shall go
within."

And the man followed the stones.

The falsehoods of the wicked never amount to much.




XVI.


Two thieves went into a farmer's granary and stole a sack of kitchen
vegetables; and, one of them slinging it across his shoulders, they
began to run away. In a moment all the domestic animals and barn-yard
fowls about the place were at their heels, in high clamour, which
threatened to bring the farmer down upon them with his dogs.

"You have no idea how the weight of this sack assists me in escaping,
by increasing my momentum," said the one who carried the plunder;
"suppose _you_ take it."

"Ah!" returned the other, who had been zealously pointing out the way
to safety, and keeping foremost therein, "it is interesting to find
how a common danger makes people confiding. You have a thousand times
said I could not be trusted with valuable booty. It is an humiliating
confession, but I am myself convinced that if I should assume that
sack, and the impetus it confers, you could not depend upon your
dividend."

[Illustration]

"A common danger," was the reply, "seems to stimulate conviction, as
well as confidence."

"Very likely," assented the other, drily; "I am quite too busy to
enter into these subtleties. You will find the subject very ably
treated in the Zend-Avesta."

But the bastinado taught them more in a minute than they would have
gleaned from that excellent work in a fortnight.

If they could only have had the privilege of reading this fable, it
would have taught them more than either.




XVII.


While a man was trying with all his might to cross a fence, a bull ran
to his assistance, and taking him upon his horns, tossed him over.
Seeing the man walking away without making any remark, the bull said:

"You are quite welcome, I am sure. I did no more than my duty."

"I take a different view of it, very naturally," replied the man, "and
you may keep your polite acknowledgments of my gratitude until you
receive it. I did not require your services."

"You don't mean to say," answered the bull, "that you did not wish to
cross that fence!"

"I mean to say," was the rejoinder, "that I wished to cross it by my
method, solely to avoid crossing it by yours."

_Fabula docet_ that while the end is everything, the means is
something.




XVIII.


An hippopotamus meeting an open alligator, said to him:

"My forked friend, you may as well collapse. You are not sufficiently
comprehensive to embrace me. I am myself no tyro at smiling, when in
the humour."

"I really had no expectation of taking you in," replied the other. "I
have a habit of extending my hospitality impartially to all, and about
seven feet wide."

"You remind me," said the hippopotamus, "of a certain zebra who was
not vicious at all; he merely kicked the breath out of everything that
passed behind him, but did not induce things to pass behind him."

"It is quite immaterial what I remind you of," was the reply.

The lesson conveyed by this fable is a very beautiful one.




XIX.


A man was plucking a living goose, when his victim addressed him thus:

"Suppose _you_ were a goose; do you think you would relish this sort
of thing?"

"Well, suppose I were," answered the man; "do you think _you_ would
like to pluck me?"

"Indeed I would!" was the emphatic, natural, but injudicious reply.

"Just so," concluded her tormentor; "that's the way _I_ feel about the
matter."




XX.


A traveller perishing of thirst in a desert, debated with his camel
whether they should continue their journey, or turn back to an oasis
they had passed some days before. The traveller favoured the latter
plan.

"I am decidedly opposed to any such waste of time," said the animal;
"I don't care for oases myself."

"I should not care for them either," retorted the man, with some
temper, "if, like you, I carried a number of assorted water-tanks
inside. But as you will not submit to go back, and I shall not consent
to go forward, we can only remain where we are."

"But," objected the camel, "that will be certain death to you!"

"Not quite," was the quiet answer, "it involves only the loss of my
camel."

So saying, he assassinated the beast, and appropriated his liquid
store.

A compromise is not always a settlement satisfactory to both parties.




XXI.


A sheep, making a long journey, found the heat of his fleece very
uncomfortable, and seeing a flock of other sheep in a fold, evidently
awaiting for some one, leaped over and joined them, in the hope of
being shorn. Perceiving the shepherd approaching, and the other sheep
huddling into a remote corner of the fold, he shouldered his way
forward, and going up to the shepherd, said:

"Did you ever see such a lot of fools? It's lucky I came along to set
them an example of docility. Seeing me operated upon, they 'll be glad
to offer themselves."

"Perhaps so," replied the shepherd, laying hold of the animal's horns;
"but I never kill more than one sheep at a time. Mutton won't keep in
hot weather."

The chops tasted excellently well with tomato sauce.

The moral of this fable isn't what you think it is. It is this: The
chops of another man's mutton are _always_ nice eating.




XXII.


Two travellers between Teheran and Bagdad met half-way up the vertical
face of a rock, on a path only a cubit in width. As both were in a
hurry, and etiquette would allow neither to set his foot upon the
other even if dignity had permitted prostration, they maintained for
some time a stationary condition. After some reflection, each decided
to jump round the other; but as etiquette did not warrant conversation
with a stranger, neither made known his intention. The consequence was
they met, with considerable emphasis, about four feet from the edge of
the path, and went through a flight of soaring eagles, a mile out of
their way![A]

[Footnote A: This is infamous! The learned Parsee appears wholly to
ignore the distinction between a fable and a simple lie.--TRANSLATOR.]




XXIII.


A stone which had lain for centuries in a hidden place complained to
Allah that remaining so long in one position was productive of cramps.

"If thou wouldst be pleased," it said, "to let me take a little
exercise now and then, my health would be the better for it."

So it was granted permission to make a short excursion, and at once
began rolling out into the open desert. It had not proceeded far
before an ostrich, who was pensively eating a keg of nails, left his
repast, dashed at the stone, and gobbled it up.

This narration teaches the folly of contentment: if the ostrich had
been content with his nails he would never have eaten the stone.




XXIV.


A man carrying a sack of corn up a high ladder propped against a wall,
had nearly reached the top, when a powerful hog passing that way leant
against the bottom to scratch its hide.

"I wish," said the man, speaking down the ladder, "you would make
that operation as brief as possible; and when I come down I will
reward you by rearing a fresh ladder especially for you."

"This one is quite good enough for a hog," was the reply; "but I am
curious to know if you will keep your promise, so I'll just amuse
myself until you come down."

And taking the bottom rung in his mouth, he moved off, away from the
wall. A moment later he had all the loose corn he could garner, but he
never got that other ladder.

MORAL.--An ace and four kings is as good a hand as one can hold in
draw-poker.




XXV.


A young cock and a hen were speaking of the size of eggs. Said the
cock:

"I once laid an egg--"

"Oh, you did!" interrupted the hen, with a derisive cackle. "Pray how
did you manage it?"

The cock felt injured in his self-esteem, and, turning his back upon
the hen, addressed himself to a brood of young chickens.

"I once laid an egg--"

The chickens chirped incredulously, and passed on. The insulted bird
reddened in the wattles with indignation, and strutting up to the
patriarch of the entire barn-yard, repeated his assertion. The
patriarch nodded gravely, as if the feat were an every-day affair, and
the other continued:

"I once laid an egg alongside a water-melon, and compared the two. The
vegetable was considerably the larger."

This fable is intended to show the absurdity of hearing all a man has
to say.




XXVI.


[Illustration]

Seeing himself getting beyond his depth, a bathing naturalist called
lustily for succour.

"Anything _I_ can do for you?" inquired the engaging octopus.

"Happy to serve you, I am sure," said the accommodating leech.

"Command _me_," added the earnest crab.

"Gentlemen of the briny deep," exclaimed the gasping _savant_, "I am
compelled to decline your friendly offices, but I tender you my
scientific gratitude; and, as a return favour, I beg, with this my
last breath, that you will accept the freedom of my aquarium, and make
it your home."

This tale proves that scientific gratitude is quite as bad as the
natural sort.




XXVII.


Two whales seizing a pike, attempted in turn to swallow him, but
without success. They finally determined to try him jointly, each
taking hold of an end, and both shutting their eyes for a grand
effort, when a shark darted silently between them, biting away the
whole body of their prey. Opening their eyes, they gazed upon one
another with much satisfaction.

"I had no idea he would go down so easily," said the one.

"Nor I," returned the other; "but how very tasteless a pike is."

The insipidity we observe in most of our acquaintances is largely due
to our imperfect knowledge of them.




XXVIII.


A wolf went into the cottage of a peasant while the family was absent
in the fields, and falling foul of some beef, was quietly enjoying it,
when he was observed by a domestic rat, who went directly to her
master, informing him of what she had seen.

"I would myself have dispatched the robber," she added, "but feared
you might wish to take him alive."

So the man secured a powerful club and went to the door of the house,
while the rat looked in at the window. After taking a survey of the
situation, the man said:

"I don't think I care to take this fellow alive. Judging from his
present performance, I should say his keeping would entail no mean
expense. You may go in and slay him if you like; I have quite changed
my mind."

"If you really intended taking him prisoner," replied the rat, "the
object of that bludgeon is to me a matter of mere conjecture. However,
it is easy enough to see you have changed your mind; and it may be
barely worth mentioning that I have changed mine."

"The interest you both take in me," said the wolf, without looking up,
"touches me deeply. As you have considerately abstained from bothering
me with the question of how I am to be disposed of, I will not
embarrass your counsels by obtruding a preference. Whatever may be
your decision, you may count on my acquiescence; my countenance alone
ought to convince you of the meek docility of my character. I never
lose my temper, and I never swear; but, by the stomach of the Prophet!
if either one of you domestic animals is in sight when I have finished
the conquest of these ribs, the question of _my_ fate may be postponed
for future debate, without detriment to any important interest."

This fable teaches that while you are considering the abatement of a
nuisance, it is important to know which nuisance is the more likely to
be abated.




XXIX.


A snake tried to shed his skin by pulling it off over his head, but,
being unable to do so, was advised by a woodman to slip out of it in
the usual way.

"But," said the serpent, "this is the way _you_ do it!"

"True," exclaimed the woodman, holding out the hem of his tunic; "but
you will observe that my skin is brief and open. If you desire one
like that, I think I can assist you."

So saying, he chopped off about a cubit of the snake's tail.




XXX.


An oyster who had got a large pebble between the valves of his shell,
and was unable to get it out, was lamenting his sad fate, when--the
tide being out--a monkey ran to him, and began making an examination.

"You appear," said the monkey, "to have got something else in here,
too. I think I'd better remove that first."

With this he inserted his paw, and scooped out the animal's essential
part.

"Now," said he, eating the portion he had removed, "I think you will
be able to manage the pebble yourself."

To apprehend the lesson of this fable one must have some experience of
the law.




XXXI.


An old fox and her two cubs were pursued by dogs, when one of the cubs
got a thorn in his foot, and could go no farther. Setting the other to
watch for the pursuers, the mother proceeded, with much tender
solicitude, to extract the thorn. Just as she had done so, the
sentinel gave the alarm.

"How near are they?" asked the mother.

"Close by, in the next field," was the answer.

"The deuce they are!" was the hasty rejoinder. "However, I presume
they will be content with a single fox."

And shoving the thorn earnestly back into the wounded foot, this
excellent parent took to her heels.

This fable proves that humanity does not happen to enjoy a monopoly of
paternal affection.




XXXII.


A man crossing the great river of Egypt, heard a voice, which seemed
to come from beneath his boat, requesting him to stop. Thinking it
must proceed from some river-deity, he laid down his paddle and said:

"Whoever you are that ask me to stop, I beg you will let me go on. I
have been asked by a friend to dine with him, and I am late."

"Should your friend pass this way," said the voice, "I will show him
the cause of your detention. Meantime you must come to dinner with
_me_."

"Willingly," replied the man, devoutly, very well pleased with so
extraordinary an honour; "pray show me the way."

"In here," said the crocodile, elevating his distending jaws above the
water and beckoning with his tongue--"this way, please."

This fable shows that being asked to dinner is not always the same
thing as being asked to dine.




XXXIII.


An old monkey, designing to teach his sons the advantage of unity,
brought them a number of sticks, and desired them to see how easily
they might be broken, one at a time. So each young monkey took a stick
and broke it.

"Now," said the father, "I will teach you a lesson."

And he began to gather the sticks into a bundle. But the young
monkeys, thinking he was about to beat them, set upon him, all
together, and disabled him.

"There!" said the aged sufferer, "behold the advantage of unity! If
you had assailed me one at a time, I would have killed every mother's
son of you!"

Moral lessons are like the merchant's goods: they are conveyed in
various ways.




XXXIV.


A wild horse meeting a domestic one, taunted him with his condition of
servitude. The tamed animal claimed that he was as free as the wind.

"If that is so," said the other, "pray tell me the office of that bit
in your mouth."

"That," was the answer, "is iron, one of the best tonics in the
_materia medica_."

"But what," said the other, "is the meaning of the rein attached to
it?"

"Keeps it from falling out of my mouth when I am too indolent to hold
it," was the reply.

"How about the saddle?"

"Fool!" was the angry retort; "its purpose is to spare me fatigue:
when I am tired, I get on and ride."




XXXV.


Some doves went to a hawk, and asked him to protect them from a kite.

"That I will," was the cheerful reply; "and when I am admitted into
the dovecote, I shall kill more of you in a day than the kite did in a
century. But of course you know this; you expect to be treated in the
regular way."

So he entered the dovecote, and began preparations for a general
slaughter. But the doves all set upon him and made exceedingly short
work of him. With his last breath he asked them why, being so
formidable, they had not killed the kite. They replied that they had
never seen any kite.




[Illustration]


XXXVI.


A defeated warrior snatched up his aged father, and, slinging him
across his shoulders, plunged into the wilderness, followed by the
weary remnant of his beaten army. The old gentleman liked it.

"See!" said he, triumphantly, to the flying legion; "did you ever hear
of so dutiful and accommodating a son? And he's as easy under the
saddle as an old family horse!"

"I rather think," replied the broken and disordered battalion, with a
grin, "that Mr. Æneas once did something of this kind. But _his_
father had thoughtfully taken an armful of lares and penates; and the
accommodating nature of _his_ son was, therefore, more conspicuous. If
I might venture to suggest that you take up my shield and scimitar--"

"Thank you," said the aged party, "I could not think of disarming the
military: but if you would just hand me up one of the heaviest of
those dead branches, I think the merits of my son would be rendered
sufficiently apparent."

The routed column passed him up the one shown in the immediate
foreground of our sketch, and it was quite enough for both steed and
rider.

_Fabula ostendit_ that History repeats itself, with variations.




XXXVII.


A pig who had engaged a cray-fish to pilot him along the beach in
search of mussels, was surprised to see his guide start off backwards.

"Your excessive politeness quite overcomes me," said the porker, "but
don't you think it rather ill bestowed upon a pig? Pray don't hesitate
to turn your back upon me."

"Sir," replied the cray-fish, "permit me to continue as I am. We now
stand to each other in the proper relation of _employé_ to employer.
The former is excessively obsequious, and the latter is, in the eyes
of the former, a hog."




XXXVIII.


The king of tortoises desiring to pay a visit of ceremony to a
neighbouring monarch, feared that in his absence his idle subjects
might get up a revolution, and that whoever might be left at the head
of the State would usurp the throne. So calling his subjects about
him, he addressed them thus:

"I am about to leave our beloved country for a long period, and desire
to leave the sceptre in the hands of him who is most truly a tortoise.
I decree that you shall set out from yonder distant tree, and pass
round it. Whoever shall get back last shall be appointed Regent."

So the population set out for the goal, and the king for his
destination. Before the race was decided, his Majesty had made the
journey and returned. But he found the throne occupied by a subject,
who at once secured by violence what he had won by guile.

Certain usurpers are too conscientious to retain kingly power unless
the rightful monarch be dead; and these are the most dangerous sort.




XXXIX.


A spaniel at the point of death requested a mastiff friend to eat him.

"It would soothe my last moments," said he, "to know that when I am no
longer of any importance to myself I may still be useful to you."

"Much obliged, I am sure," replied his friend; "I think you mean well,
but you should know that my appetite is not so depraved as to relish
dog."

Perhaps it is for a similar reason we abstain from cannibalism.




XL.


A cloud was passing across the face of the sun, when the latter
expostulated with him.

"Why," said the sun, "when you have so much space to float in, should
you be casting your cold shadow upon me?"

After a moment's reflection, the cloud made answer thus:

"I certainly had no intention of giving offence by my presence, and as
for my shadow, don't you think you have made a trifling mistake?--not
a gigantic or absurd mistake, but merely one that would disgrace an
idiot."

At this the great luminary was furious, and fell so hotly upon him
that in a few minutes there was nothing of him left.

It is very foolish to bandy words with a cloud if you happen to be the
sun.




XLI.


A rabbit travelling leisurely along the highway was seen, at some
distance, by a duck, who had just come out of the water.

"Well, I declare!" said she, "if I could not walk without limping in
that ridiculous way, I'd stay at home. Why, he's a spectacle!"

"Did you ever see such an ungainly beast as that duck!" said the
rabbit to himself. "If I waddled like that I should go out only at
night."

MORAL, BY A KANGAROO.--People who are ungraceful of gait are always
intolerant of mind.




XLII.


A fox who dwelt in the upper chamber of an abandoned watch-tower,
where he practised all manner of magic, had by means of his art
subjected all other animals to his will. One day he assembled a great
multitude of them below his window, and commanded that each should
appear in his presence, and all who could not teach him some important
truth should be thrown off the walls and dashed to pieces. Upon
hearing this they were all stricken with grief, and began to lament
their hard fate most piteously.

"How," said they, "shall we, who are unskilled in magic, unread in
philosophy, and untaught in the secrets of the stars--who have neither
wit, eloquence, nor song--how shall we essay to teach wisdom to the
wise?"

Nevertheless, they were compelled to make the attempt. After many had
failed and been dispatched, another fox arrived on the ground, and
learning the condition of affairs, scampered slyly up the steps, and
whispered something in the ear of the cat, who was about entering the
tower. So the latter stuck her head in at the door, and shrieked:

"Pullets with a southern exposure ripen earliest, and have yellow
legs."

At this the magician was so delighted that he dissolved the spell and
let them all go free.




XLIII.


One evening a jackass, passing between a village and a hill, looked
over the latter and saw the faint light of the rising moon.

"Ho-ho, Master Redface!" said he, "so you are climbing up the other
side to point out my long ears to the villagers, are you? I'll just
meet you at the top, and set my heels into your insolent old lantern."

So he scrambled painfully up to the crest, and stood outlined against
the broad disc of the unconscious luminary, more conspicuously a
jackass than ever before.




XLIV.


A bear wishing to rob a beehive, laid himself down in front of it, and
overturned it with his paw.

"Now," said he, "I will lie perfectly still and let the bees sting me
until they are exhausted and powerless; their honey may then be
obtained without opposition."

And it was so obtained, but by a fresh bear, the other being dead.

This narrative exhibits one aspect of the "Fabian policy."




XLV.


A cat seeing a mouse with a piece of cheese, said:

"I would not eat that, if I were you, for I think it is poisoned.
However, if you will allow me to examine it, I will tell you certainly
whether it is or not."

While the mouse was thinking what it was best to do, the cat had fully
made up her mind, and was kind enough to examine both the cheese and
the mouse in a manner highly satisfactory to herself, but the mouse
has never returned to give _his_ opinion.




XLVI.


An improvident man, who had quarrelled with his wife concerning
household expenses, took her and the children out on the lawn,
intending to make an example of her. Putting himself in an attitude of
aggression, and turning to his offspring, he said:

"You will observe, my darlings, that domestic offences are always
punished with a loss of blood. Make a note of this and be wise."

He had no sooner spoken than a starving mosquito settled upon his
nose, and began to assist in enforcing the lesson.

"My officious friend," said the man, "when I require illustrations
from the fowls of the air, you may command my patronage. The deep
interest you take in my affairs is, at present, a trifle annoying."

[Illustration]

"I do not find it so," the mosquito would have replied had he been at
leisure, "and am convinced that our respective points of view are so
widely dissimilar as not to afford the faintest hope of reconciling
our opinions upon collateral points. Let us be thankful that upon the
main question of bloodletting we perfectly agree."

When the bird had concluded, the man's convictions were quite
unaltered, but he was too weak to resume the discussion; and, although
blood is thicker than water, the children were constrained to confess
that the stranger had the best of it.

This fable teaches.




XLVII.


"I hate snakes who bestow their caresses with interested partiality or
fastidious discrimination," boasted a boa constrictor. "_My_
affection is unbounded; it embraces all animated nature. I am the
universal shepherd; I gather all manner of living things into my
folds. Entertainment here for man and beast!"

"I should be glad of one of your caresses," said a porcupine, meekly;
"it has been some time since I got a loving embrace."

So saying, he nestled snugly and confidingly against the large-hearted
serpent--who fled.

A comprehensive philanthropy may be devoid of prejudices, but it has
its preferences all the same.




XLVIII.


During a distressing famine in China a starving man met a fat pig,
who, seeing no chance of escape, walked confidently up to the superior
animal, and said:

"Awful famine! isn't it?"

"Quite dreadful!" replied the man, eyeing him with an evident purpose:
"almost impossible to obtain meat."

"Plenty of meat, such as it is, but no corn. Do you know, I have been
compelled to eat so many of your people, I don't believe there is an
ounce of pork in my composition."

"And I so many that I have lost all taste for pork."

"Terrible thing this cannibalism!"

"Depends upon which character you try it in; it is terrible to be
eaten."

"You are very brutal!"

"You are very fat."

"You look as if you would take my life."

"You look as if you would sustain mine."

"Let us 'pull sticks,'" said the now desperate animal, "to see which
of us shall die."

"Good!" assented the man: "I'll pull this one."

So saying, he drew a hedge-stake from the ground, and stained it with
the brain of that unhappy porker.

MORAL.--An empty stomach has no ears.




XLIX.


A snake, a mile long, having drawn himself over a roc's egg,
complained that in its present form he could get no benefit from it,
and modestly desired the roc to aid him in some way.

"Certainly," assented the bird, "I think we can arrange it."

Saying which, she snatched up one of the smaller Persian provinces,
and poising herself a few leagues above the suffering reptile, let it
drop upon him to smash the egg.

This fable exhibits the folly of asking for aid without specifying the
kind and amount of aid you require.




L.


An ox meeting a man on the highway, asked him for a pinch of snuff,
whereupon the man fled back along the road in extreme terror.

"_Don't_ be alarmed," said a horse whom he met; "the ox won't bite
you."

The man gave one stare and dashed across the meadows.

"Well," said a sheep, "I wouldn't be afraid of a horse; _he_ won't
kick."

The man shot like a comet into the forest.

"Look where you're going there, or I'll thrash the life out of you!"
screamed a bird into whose nest he had blundered.

Frantic with fear, the man leapt into the sea.

"By Jove! how you frightened me," said a small shark.

The man was dejected, and felt a sense of injury. He seated himself
moodily on the bottom, braced up his chin with his knees, and thought
for an hour. Then he beckoned to the fish who had made the last
remark.

"See here, I say," said he, "I wish you would just tell me what in
thunder this all means."

"Ever read any fables?" asked the shark.

"No--yes--well, the catechism, the marriage service, and--"

"Oh, bother!" said the fish, playfully, smiling clean back to the
pectoral fins; "get out of this and bolt your Æsop!"

The man did get out and bolted.

[This fable teaches that its worthy author was drunk as a
loon.--TRANSLATOR.]




LI.


A lion pursued by some villagers was asked by a fox why he did not
escape on horseback.

"There is a fine strong steed just beyond this rock," said the fox.
"All you have to do is to get on his back and stay there."

So the lion went up to the charger and asked him to give him a lift.

"Certainly," said the horse, "with great pleasure."

And setting one of his heels into the animal's stomach, he lifted him.
about seven feet from the ground.

"Confound you!" roared the beast as he fell back.

"So did you," quietly remarked the steed.




LII.


A Mahout who had dismounted from his elephant, and was quietly
standing on his head in the middle of the highway, was asked by the
animal why he did not revert and move on.

"You are making a spectacle of yourself," said the beast.

"If I choose to stand upside down," replied the man, "I am very well
aware that I incur the displeasure of those who adhere with slavish
tenacity to the prejudices and traditions of society; but it seems to
me that rebuke would come with a more consistent grace from one who
does not wear a tail upon his nose."

This fable teaches that four straight lines may enclose a circle, but
there will be corners to let.




LIII.


A dog meeting a strange cat, took her by the top of the back, and
shook her for a considerable period with some earnestness. Then
depositing her in a ditch, he remarked with gravity:

"There, my feline friend! I think that will teach you a wholesome
lesson; and as punishment is intended to be reformatory, you ought to
be grateful to me for deigning to administer it."

"I don't think of questioning your right to worry me," said the cat,
getting her breath, "but I should like to know where you got your
licence to preach at me. Also, if not inconsistent with the dignity of
the court, I should wish to be informed of the nature of my offence;
in order that I may the more clearly apprehend the character of the
lesson imparted by its punishment."

"Since you are so curious," replied the dog, "I worry you because you
are too feeble to worry me."

"In other words," rejoined the cat, getting herself together as well
as she could, "you bite me for that to which you owe your existence."

The reply of the dog was lost in the illimitable field of ether,
whither he was just then projected by the kick of a passing horse. The
moral of this fable cannot be given until he shall get down, and close
the conversation with the regular apophthegm.




LIV.


People who wear tight hats will do well to lay this fable well to
heart, and ponder upon the deep significance of its moral:

In passing over a river, upon a high bridge, a cow discovered a broad
loose plank in the flooring, sustained in place by a beam beneath the
centre.

"Now," said she, "I will stand at this end of the trap, and when
yonder sheep steps upon the opposite extreme there will be an upward
tendency in wool."

So when the meditative mutton advanced unwarily upon the treacherous
device, the cow sprang bodily upon the other end, and there was a fall
in beef.




LV.


Two snakes were debating about the proper method of attacking prey.

"The best way," said one, "is to slide cautiously up, endwise, and
seize it thus"--illustrating his method by laying hold of the other's
tail.

"Not at all," was the reply; "a better plan is to approach by a
circular side-sweep, thus"--turning upon his opponent and taking in
_his_ tail.

Although there was no disagreement as to the manner of disposing of
what was once seized, each began to practise his system upon the
other, and continued until both were swallowed.

The work begun by contention is frequently completed by habit.




[Illustration:]


LVI.


A man staggering wearily through the streets of Persepolis, under a
heavy burden, said to himself:

"I wish I knew what this thing is I have on my back; then I could make
some sort of conjecture as to what I design doing with it."

"Suppose," said the burden, "I were a man in a sack; what disposition
would you make of me?"

"The regular thing," replied the man, "would be to take you over to
Constantinople, and pitch you into the Bosphorus; but I should
probably content myself with laying you down and jumping on you, as
being more agreeable to my feelings, and quite as efficacious."

"But suppose," continued the burden, "I were a shoulder of
beef--which I quite as much resemble--belonging to some poor family?"

"In that case," replied the man, promptly, "I should carry you to my
larder, my good fellow."

"But if I were a sack of gold, do you think you would find me very
onerous?" said the burden.

"A great deal would depend," was the answer, "upon whom you happened
to belong to; but I may say, generally, that gold upon the shoulders
is wonderfully light, considering the weight of it."

"Behold," said the burden, "the folly of mankind: they cannot perceive
that the _quality_ of the burdens of life is a matter of no
importance. The question of pounds and ounces is the only
consideration of any real weight."




LVII.


A ghost meeting a genie, one wintry night, said to him:

"Extremely harassing weather, friend. Wish I had some teeth to
chatter!"

"You do not need them," said the other; "you can always chatter those
of other people, by merely showing yourself. For my part, I should be
content with some light employment: would erect a cheap palace,
transport a light-weight princess, threaten a small cripple--or jobs
of that kind. What are the prospects of the fool crop?"

"For the next few thousand years, very good. There is a sort of thing
called Literature coming in shortly, and it will make our fortune. But
it will be very bad for History. Curse this phantom apparel! The more
I gather it about me the colder I get."

"When Literature has made our fortune," sneered the genie, "I presume
you will purchase material clothing."

"And you," retorted the ghost, "will be able to advertise for
permanent employment at a fixed salary."

This fable shows the difference between the super natural and the
natural "super": the one appears in the narrative, the other does not.




LVIII.


"Permit me to help you on in the world, sir," said a boy to a
travelling tortoise, placing a glowing coal upon the animal's back.

"Thank you," replied the unconscious beast; "I alone am responsible
for the time of my arrival, and I alone will determine the degree of
celerity required. The gait I am going will enable me to keep all my
present appointments."

A genial warmth began about this time to pervade his upper crust, and
a moment after he was dashing away at a pace comparatively tremendous.

"How about those engagements?" sneered the grinning urchin.

"I've recollected another one," was the hasty reply.




LIX.


Having fastened his gaze upon a sparrow, a rattlesnake sprung open his
spanning jaws, and invited her to enter.

"I should be most happy," said the bird, not daring to betray her
helpless condition, but anxious by any subterfuge to get the serpent
to remove his fascinating regard, "but I am lost in contemplation of
yonder green sunset, from which I am unable to look away for more
than a minute. I shall turn to it presently."

"Do, by all means," said the serpent, with a touch of irony in his
voice. "There is nothing so improving as a good, square, green
sunset."

"Did you happen to observe that man standing behind you with a club?"
continued the sparrow. "Handsome fellow! Fifteen cubits high, with
seven heads, and very singularly attired; quite a spectacle in his
way."

"I don't seem to care much for men," said the snake. "Every way
inferior to serpents--except in malice."

"But he is accompanied by a _really interesting_ child," persisted the
bird, desperately.

The rattlesnake reflected deeply. He soliloquized as follows:

"There is a mere chance--say about one chance to ten thousand
million--that this songster is speaking the truth. One chance in ten
thousand million of seeing a really interesting child is worth the
sacrifice demanded; I'll make it."

So saying, he removed his glittering eyes from the bird (who
immediately took wing) and looked behind him. It is needless to say
there was no really interesting child there--nor anywhere else.

MORAL.--Mendacity (so called from the inventors) is a very poor sort
of dacity; but it will serve your purpose if you draw it sufficiently
strong.




LX.


A man who was very much annoyed by the incursions of a lean ass
belonging to his neighbour, resolved to compass the destruction of the
invader.

"Now," said he, "if this animal shall choose to starve himself to
death in the midst of plenty, the law will not hold _me_ guilty of his
blood. I have read of a trick which I think will 'fix' him."

So he took two bales of his best hay, and placed them in a distant
field, about forty cubits apart. By means of a little salt he then
enticed the ass in, and coaxed him between the bundles.

"There, fiend!" said he, with a diabolic grin, as he walked away
delighted with the success of his stratagem, "now hesitate which
bundle of hay to attack first, until you starve--monster!"

Some weeks afterwards he returned with a wagon to convey back the
bundles of hay. There wasn't any hay, but the wagon was useful for
returning to his owner that unfortunate ass--who was too fat to walk.

This ought to show any one the folly of relying upon the teaching of
obscure and inferior authors.[A]

[Footnote A: It is to be wished our author had not laid himself open
to the imputation of having perverted, if not actually invented, some
of his facts, for the unworthy purpose of bringing a deserving rival
into disfavour.--TRANSLATOR.]




LXI.


One day the king of the wrens held his court for the trial of a bear,
who was at large upon his own recognizance. Being summoned to appear,
the animal came with great humility into the royal presence.

"What have you to say, sir," demanded the king, "in defence of your
inexcusable conduct in pillaging the nests of our loyal subjects
wherever you can find them?"

"May it please your Majesty," replied the prisoner, with a reverential
gesture, repeated at intervals, and each time at a less distance from
the royal person, "I will not wound your Majesty's sensibilities by
pleading a love of eggs; I will humbly confess my course of crime,
warn your Majesty of its probable continuance, and beg your Majesty's
gracious permission to inquire--What is your Majesty going to do about
it?"

The king and his ministers were very much struck with this respectful
speech, with the ingenuity of the final inquiry, and with the bear's
paw. It was the paw, however, which made the most lasting impression.

Always give ear to the flattery of your powerful inferiors: it will
cheer you in your decline.




LXII.


A philosopher looking up from the pages of the Zend-Avesta, upon which
he had been centring his soul, beheld a pig violently assailing a
cauldron of cold slops.

"Heaven bless us!" said the sage; "for unalloyed delight give me a
good honest article of Sensuality. So soon as my 'Essay upon the
Correlation of Mind-forces' shall have brought me fame and fortune, I
hope to abjure the higher faculties, devoting the remainder of my life
to the cultivation of the propensities."

"Allah be praised!" soliloquized the pig, "there is nothing so godlike
as Intellect, and nothing so ecstatic as intellectual pursuits. I must
hasten to perform this gross material function, that I may retire to
my wallow and resign my soul to philosophical meditation."

This tale has one moral if you are a philosopher, and another if you
are a pig.




LXIII.


"Awful dark--isn't it?" said an owl, one night, looking in upon the
roosting hens in a poultry-house; "don't see how I am to find my way
back to my hollow tree."

"There is no necessity," replied the cock; "you can roost there,
alongside the door, and go home in the morning."

"Thanks!" said the owl, chuckling at the fool's simplicity; and,
having plenty of time to indulge his facetious humour, he gravely
installed himself upon the perch indicated, and shutting his eyes,
counterfeited a profound slumber. He was aroused soon after by a sharp
constriction of the throat.

"I omitted to tell you," said the cock, "that the seat you happen by
the merest chance to occupy is a contested one, and has been fruitful
of hens to this vexatious weasel. I don't know _how_ often I have been
partially widowed by the sneaking villain."

For obvious reasons there was no audible reply.

This narrative is intended to teach the folly--the worse than sin!--of
trumping your partner's ace.




LXIV.


A fat cow who saw herself detected by an approaching horse while
perpetrating stiff and ungainly gambols in the spring sunshine,
suddenly assumed a severe gravity of gait, and a sedate solemnity of
expression that would have been creditable to a Brahmin.

"Fine morning!" said the horse, who, fired by her example, was
curvetting lithely and tossing his head.

"That rather uninteresting fact," replied the cow, attending strictly
to her business as a ruminant, "does not impress me as justifying your
execution of all manner of unseemly contortions, as a preliminary to
accosting an entire stranger."

"Well, n--no," stammered the horse; "I--I suppose not. Fact is
I--I--no offence, I hope."

And the unhappy charger walked soberly away, dazed by the
preternatural effrontery of that placid cow.

When overcome by the dignity of any one you chance to meet, try to
have this fable about you.




LXV.


"What have you there on your back?" said a zebra, jeeringly, to a
"ship of the desert" in ballast.

"Only a bale of gridirons," was the meek reply.

"And what, pray, may you design doing with them?" was the incredulous
rejoinder.

"What am I to do with gridirons?" repeated the camel, contemptuously.
"Nice question for _you_, who have evidently just come off one!"

People who wish to throw stones should not live in glass houses; but
there ought to be a few in their vicinity.




LXVI.


A cat, waking out of a sound sleep, saw a mouse sitting just out of
reach, observing her. Perceiving that at the slightest movement of
hers the mouse would recollect an engagement, she put on a look of
extreme amiability, and said:

"Oh! it's you, is it? Do you know, I thought at first you were a
frightful great rat; and I am _so_ afraid of rats! I feel so much
relieved--you don't know! Of course you have heard that I am a great
friend to the dear little mice?"

[Illustration]

"Yes," was the answer, "I have heard that you love us indifferently
well, and my mission here was to bless you while you slept. But as you
will wish to go and get your breakfast, I won't bore you. Fine
morning--isn't it? _Au revoir!"_

This fable teaches that it is usually safe to avoid one who pretends
to be a friend without having any reason to be. It wasn't safe in this
instance, however; for the cat went after that departing rodent, and
got away with him.




LXVII.


A man pursued by a lion, was about stepping into a place of safety,
when he bethought him of the power of the human eye; and, turning
about, he fixed upon his pursuer a steady look of stern reproof. The
raging beast immediately moderated his rate per hour, and finally came
to a dead halt, within a yard of the man's nose. After making a
leisurely survey of him, he extended his neck and bit off a small
section of his victim's thigh.

"Beard of Arimanes!" roared the man; "have you no respect for the
Human Eye?"

"I hold the human eye in profound esteem," replied the lion, "and I
confess its power. It assists digestion if taken just before a meal.
But I don't understand why you should have two and I none."

With that he raised his foot, unsheathed his claws, and transferred
one of the gentleman's visual organs to his own mouth.

"Now," continued he, "during the brief remainder of a squandered
existence, your lion-quelling power, being more highly concentrated,
will be the more easily managed."

He then devoured the remnant of his victim, including the other eye.




LXVIII.


An ant laden with a grain of corn, which he had acquired with infinite
toil, was breasting a current of his fellows, each of whom, as is
their etiquette, insisted upon stopping him, feeling him all over, and
shaking hands. It occurred to him that an excess of ceremony is an
abuse of courtesy. So he laid down his burden, sat upon it, folded all
his legs tight to his body, and smiled a smile of great grimness.

"Hullo! what's the matter with _you_?" exclaimed the first insect
whose overtures were declined.

"Sick of the hollow conventionalities of a rotten civilization," was
the rasping reply. "Relapsed into the honest simplicity of primitive
observances. Go to grass!"

"Ah! then we must trouble you for that corn. In a condition of
primitive simplicity there are no rights of property, you know. These
are 'hollow conventionalities.'"

A light dawned upon the intellect of that pismire. He shook the reefs
out of his legs; he scratched the reverse of his ear; he grappled that
cereal, and trotted away like a giant refreshed. It was observed that
he submitted with a wealth of patience to manipulation by his friends
and neighbours, and went some distance out of his way to shake hands
with strangers on competing lines of traffic.




LXIX.


A snake who had lain torpid all winter in his hole took advantage of
the first warm day to limber up for the spring campaign. Having tied
himself into an intricate knot, he was so overcome by the warmth of
his own body that he fell asleep, and did not wake until nightfall. In
the darkness he was unable to find his head or his tail, and so could
not disentangle and slide into his hole. Per consequence, he froze to
death.

Many a subtle philosopher has failed to solve himself, owing to his
inability to discern his beginning and his end.




LXX.


A dog finding a joint of mutton, apparently guarded by a negligent
raven, stretched himself before it with an air of intense
satisfaction.

"Ah!" said he, alternately smiling and stopping up the smiles with
meat, "this is an instrument of salvation to my stomach--an instrument
upon which I love to perform."

"I beg your pardon!" said the bird; "it was placed there specially for
me, by one whose right to so convey it is beyond question, he having
legally acquired it by chopping it off the original owner."

"I detect no flaw in your abstract of title," replied the dog; "all
seems quite regular; but I must not provoke a breach of the peace by
lightly relinquishing what I might feel it my duty to resume by
violence. I must have time to consider; and in the meantime I will
dine."

Thereupon he leisurely consumed the property in dispute, shut his
eyes, yawned, turned upon his back, thrust out his legs divergently,
and died.

For the meat had been carefully poisoned--a fact of which the raven
was guiltily conscious.

There are several things mightier than brute force, and arsenic[A] is
one of them.

[Footnote A: In the original, "_pizen;"_ which might, perhaps, with
equal propriety have been rendered by "caper sauce."--TRANSLATOR.]




LXXI.


The King of Persia had a favourite hawk. One day his Majesty was
hunting, and had become separated from his attendants. Feeling
thirsty, he sought a stream of water trickling from a rock; took a
cup, and pouring some liquor into it from his pocket-flask, filled it
up with water, and raised it to his lips. The hawk, who had been all
this time hovering about, swooped down, screaming "No, you don't!" and
upset the cup with his wing.

"I know what is the matter," said the King: "there is a dead serpent
in the fountain above, and this faithful bird has saved my life by not
permitting me to drink the juice. I must reward him in the regular
way."

So he called a page, who had thoughtfully presented himself, and gave
directions to have the Remorse Apartments of the palace put in order,
and for the court tailor to prepare an evening suit of
sackcloth-and-ashes. Then summoning the hawk, he seized and dashed him
to the ground, killing him very dead. Rejoining his retinue, he
dispatched an officer to remove the body of the serpent from the
fountain, lest somebody else should get poisoned. There wasn't any
serpent--the water was remarkable for its wholesome purity!

Then the King, cheated of his remorse, was sorry he had slain the
bird; he said it was a needless waste of power to kill a bird who
merely deserved killing. It never occurred to the King that the hawk's
touching solicitude was with reference to the contents of the royal
flask.

_Fabula ostendit_ that a "twice-told tale" needs not necessarily be
"tedious"; a reasonable degree of interest may be obtained by
intelligently varying the details.




LXXII.


A herd of cows, blown off the summit of the Himalayas, were sailing
some miles above the valleys, when one said to another:

"Got anything to say about this?"

"Not much," was the answer. "It's airy."

"I wasn't thinking of that," continued the first; "I am troubled about
our course. If we could leave the Pleiades a little more to the right,
striking a middle course between Boötes and the ecliptic, we should
find it all plain sailing as far as the solstitial colure. But once we
get into the Zodiac upon our present bearing, we are certain to meet
with shipwreck before reaching our aphelion."

They escaped this melancholy fate, however, for some Chaldean
shepherds, seeing a nebulous cloud drifting athwart the heavens, and
obscuring a favourite planet they had just invented, brought out their
most powerful telescopes and resolved it into independent cows--whom
they proceeded to slaughter in detail with the instruments of smaller
calibre. There have been occasional "meat showers" ever since. These
are probably nothing more than--

[Our author can be depended upon in matters of fact; his scientific
theories are not worth printing.--TRANSLATOR.]




LXXIII.


A bear, who had worn himself out walking from one end of his cage to
the other, addressed his keeper thus:

"I say, friend, if you don't procure me a shorter cage I shall have to
give up zoology; it is about the most wearing pursuit I ever engaged
in. I favour the advancement of science, but the mechanical part of it
is a trifle severe, and ought to be done by contract."

"You are quite right, my hearty," said the keeper, "it _is_ severe;
and there have been several excellent plans proposed to lighten the
drudgery. Pending the adoption of some of them, you would find a
partial relief in lying down and keeping quiet."

"It won't do--it won't do!" replied the bear, with a mournful shake
of the head, "it's not the orthodox thing. Inaction may do for
professors, collectors, and others connected with the ornamental part
of the noble science; but for _us_, we must keep moving, or zoology
would soon revert to the crude guesses and mistaken theories of the
azoic period. And yet," continued the beast, after the keeper had
gone, "there is something novel and ingenious in what the underling
suggests. I must remember that; and when I have leisure, give it a
trial."

It was noted next day that the noble science had lost an active
apostle, and gained a passive disciple.




LXXIV.


A hen who had hatched out a quantity of ducklings, was somewhat
surprised one day to see them take to the water, and sail away out of
her jurisdiction. The more she thought of this the more unreasonable
such conduct appeared, and the more indignant she became. She resolved
that it must cease forthwith. So she soon afterward convened her
brood, and conducted them to the margin of a hot pool, having a
business connection with the boiling spring of Doo-sno-swair. They
straightway launched themselves for a cruise--returning immediately to
the land, as if they had forgotten their ship's papers.

When Callow Youth exhibits an eccentric tendency, give it him hot.




LXXV.


"Did it ever occur to you that this manner of thing is extremely
unpleasant?" asked a writhing worm of the angler who had impaled him
upon a hook. "Such treatment by those who boast themselves our
brothers is, possibly, fraternal--but it hurts."

"I confess," replied the idler, "that our usages with regard to vermin
and reptiles might be so amended as to be more temperately diabolical;
but please to remember that the gentle agonies with which we afflict
_you_ are wholesome and exhilarating compared with the ills we ladle
out to one another. During the reign of His Pellucid Refulgence,
Khatchoo Khan," he continued, absently dropping his wriggling auditor
into the brook, "no less than three hundred thousand Persian subjects
were put to death, in a pleasing variety of ingenious ways, for their
religious beliefs."

"What that has to do with your treatment of _us_" interrupted a fish,
who, having bitten at the worm just then, was drawn into the
conversation, "I am quite unable to see."

"That," said the angler, disengaging him, "is because you have the
hook through your eyeball, my edible friend."

Many a truth is spoken in jest; but at least ten times as many
falsehoods are uttered in dead earnest.




LXXVI.


A wild cat was listening with rapt approval to the melody of distant
hounds tracking a remote fox.

"Excellent! _bravo!_" she exclaimed at intervals. "I could sit and
listen all day to the like of that. I am passionately fond of music.
_Ong-core!_"

Presently the tuneful sounds drew near, whereupon she began to fidget;
ending by shinning up a tree, just as the dogs burst into view below
her, and stifled their songs upon the body of their victim before her
eyes--which protruded.

[Illustration]

"There is an indefinable charm," said she--"a subtle and tender
spell--a mystery--a conundrum, as it were--in the sounds of an unseen
orchestra. This is quite lost when the performers are visible to the
audience. Distant music (if any) for your obedient servant!"




LXXVII.


Having been taught to turn his scraps of bad Persian into choice
Latin, a parrot was puffed up with conceit.

"Observe," said he, "the superiority I may boast by virtue of my
classical education: I can chatter flat nonsense in the language of
Cicero."

"I would advise you," said his master, quietly, "to let it be of a
different character from that chattered by some of Mr. Cicero's most
admired compatriots, if you value the priviledge of hanging at that
public window. 'Commit no mythology,' please."

The exquisite fancies of a remote age may not be imitated in this;
not, perhaps, from a lack of talent, so much as from a fear of arrest.




LXXVIII.


A rat, finding a file, smelt it all over, bit it gently, and observed
that, as it did not seem to be rich enough to produce dyspepsia, he
would venture to make a meal of it. So he gnawed it into
_smithareens_[A] without the slightest injury to his teeth. With his
morals the case was somewhat different. For the file was a file of
newspapers, and his system became so saturated with the "spirit of the
Press" that he went off and called his aged father a "lingering
contemporary;" advised the correction of brief tails by amputation;
lauded the skill of a quack rodentist for money; and, upon what would
otherwise have been his death-bed, essayed a lie of such phenomenal
magnitude that it stuck in his throat, and prevented him breathing
his last. All this crime, and misery, and other nonsense, because he
was too lazy to worry about and find a file of nutritious fables.

This tale shows the folly of eating everything you happen to fancy.
Consider, moreover, the danger of such a course to your neighbour's
wife.

[Footnote A: I confess my inability to translate this word: it may
mean "flinders."--TRANSLATOR.]




LXXIX.


"I should like to climb up you, if you don't mind," cried an ivy to a
young oak.

"Oh, certainly; come along," was the cheerful assent.

So she started up, and finding she could grow faster than he, she
wound round and round him until she had passed up all the line she
had. The oak, however, continued to grow, and as she could not
disengage her coils, she was just lifted out by the root. So that ends
the oak-and-ivy business, and removes a powerful temptation from the
path of the young writer.




LXXX.


A merchant of Cairo gave a grand feast. In the midst of the revelry,
the great doors of the dining-hall were pushed open from the outside,
and the guests were surprised and grieved by the advent of a crocodile
of a tun's girth, and as long as the moral law.

"Thought I 'd look in," said he, simply, but not without a certain
grave dignity.

"But," cried the host, from the top of the table, "I did not invite
any saurians."

"No--I know yer didn't; it's the old thing, it is: never no wacancies
for saurians--saurians should orter keep theirselves _to_
theirselves--no saurians need apply. I got it all by 'eart, I tell
yer. But don't give yerself no distress; I didn't come to beg; thank
'eaven I ain't drove to that yet--leastwise I ain't done it. But I
thought as 'ow yer'd need a dish to throw slops and broken wittles in
it; which I fetched along this 'ere."

And the willing creature lifted off the cover by erecting the upper
half of his head till the snout of him smote the ceiling.

Open servitude is better than covert begging.




LXXXI.


A gander being annoyed by the assiduous attendance of his ugly
reflection in the water, determined that he would prosecute future
voyages in a less susceptible element. So he essayed a sail upon the
placid bosom of a clay-bank. This kind of navigation did not meet his
expectations, however, and he returned with dogged despair to his
pond, resolved to make a final cruise and go out of commission. He was
delighted to find that the clay adhering to his hull so defiled the
water that it gave back no image of him. After that, whenever he left
port, he was careful to be well clayed along the water-line.

The lesson of this is that if all geese are alike, we can banish
unpleasant reflections by befouling ourselves. This is worth knowing.




LXXXII.


The belly and the members of the human body were in a riot. (This is
not the riot recorded by an inferior writer, but a more notable and
authentic one.) After exhausting the well-known arguments, they had
recourse to the appropriate threat, when the man to whom they
belonged thought it time for _him_ to be heard, in his capacity as a
unit.

"Deuce take you!" he roared. "Things have come to a pretty pass if a
fellow cannot walk out of a fine morning without alarming the town by
a disgraceful squabble between his component parts! I am reasonably
impartial, I hope, but man's devotion is due to his deity: I espouse
the cause of my belly."

Hearing this, the members were thrown into so extraordinary confusion
that the man was arrested for a windmill.

As a rule, don't "take sides." Sides of bacon, however, may be
temperately acquired.




LXXXIII.


A man dropping from a balloon struck against a soaring eagle.

"I beg your pardon," said he, continuing his descent; "I never _could_
keep off eagles when in my descending node."

"It is agreeable to meet so pleasing a gentleman, even without
previous appointment," said the bird, looking admiringly down upon the
lessening aeronaut; "he is the very pink of politeness. How extremely
nice his liver must be. I will follow him down and arrange his simple
obsequies."

This fable is narrated for its intrinsic worth.




LXXXIV.


To escape from a peasant who had come suddenly upon him, an opossum
adopted his favourite expedient of counterfeiting death.

"I suppose," said the peasant, "that ninety-nine men in a hundred
would go away and leave this poor creature's body to the beasts of
prey." [It is notorious that man is the only living thing that will
eat the animal.] "But _I_ will give him good burial."

So he dug a hole, and was about tumbling him into it, when a solemn
voice appeared to emanate from the corpse: "Let the dead bury their
dead!"

"Whatever spirit hath wrought this miracle," cried the peasant,
dropping upon his knees, "let him but add the trifling explanation of
_how_ the dead can perform this or any similar rite, and I am
obedience itself. Otherwise, in goes Mr. 'Possum by these hands."

"Ah!" meditated the unhappy beast, "I have performed one miracle, but
I can't keep it up all day, you know. The explanation demanded is a
trifle too heavy for even the ponderous ingenuity of a marsupial."

And he permitted himself to be sodded over.

If the reader knows what lesson is conveyed by this narrative, he
knows--just what the writer knows.




LXXXV.


Three animals on board a sinking ship prepared to take to the water.
It was agreed among them that the bear should be lowered alongside;
the mouse (who was to act as pilot) should embark upon him at once, to
beat off the drowning sailors; and the monkey should follow, with
provisions for the expedition--which arrangement was successfully
carried out. The fourth day out from the wreck, the bear began to
propound a series of leading questions concerning dinner; when it
appeared that the monkey had provided but a single nut.

"I thought this would keep me awhile," he explained, "and you could
eat the pilot."

Hearing this, the mouse vanished like a flash into the bear's ear,
and fearing the hungry beast would then demand the nut, the monkey
hastily devoured it. Not being in a position to insist upon his
rights, the bear merely gobbled up the monkey.




[Illustration]


LXXXVI.


A lamb suffering from thirst went to a brook to drink. Putting his
nose to the water, he was interested to feel it bitten by a fish. Not
liking fish, he drew back and sought another place; but his persecutor
getting there before him administered the same rebuff. The lamb being
rather persevering, and the fish having no appointments for that day,
this was repeated a few thousand times, when the former felt justified
in swearing:

"I'm eternally boiled!" said he, "if ever I experienced so many fish
in all my life. It is discouraging. It inspires me with mint sauce and
green peas."

He probably meant amazement and fear; under the influence of powerful
emotions even lambs will talk "shop."

"Well, good bye," said his tormentor, taking a final nip at the
animal's muzzle; "I should like to amuse you some more; but I have
other fish to fry."

This tale teaches a good quantity of lessons; but it does _not_ teach
why this fish should have persecuted this lamb.




LXXXVII.


A mole, in pursuing certain geological researches, came upon the
buried carcase of a mule, and was about to tunnel him.

"Slow down, my good friend," said the deceased. "Push your mining
operations in a less sacrilegious direction. Respect the dead, as you
hope for death!"

"You have that about you," said the gnome, "that must make your grave
respected in a certain sense, for at least such a period as your
immortal part may require for perfect exhalation. The immunity I
accord is not conceded to your sanctity, but extorted by your scent.
The sepulchres of moles only are sacred."

To moles, the body of a lifeless mule
A dead mule's carcase is, and nothing more.




LXXXVIII.


"I think I'll set my sting into you, my obstructive friend," said a
bee to an iron pump against which she had flown; "you are always more
or less in the way."

"If you do," retorted the other, "I'll pump on you, if I can get any
one to work my handle."

Exasperated by this impotent conservative threat, she pushed her
little dart against him with all her vigour. When she tried to sheathe
it again she couldn't, but she still made herself useful about the
hive by hooking on to small articles and dragging them about. But no
other bee would sleep with her after this; and so, by her ill-judged
resentment, she was self-condemmed to a solitary cell.

The young reader may profitably beware.




LXXXIX.


A Chinese dog, who had been much abroad with his master, was asked,
upon his return, to state the most ludicrous fact he had observed.

"There is a country," said he, "the people of which are eternally
speaking about 'Persian honesty,' 'Persian courage,' 'Persian
loyalty,' 'Persian love of fair play,' &c., as if the Persians enjoyed
a clear monopoly of these universal virtues. What is more, they speak
thus in blind good faith--with a dense gravity of conviction that is
simply amazing."

"But," urged the auditors, "we requested something ludicrous, not
amazing."

"Exactly; the ludicrous part is the name of their country, which is--"

"What?"

"Persia."




XC.


There was a calf, who, suspecting the purity of the milk supplied him
by his dam, resolved to transfer his patronage to the barn-yard pump.

"Better," said he, "a pure article of water, than a diet that is
neither fish, flesh, nor fowl."

But, although extremely regular in his new diet--taking it all the
time--he did not seem to thrive as might have been expected. The
larger orders he drew, the thinner and the more transparent he became;
and at last, when the shadow of his person had become to him a vague
and unreal memory, he repented, and applied to be reinstated in his
comfortable sinecure at the maternal udder.

"Ah! my prodigal son," said the old lady, lowering her horns as if to
permit him to weep upon her neck, "I regret that it is out of my power
to celebrate your return by killing the fatted calf; but what I can I
will do."

And she killed him instead.

_Mot herl yaff ecti onk nocksal loth ervir tu esperfec tlyc old_.[A]

[Footnote A: The learned reader will appreciate the motive which has
prompted me to give this moral only in the original Persian.--TRANSLATOR.]




XCI.


"There, now," said a kitten, triumphantly, laying a passive mouse at
the feet of her mother. "I flatter myself I am coming on with a
reasonable degree of rapidity. What will become of the minor
quadrupeds when I have attained my full strength and ferocity, it is
mournful to conjecture!"

"Did he give you much trouble?" inquired the aged ornament of the
hearth-side, with a look of tender solicitude.

"Trouble!" echoed the kitten, "I never had such a fight in all my
life! He was a downright savage--in his day."

"My Falstaffian issue," rejoined the Tabby, dropping her eyelids and
composing her head for a quiet sleep, "the above is a _toy_ mouse."




XCII.


A crab who had travelled from the mouth of the Indus all the way to
Ispahan, knocked, with much chuckling, at the door of the King's
physician.

"Who's there?" shouted the doctor, from his divan within.

"A bad case of _cancer_," was the complacent reply.

"Good!" returned the doctor; "I'll _cure_ you, my friend."

So saying, he conducted his facetious patient into the kitchen, and
potted him in pickle. It cured him--of practical jocularity.

May the fable heal _you_, if you are afflicted with that form of evil.




XCIII.


A certain magician owned a learned pig, who had lived a cleanly
gentlemanly life, achieving great fame, and winning the hearts of all
the people. But perceiving he was not happy, the magician, by a
process easily explained did space permit, transformed him into a man.
Straightway the creature abandoned his cards, his timepiece, his
musical instruments, and all other devices of his profession, and
betook him to a pool of mud, wherein he inhumed himself to the tip of
his nose.

"Ten minutes ago," said the magician reprovingly, "you would have
scorned to do an act like that."

"True," replied the biped, with a contented grunt; "I was then a
learned pig; I am now a learned man."




XCIV.


"Nature has been very kind to her creatures," said a giraffe to an
elephant. "For example, your neck being so very short, she has given
you a proboscis wherewith to reach your food; and I having no
proboscis, she has bestowed upon me a long neck."

"I think, my good friend, you have been among the theologians," said
the elephant. "I doubt if I am clever enough to argue with you. I can
only say it does not strike me that way."

"But, really," persisted the giraffe, "you must confess your trunk is
a great convenience, in that it enables you to reach the high branches
of which you are so fond, even as my long neck enables me."

"Perhaps," mused the ungrateful pachyderm, "if we could not reach the
higher branches, we should develop a taste for the lower ones."

"In any case," was the rejoinder, "we can never be sufficiently
thankful that we are unlike the lowly hippopotamus, who can reach
neither the one nor the other."

"Ah! yes," the elephant assented, "there does not seem to have been
enough of Nature's kindness to go round."

"But the hippopotamus has his roots and his rushes."

"It is not easy to see how, with his present appliances, he could
obtain anything else."

This fable teaches nothing; for those who perceive the meaning of it
either knew it before, or will not be taught.




XCV.


A pious heathen who was currying favour with his wooden deity by
sitting for some years motionless in a treeless plain, observed a
young ivy putting forth her tender shoots at his feet. He thought he
could endure the additional martyrdom of a little shade, and begged
her to make herself quite at home.

"Exactly," said the plant; "it is my mission to adorn venerable
ruins."

She lapped her clinging tendrils about his wasted shanks, and in six
months had mantled him in green.

"It is now time," said the devotee, a year later, "for me to fulfil
the remainder of my religious vow. I must put in a few seasons of
howling and leaping. You have been very good, but I no longer require
your gentle ministrations."

"But I require yours," replied the vine; "you have become a second
nature to me. Let others indulge in the delights of gymnastic worship;
you and I will 'surfer and be strong'--respectively."

The devotee muttered something about the division of labour, and his
bones are still pointed out to the pilgrim.




XCVI.


A fox seeing a swan afloat, called out:

"What ship is that? I wish to take passage by your line."

"Got a ticket?" inquired the fowl.

"No; I'll make it all right with the company, though."

So the swan moored alongside, and he embarked,--deck passage. When
they were well off shore the fox intimated that dinner would be
agreeable.

"I would advise you not to try the ship's provisions," said the bird;
"we have only salt meat on board. Beware the scurvy!"

"You are quite right," replied the passenger; "I'll see if I can stay
my stomach with the foremast."

So saying he bit off her neck, and she immediately capsizing, he was
drowned.

MORAL--highly so, but not instructive.




XCVII.


A monkey finding a heap of cocoa-nuts, gnawed into one, then dropped
it, gagging hideously.

"Now, this is what _I_ call perfectly disgusting!" said he: "I can
never leave anything lying about but some one comes along and puts a
quantity of nasty milk into it!"

A cat just then happening to pass that way began rolling the
cocoa-nuts about with her paw.

"Yeow!" she exclaimed; "it is enough to vex the soul of a cast-iron
dog! Whenever I set out any milk to cool, somebody comes and seals it
up tight as a drum!"

Then perceiving one another, and each thinking the other the offender,
these enraged animals contended, and wrought a mutual extermination.
Whereby two worthy consumers were lost to society, and a quantity of
excellent food had to be given to the poor.




XCVIII.


A mouse who had overturned an earthern jar was discovered by a cat,
who entered from an adjoining room and began to upbraid him in the
harshest and most threatening manner.

"You little wretch!" said she, "how dare you knock over that valuable
urn? If it had been filled with hot water, and I had been lying before
it asleep, I should have been scalded to death."

"If it had been full of water," pleaded the mouse, "it would not have
upset."

[Illustration]

"But I might have lain down in it, monster!" persisted the cat.

"No, you couldn't," was the answer; "it is not wide enough."

"Fiend!" shrieked the cat, smashing him with her paw; "I can curl up
real small when I try."

The _ultima ratio_ of very angry people is frequently addressed to the
ear of the dead.




XCIX.


In crossing a frozen pool, a monkey slipped and fell, striking upon
the back of his head with considerable force, so that the ice was very
much shattered. A peacock, who was strutting about on shore thinking
what a pretty peacock he was, laughed immoderately at the mishap.
N.B.--All laughter is immoderate when a fellow is hurt--if the fellow
is oneself.

"Bah!" exclaimed the sufferer; "if you could see the beautiful
prismatic tints I have knocked into this ice, you would laugh out of
the other side of your bill. The splendour of your tail is quite
eclipsed."

Thus craftily did he inveigle the vain bird, who finally came and
spread his tail alongside the fracture for comparison. The gorgeous
feathers at once froze fast to the ice, and--in short, that artless
fowl passed a very uncomfortable winter.




C.


A volcano, having discharged a few million tons of stones upon a small
village, asked the mayor if he thought that a tolerably good supply
for building purposes.

"I think," replied that functionary, "if you give us another dash of
granite, and just a pinch of old red sandstone, we could manage with
what you have already done for us. We would, however, be grateful for
the loan of your crater to bake bricks."

"Oh, certainly; parties served at their residences." Then, after the
man had gone, the mountain added, with mingled lava and contempt: "The
most insatiable people I ever contracted to supply. They shall not
have another pebble!"

He banked his fires, and in six weeks was as cold as a neglected
pudding. Then might you have seen the heaving of the surface boulders,
as the people began stirring forty fathoms beneath.

When you have got quite enough of anything, make it manifest by asking
for some more. You won't get it.




CI.


"I entertain for you a sentiment of profound amity," said the tiger to
the leopard. "And why should I not? for are we not members of the same
great feline family?"

"True," replied the leopard, who was engaged in the hopeless endeavour
to change his spots; "since we have mutually plundered one another's
hunting grounds of everything edible, there remains no grievance to
quarrel about. You are a good fellow; let us embrace!"

They did so with the utmost heartiness; which being observed by a
contiguous monkey, that animal got up a tree, where he delivered
himself of the wisdom following:

"There is nothing so touching as these expressions of mutual regard
between animals who are vulgarly believed to hate one another. They
render the brief intervals of peace almost endurable to both parties.
But the difficulty is, there are so many excellent reasons why these
relatives should live in peace, that they won't have time to state
them all before the next fight."




CII.


A woodpecker, who had bored a multitude of holes in the body of a dead
tree, was asked by a robin to explain their purpose.

"As yet, in the infancy of science," replied the woodpecker, "I am
quite unable to do so. Some naturalists affirm that I hide acorns in
these pits; others maintain that I get worms out of them. I
endeavoured for some time to reconcile the two theories; but the worms
ate my acorns, and then would not come out. Since then, I have left
science to work out its own problems, while I work out the holes. I
hope the final decision may be in some way advantageous to me; for at
my nest I have a number of prepared holes which I can hammer into some
suitable tree at a moment's notice. Perhaps I could insert a few into
the scientific head."

"No-o-o," said the robin, reflectively, "I should think not. A
prepared hole is an idea; I don't think it could get in."

MORAL.--It might be driven in with a steam-hammer.




CIII.


"Are you going to this great hop?" inquired a spruce cricket of a
labouring beetle.

"No," replied he, sadly, "I've got to attend this great ball."

"Blest if I know the difference," drawled a more offensive insect,
with his head in an empty silk hat; "and I've been in society all my
life. But why was I not invited to either hop or ball?"

He is now invited to the latter.




CIV.


"Too bad, too bad," said a young Abyssinian to a yawning hippopotamus.

"What is 'too bad?'" inquired the quadruped. "What is the matter with
you?"

"Oh, _I_ never complain," was the reply; "I was only thinking of the
niggard economy of Nature in building a great big beast like you and
not giving him any mouth."

"H'm, h'm! it was still worse," mused the beast, "to construct a
great wit like you and give him no seasonable occasion for the display
of his cleverness."

A moment later there were a cracking of bitten bones, a great gush of
animal fluids, the vanishing of two black feet--in short, the fatal
poisoning of an indiscreet hippopotamus.

The rubbing of a bit of lemon about the beaker's brim is the
finishing-touch to a whiskey punch. Much misery may be thus averted.




CV.


A salmon vainly attempted to leap up a cascade. After trying a few
thousand times, he grew so fatigued that he began to leap less and
think more. Suddenly an obvious method of surmounting the difficulty
presented itself to the salmonic intelligence.

"Strange," he soliloquized, as well as he could in the water,--"very
strange I did not think of it before! I'll go above the fall and leap
downwards."

So he went out on the bank, walked round to the upper side of the
fall, and found he could leap over quite easily. Ever afterwards when
he went up-stream in the spring to be caught, he adopted this plan. He
has been heard to remark that the price of salmon might be brought
down to a merely nominal figure, if so many would not wear themselves
out before getting up to where there is good fishing.




CVI.


"The son of a jackass," shrieked a haughty mare to a mule who had
offended her by expressing an opinion, "should cultivate the simple
grace of intellectual humility."

"It is true," was the meek reply, "I cannot boast an illustrious
ancestry; but at least I shall never be called upon to blush for my
posterity. Yonder mule colt is as proper a son--"

"Yonder mule colt?" interrupted the mare, with a look of ineffable
contempt for her auditor; "that is _my_ colt!"

"The consort of a jackass and the mother of mules," retorted he,
quietly, "should cultivate the simple thingamy of intellectual
whatsitsname."

The mare muttered something about having some shopping to do, threw on
her harness, and went out to call a cab.




CVII.


"Hi! hi!" squeaked a pig, running after a hen who had just left her
nest; "I say, mum, you dropped this 'ere. It looks wal'able; which I
fetched it along!" And splitting his long face, he laid a warm egg at
her feet.

"You meddlesome bacon!" cackled the ungrateful bird; "if you don't
take that orb directly back, I 'll sit on you till I hatch you out of
your saddle-cover!"

MORAL.--Virtue is its only reward.




CVIII.


A rustic, preparing to devour an apple, was addressed by a brace of
crafty and covetous birds:

"Nice apple that," said one, critically examining it. "I don't wish to
disparage it--wouldn't say a word against that vegetable for all the
world. But I never can look upon an apple of that variety without
thinking of my poisoned nestling! Ah! so plump, and rosy,
and--rotten!"

"Just so," said the other. "And you remember my good father, who
perished in that orchard. Strange that so fair a skin should cover so
vile a heart!"

Just then another fowl came flying up.

[Illustration]

"I came in, all haste," said he, "to warn you about that fruit. My
late lamented wife ate some off the same tree. Alas! how comely to the
eye, and how essentially noxious!"

"I am very grateful," the young man said; "but I am unable to
comprehend how the sight of this pretty piece of painted confectionery
should incite you all to slander your dead relations."

Whereat there was confusion in the demeanour of that feathered trio.




CIX.


"The Millennium is come," said a lion to a lamb. "Suppose you come out
of that fold, and let us lie down together, as it has been foretold we
should."

"Been to dinner to-day?" inquired the lamb.

"Not a bite of anything since breakfast," was the reply, "except a few
lean swine, a saddle or two, and some old harness."

"I distrust a Millennium," continued the lamb, thoughtfully, "which
consists _solely_ in our lying down together. My notion of that happy
time is that it is a period in which pork and leather are not articles
of diet, but in which every respectable lion shall have as much mutton
as he can consume. However, you may go over to yonder sunny hill and
lie down until I come."

It is singular how a feeling of security tends to develop cunning. If
that lamb had been out upon the open plain he would have readily
fallen into the snare--and it was studded very thickly with teeth.




CX.


"I say, you!" bawled a fat ox in a stall to a lusty young ass who was
braying outside; "the like of that is not in good taste!"

"In whose good taste, my adipose censor?" inquired the ass, not too
respectfully.

"Why--h'm--ah! I mean it does not suit _me_. You ought to bellow."

"May I inquire how it happens to be any of your business whether I
bellow or bray, or do both--or neither?"

"I cannot tell you," answered the critic, shaking his head
despondingly; "I do not at all understand it. I can only say that I
have been accustomed to censure all discourse that differs from my
own."

"Exactly," said the ass; "you have sought to make an art of
impertinence by mistaking preferences for principles. In 'taste' you
have invented a word incapable of definition, to denote an idea
impossible of expression; and by employing in connection therewith the
words 'good' and 'bad,' you indicate a merely subjective process in
terms of an objective quality. Such presumption transcends the limit
of the merely impudent, and passes into the boundless empyrean of pure
cheek!"

At the close of this remarkable harangue, the bovine critic was at a
loss for language to express his disapproval. So he said the speech
was in bad taste.




CXI.


A bloated toad, studded with dermal excrescences, was boasting that
she was the wartiest creature alive.

"Perhaps you are," said her auditor, emerging from the soil; "but it
is a barren and superficial honour. Look at me: I am one solid mole!"




CXII.


"It is very difficult getting on in the world," sighed a weary snail;
"very difficult indeed, with such high rents!"

"You don't mean to say you pay anything for that old rookery!" said a
slug, who was characteristically insinuating himself between the stems
of the celery intended for dinner. "A miserable old shanty like that,
without stables, grounds, or any modern conveniences!"

"Pay!" said the snail, contemptuously; "I'd like to see you get a
semi-detatched villa like this at a nominal rate!"

"Why don't you let your upper apartments to a respectable single
party?" urged the slug.

The answer is not recorded.




CXIII.


A hare, pursued by a dog, sought sanctuary in the den of a wolf. It
being after business hours, the latter was at home to him.

"Ah!" panted the hare; "how very fortunate! I feel quite safe here,
for you dislike dogs quite as much as I do."

"Your security, my small friend," replied the wolf, "depends not upon
those points in which you and I agree, but upon those in which I and
the dog differ."

"Then you mean to eat me?" inquired the timorous puss.

"No-o-o," drawled the wolf, reflectively, "I should not like to
promise _that_; I mean to eat a part of you. There may be a tuft of
fur, and a toe-nail or two, left for you to go on with. I am hungry,
but I am not hoggish."

"The distinction is too fine for me," said the hare, scratching her
head.

"That, my friend, is because you have not made a practice of
hare-splitting. I have."




CXIV.


"Oyster at home?" inquired a monkey, rapping at the closed shell.

There was no reply. Dropping the knocker, he laid hold of the
bell-handle, ringing a loud peal, but without effect.

"Hum, hum!" he mused, with a look of disappointment, "gone to the sea
side, I suppose."

So he turned away, thinking he would call again later in the season;
but he had not proceeded far before he conceived a brilliant idea.
Perhaps there had been a suicide!--or a murder! He would go back and
force the door. By way of doing so he obtained a large stone, and
smashed in the roof. There had been no murder to justify such
audacity, so he committed one.

The funeral was gorgeous. There were mute oysters with wands, drunken
oysters with scarves and hat-bands, a sable hearse with hearth-dusters
on it, a swindling undertaker's bill, and all the accessories of a
first-rate churchyard circus--everything necessary but the corpse.
That had been disposed of by the monkey, and the undertaker meanly
withheld the use of his own.

MORAL.--A lamb foaled in March makes the best pork when his horns have
attained the length of an inch.




CXV.


"Pray walk into my parlour," said the spider to the fly.
"That is not quite original," the latter made reply.
"If that's the way you plagiarize, your fame will be a fib--
But I'll walk into your parlour, while I pitch into your crib.
But before I cross your threshold, sir, if I may make so free,
Pray let me introduce to you my friend, 'the wicked flea.'"
"How do you?" says the spider, as his welcome he extends;
"'How doth the busy little bee,' and all our other friends?"
"Quite well, I think, and quite unchanged," the flea said; "though I learn,
In certain quarters well informed, 'tis feared 'the worm will turn.'"
"Humph!" said the fly; "I do not understand this talk--not I!"
"It is 'classical allusion,'" said the spider to the fly.




CXVI.


A polar bear navigating the mid-sea upon the mortal part of a late
lamented walrus, soliloquized, in substance, as follows:

"Such liberty of action as I am afflicted with is enough to embarrass
any bear that ever bore. I can remain passive, and starve; or I can
devour my ship, and drown. I am really unable to decide."

So he sat down to think it over. He considered the question in all its
aspects, until he grew quite thin; turned it over and over in his mind
until he was too weak to sit up; meditated upon it with a constantly
decreasing pulse, a rapidly failing respiration. But he could not make
up his mind, and finally expired without having come to a decision.

It appears to me he might almost as well have chosen starvation, at a
venture.




CXVII.


A sword-fish having penetrated seven or eight feet into the bottom of
a ship, under the impression that he was quarrelling with a whale, was
unable to draw out of the fight. The sailors annoyed him a good deal,
by pounding with handspikes upon that portion of his horn inside; but
he bore it as bravely as he could, putting the best possible face
upon the matter, until he saw a shark swimming by, of whom he inquired
the probable destination of the ship.

"Italy, I think," said the other, grinning. "I have private reasons
for believing her cargo consists mainly of consumptives."

"Ah!" exclaimed the captive; "Italy, delightful clime of the cerulean
orange--the rosy olive! Land of the night-blooming Jesuit, and the
fragrant _laszarone_! It would be heavenly to run down gondolas in the
streets of Venice! I _must_ go to Italy."

"Indeed you must," said the shark, darting suddenly aft, where he had
caught the gleam of shotted canvas through the blue waters.

But it was fated to be otherwise: some days afterwards the ship and
fish passed over a sunken rock which almost grazed the keel. Then the
two parted company, with mutual expressions of tender regard, and a
report which could be traced by those on board to no trustworthy
source.

The foregoing fable shows that a man of good behaviour need not care
for money, and _vice versâ_.




CXVIII.


A facetious old cat seeing her kitten sleeping in a bath tub, went
down into the cellar and turned on the hot water. (For the convenience
of the bathers the bath was arranged in that way; you had to undress,
and then go down to the cellar to let on the wet.) No sooner did the
kitten remark the unfamiliar sensation, than he departed thence with a
willingness quite creditable in one who was not a professional
acrobat, and met his mother on the kitchen stairs.

"Aha! my steaming hearty!" cried the elder grimalkin; "I coveted you
when I saw the cook put you in the dinner-pot. If I have a weakness,
it is hare--hare nicely dressed, and partially boiled."

Whereupon she made a banquet of her suffering offspring.[A]

Adversity works a stupendous change in tender youth; many a young man
is never recognized by his parents after having been in hot water.

[Footnote A: Here should have followed the appropriate and obvious
classical allusion. It is known our fabulist was classically educated.
Why, then, this disgraceful omission?--TRANSLATOR.]




CXIX.


"It is a waste of valour for us to do battle," said a lame ostrich to
a negro who had suddenly come upon her in the desert; "let us cast
lots to see who shall be considered the victor, and then go about our
business."

To this proposition the negro readily assented. They cast lots: the
negro cast lots of stones, and the ostrich cast lots of feathers. Then
the former went about his business, which consisted of skinning the
bird.

MORAL.--There is nothing like the arbitrament of chance. That form of
it known as _trile-bi-joorie_ is perhaps as good as any.




CXX.


An author who had wrought a book of fables (the merit whereof
transcended expression) was peacefully sleeping atop of the modest
eminence to which he had attained, when he was rudely awakened by a
throng of critics, emitting adverse judgment upon the tales he had
builded.

[Illustration]

"Apparently," said he, "I have been guilty of some small grains of
unconsidered wisdom, and the same have proven a bitterness to these
excellent folk, the which they will not abide. Ah, well! those who
produce the Strasburg _pâté_ and the feather-pillow are prone to
regard _us_ as rival creators. I presume it is in course of nature for
him who grows the pen to censure the manner of its use."

So speaking, he executed a smile a hand's-breath in extent, and
resumed his airy dream of dropping ducats.




CXXI.


For many years an opossum had anointed his tail with bear's oil, but
it remained stubbornly bald-headed. At last his patience was
exhausted, and he appealed to Bruin himself, accusing him of breaking
faith, and calling him a quack.

"Why, you insolent marsupial!" retorted the bear in a rage; "you
expect my oil to give you hair upon your tail, when it will not give
me even a tail. Why don't you try under-draining, or top-dressing with
light compost?"

They said and did a good deal more before the opossum withdrew his
cold and barren member from consideration; but the judicious fabulist
does not encumber his tale with extraneous matter, lest it be
pointless.




CXXII.


"So disreputable a lot as you are I never saw!" said a sleepy rat to
the casks in a wine-cellar. "Always making night hideous with your
hoops and hollows, and disfiguring the day with your bunged-up
appearance. There is no sleeping when once the wine has got into your
heads. I'll report you to the butler!"

"The sneaking tale-bearer," said the casks. "Let us beat him with our
staves."

"_Requiescat in pace_," muttered a learned cobweb, sententiously.

"Requires a cat in the place, does it?" shrieked the rat. "Then I'm
off!"

To explain all the wisdom imparted by this fable would require the pen
of a pig, and volumes of smoke.




CXXIII.


A giraffe having trodden upon the tail of a poodle, that animal flew
into a blind rage, and wrestled valorously with the invading foot.

"Hullo, sonny!" said the giraffe, looking down, "what are you doing
there?"

"I am fighting!" was the proud reply; "but I don't know that it is any
of your business."

"Oh, I have no desire to mix in," said the good-natured giraffe. "I
never take sides in terrestrial strife. Still, as that is my foot, I
think--"

"Eh!" cried the poodle, backing some distance away and gazing upward,
shading his eyes with his paw. "You don't mean to say--by Jove it's a
fact! Well, that beats _me_! A beast of such enormous length--such
preposterous duration, as it were--I wouldn't have believed it! Of
course I can't quarrel with a non-resident; but why don't you have a
local agent on the ground?"

The reply was probably the wisest ever made; but it has not descended
to this generation. It had so very far to descend.




CXXIV.


A dog having got upon the scent of a deer which a hunter had been
dragging home, set off with extraordinary zeal. After measuring off a
few leagues, he paused.

"My running gear is all right," said he; "but I seem to have lost my
voice."

Suddenly his ear was assailed by a succession of eager barks, as of
another dog in pursuit of him. It then began to dawn upon him that he
was a particularly rapid dog: instead of having lost his voice, his
voice had lost him, and was just now arriving. Full of his discovery,
he sought his master, and struck for better food and more comfortable
housing.

"Why, you miserable example of perverted powers!" said his master; "I
never intended you for the chase, but for the road. You are to be a
draught-dog--to pull baby about in a cart. You will perceive that
speed is an objection. Sir, you must be toned down; you will be at
once assigned to a house with modern conveniences, and will dine at a
French restaurant. If that system do not reduce your own, I'm an
'Ebrew Jew!"

The journals next morning had racy and appetizing accounts of a canine
suicide.




CXXV.


A gosling, who had not yet begun to blanch, was accosted by a chicken
just out of the shell:

"Whither away so fast, fair maid?" inquired the chick.

"Wither away yourself," was the contemptuous reply; "you are already
in the sere and yellow leaf; while I seem to have a green old age
before me."




CXXVI.


A famishing traveller who had run down a salamander, made a fire, and
laid him alive upon the hot coals to cook. Wearied with the pursuit
which had preceded his capture, the animal at once composed himself,
and fell into a refreshing sleep. At the end of a half-hour, the man,
stirred him with a stick, remarking:

"I say!--wake up and begin toasting, will you? How long do you mean to
keep dinner waiting, eh?"

"Oh, I beg you will not wait for me," was the yawning reply. "If you
are going to stand upon ceremony, everything will get cold. Besides, I
have dined. I wish, by-the-way, you would put on some more fuel; I
think we shall have snow."

"Yes," said the man, "the weather is like yourself--raw, and
exasperatingly cool. Perhaps this will warm you." And he rolled a
ponderous pine log atop of that provoking reptile, who flattened out,
and "handed in his checks."

  The moral thus doth glibly run--
    A cause its opposite may brew;
  The sun-shade is unlike the sun,
    The plum unlike the plumber, too.
  A salamander underdone
    His impudence may overdo.




CXXVII.


A humming-bird invited a vulture to dine with her. He accepted, but
took the precaution to have an emetic along with him; and immediately
after dinner, which consisted mainly of dew, spices, honey, and
similar slops, he swallowed his corrective, and tumbled the
distasteful viands out. He then went away, and made a good wholesome
meal with his friend the ghoul. He has been heard to remark, that the
taste for humming-bird fare is "too artificial for _him_." He says, a
simple and natural diet, with agreeable companions, cheerful
surroundings, and a struggling moon, is best for the health, and most
agreeable to the normal palate.

People with vitiated tastes may derive much profit from this opinion.
_Crede experto._




CXXVIII.


A certain terrier, of a dogmatic turn, asked a kitten her opinion of
rats, demanding a categorical answer. The opinion, as given, did not
possess the merit of coinciding with his own; whereupon he fell upon
the heretic and bit her--bit her until his teeth were much worn and
her body much elongated--bit her good! Having thus vindicated the
correctness of his own view, he felt so amiable a satisfaction that he
announced his willingness to adopt the opinion of which he had
demonstrated the harmlessness. So he begged his enfeebled antagonist
to re-state it, which she incautiously did. No sooner, however, had
the superior debater heard it for the second time than he resumed his
intolerance, and made an end of that unhappy cat.

"Heresy," said he, wiping his mouth, "may be endured in the vigorous
and lusty; but in a person lying at the very point of death such
hardihood is intolerable."

It is always intolerable.




CXXIX.


A tortoise and an armadillo quarrelled, and agreed to fight it out.
Repairing to a secluded valley, they put themselves into hostile
array.

"Now come on!" shouted the tortoise, shrinking into the inmost
recesses of his shell.

"All right," shrieked the armadillo, coiling up tightly in his coat of
mail; "I am ready for you!"

And thus these heroes waged the awful fray from morn till dewy eve, at
less than a yard's distance. There has never been anything like it;
their endurance was something marvellous! During the night each
combatant sneaked silently away; and the historian of the period
obscurely alludes to the battle as "the naval engagement of the
future."




CXXX.

[Illustration]

Two hedgehogs having conceived a dislike to a hare, conspired for his
extinction. It was agreed between them that the lighter and more agile
of the two should beat him up, surround him, run him into a ditch,
and drive him upon the thorns of the more gouty and unwieldy
conspirator. It was not a very hopeful scheme, but it was the best
they could devise. There was a chance of success if the hare should
prove willing, and, gambler-like, they decided to take that chance,
instead of trusting to the remote certainty of their victim's death
from natural cause. The doomed animal performed his part as well as
could be reasonably expected of him: every time the enemy's flying
detachment pressed him hard, he fled playfully toward the main body,
and lightly vaulted over, about eight feet above the spines. And this
prickly blockhead had not the practical sagacity to get upon a wall
seven feet and six inches high!

This fable is designed to show that the most desperate chances are
comparatively safe.




CXXXI.


A young eel inhabiting the mouth of a river in India, determined to
travel. Being a fresh-water eel, he was somewhat restricted in his
choice of a route, but he set out with a cheerful heart and very
little luggage. Before he had proceeded very far up-stream he found
the current too strong to be overcome without a ruinous consumption of
coals. He decided to anchor his tail where it then was, and _grow_ up.
For the first hundred miles it was tolerably tedious work, but when he
had learned to tame his impatience, he found this method of progress
rather pleasant than otherwise. But when he began to be caught at
widely separate points by the fishermen of eight or ten different
nations, he did not think it so fine.

This fable teaches that when you extend your residence you multiply
your experiences. A local eel can know but little of angling.




CXXXII.


Some of the lower animals held a convention to settle for ever the
unspeakably important question, What is Life?

"Life," squeaked the poet, blinking and folding his filmy wings,
"is--." His kind having been already very numerously heard from upon
the subject, he was choked off.

"Life," said the scientist, in a voice smothered by the earth he was
throwing up into small hills, "is the harmonious action of
heterogeneous but related faculties, operating in accordance with
certain natural laws."

"Ah!" chattered the lover, "but that thawt of thing is vewy gweat
blith in the thothiety of one'th thweetheart." And curling his tail
about a branch, he swung himself heavenward and had a spasm.

"It is _vita_!" grunted the sententious scholar, pausing in his
mastication of a Chaldaic root.

"It is a thistle," brayed the warrior: "very nice thing to take!"

"Life, my friends," croaked the philosopher from his hollow tree,
dropping the lids over his cattish eyes, "is a disease. We are all
symptoms."

"Pooh!" ejaculated the physician, uncoiling and springing his rattle.
"How then does it happen that when _we_ remove the symptoms, the
disease is gone?"

"I would give something to know that," replied the philosopher,
musingly; "but I suspect that in most cases the inflammation remains,
and is intensified."

Draw your own moral inference, "in your own jugs."




CXXXIII.


A heedless boy having flung a pebble in the direction of a basking
lizard, that reptile's tail disengaged itself, and flew some distance
away. One of the properties of a lizard's camp-follower is to leave
the main body at the slightest intimation of danger.

"There goes that vexatious narrative again," exclaimed the lizard,
pettishly; "I never had such a tail in my life! Its restless tendency
to divorce upon insufficient grounds is enough to harrow the
reptilian soul! Now," he continued, backing up to the fugitive part,
"perhaps you will be good enough to resume your connection with the
parent establishment."

No sooner was the splice effected, than an astronomer passing that way
casually remarked to a friend that he had just sighted a comet.
Supposing itself menaced, the timorous member again sprang away,
coming down plump before the horny nose of a sparrow. Here its career
terminated.

We sometimes escape from an imaginary danger, only to find some real
persecutor has a little bill against us.




CXXXIV.


A jackal who had pursued a deer all day with unflagging industry, was
about to seize him, when an earthquake, which was doing a little civil
engineering in that part of the country, opened a broad chasm between
him and his prey.

"Now, here," said he, "is a distinct interference with the laws of
nature. But if we are to tolerate miracles, there is an end of all
progress."

So speaking, he endeavoured to cross the abyss at two jumps. His fate
would serve the purpose of an impressive warning if it might be
clearly ascertained; but the earth having immediately pinched together
again, the research of the moral investigator is baffled.




CXXXV.


"Ah!" sighed a three-legged stool, "if I had only been a quadruped, I
should have been happy as the day is long--which, on the twenty-first
of June, would be considerable felicity for a stool."

"Ha! look at me!" said a toadstool; "consider my superior privation,
and be content with your comparatively happy lot."

"I don't discern," replied the first, "how the contemplation of
unipedal misery tends to alleviate tripedal wretchedness."

"You don't, eh!" sneered the toadstool. "You mean, do you, to fly in
the face of all the moral and social philosophers?"

"Not unless some benefactor of his race shall impel me."

"H'm! I think Zambri the Parsee is the man for that kindly office, my
dear."

This final fable teaches that he is.




BRIEF SEASONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISSIPATION.




I.


FOOL.--I have a question for you.

PHILOSOPHER.--I have a number of them for myself. Do you happen to
have heard that a fool can ask more questions in a breath than a
philosopher can answer in a life?

F.--I happen to have heard that in such a case the one is as great a
fool as the other.

PH.--Then there is no distinction between folly and philosophy?

F.--Don't lay the flattering unction to your soul. The province of
folly is to ask unanswerable questions. It is the function of
philosophy to answer them.

PH.--Admirable fool!

F.--Am I? Pray tell me the meaning of "a fool."

PH.--Commonly he has none.

F.--I mean--

PH.--Then in this case he has one.

F.--I lick thy boots! But what does Solomon indicate by the word fool?
That is what I mean.

PH.--Let us then congratulate Solomon upon the agreement between the
views of you two. However, I twig your intent: he means a wicked
sinner; and of all forms of folly there is none so great as wicked
sinning. For goodness is, in the end, more conducive to personal
happiness--which is the sole aim of man.

F.--Hath virtue no better excuse than this?

PH.--Possibly; philosophy is not omniscience.

F.--Instructed I sit at thy feet!

PH.--Unwilling to instruct, I stand on my head.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--You say personal happiness is the sole aim of man.

PHILOSOPHER.--Then it is.

F.--But this is much disputed.

PH.--There is much personal happiness in disputation.

F.--Socrates--

PH.--Hold! I detest foreigners.

F.--Wisdom, they say, is of no country.

PH.--Of none that I have seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Let us return to our subject--the sole aim of mankind. Crack me
these nuts. (1) The man, never weary of well-doing, who endures a life
of privation for the good of his fellow-creatures?

PHILOSOPHER.--Does he feel remorse in so doing? or does the rascal
rather like it?

F.--(2) He, then, who, famishing himself, parts his loaf with a
beggar?

PH.--There are people who prefer benevolence to bread.

F.--Ah! _De gustibus_--

PH.--Shut up!

F.--Well, (3) how of him who goes joyfully to martyrdom?

PH.--He goes joyfully.

F.--And yet--

PH.--Did you ever converse with a good man going to the stake?

F.--I never saw a good man going to the stake.

PH.--Unhappy pupil! you were born some centuries too early.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--You say you detest foreigners. Why?

PHILOSOPHER.--Because I am human.

F.--But so are they.

PH.--Excellent fool! I thank thee for the better reason.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHILOSOPHER.--I have been thinking of the _pocopo_.

FOOL.--Is it open to the public?

PH.--The pocopo is a small animal of North America, chiefly remarkable
for singularity of diet. It subsists solely upon a single article of
food.

F.--What is that?

PH.--Other pocopos. Unable to obtain this, their natural sustenance, a
great number of pocopos die annually of starvation. Their death leaves
fewer mouths to feed, and by consequence their race is rapidly
multiplying.

F.--From whom had you this?

PH.--A professor of political economy.

F.--I bend in reverence! What made you think of the pocopo?

PH.--Speaking of man.

F.--If you did not wish to think of the pocopo, and speaking of man
would make you think of it, you would not speak of man, would you?

PH.--Certainly not.

F.--Why not?

PH.--I do not know.

F.--Excellent philosopher!

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--I have attentively considered your teachings. They may be full
of wisdom; they are certainly out of taste.

PHILOSOPHER.--Whose taste?

F.--Why, that of people of culture.

PH.--Do any of these people chance to have a taste for intoxication,
tobacco, hard hats, false hair, the nude ballet, and over-feeding?

F.--Possibly; but in intellectual matters you must confess their taste
is correct.

PH.--Why must I?

F.--They say so themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHILOSOPHER.--I have been thinking why a dolt is called a donkey.

FOOL.--I had thought philosophy concerned itself with a less personal
class of questions; but why is it?

PH.--The essential quality of a dolt is stupidity.

F.--Mine ears are drunken!

PH.--The essential quality of an ass is asininity.

F.--Divine philosophy!

PH.--As commonly employed, "stupidity" and "asininity" are convertible
terms.

F.--That I, unworthy, should have lived to see this day!

       *       *       *       *       *




II.


FOOL.--If _I_ were a doctor--

DOCTOR.--I should endeavour to be a fool.

F.--You would fail; folly is not easily achieved.

D.--True; man is overworked.

F.--Let him take a pill.

D.--If he like. I would not.

F.--You are too frank: take a fool's advice.

D.--Thank thee for the nastier prescription.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--I have a friend who--

DOCTOR.--Stands in great need of my assistance. Absence of excitement,
gentle restraint, a hard bed, simple diet--that will straighten him
out.

F.--I'll give thee sixpence to let me touch the hem of thy garment!

D.--What of your friend?

F.--He is a gentleman.

D.--Then he is dead!

F.--Just so: he is "straightened out"--he took your prescription.

D.--All but the "simple diet."

F.--He is himself the diet.

D.--How simple!

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Believe you a man retains his intellect after decapitation?

DOCTOR.--It is possible that he acquires it?

F.--Much good it does him.

D.--Why not--as compensation? He is at some disadvantage in other
respects.

F.--For example?

D.--He is in a false position.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--What is the most satisfactory disease?

DOCTOR.--Paralysis of the thoracic duct.

F.--I am not familiar with it.

D.--It does not encourage familiarity. Paralysis of the thoracic duct
enables the patient to accept as many invitations to dinner as he can
secure, without danger of spoiling his appetite.

F.--But how long does his appetite last?

D.--That depends. Always a trifle longer than he does.

F.--The portion that survives him--?

D.--Goes to swell the Mighty Gastric Passion which lurks darkly
Outside, yawning to swallow up material creation!

F.--Pitch it a biscuit.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--You attend a patient. He gets well. Good! How do you tell
whether his recovery is because of your treatment or in spite of it?

DOCTOR.--I never do tell.

F.--I mean how do you know?

D.--I take the opinion of a person interested in the question: I ask a
fool.

F.--How does the patient know?

D.--The fool asks me.

F.--Amiable instructor! How shall I reward thee?

D.--Eat a cucumber cut up in shilling claret.

       *       *       *       *       *

DOCTOR.--The relation between a patient and his disease is the same as
that which obtains between the two wooden weather-prophets of a Dutch
clock. When the disease goes off, the patient goes on; when the
disease goes on, the patient goes off.

FOOL.--A pauper conceit. Their relations, then, are not of the most
cordial character.

D.--One's relations--except the poorer sort--seldom are.

F.--My tympanum is smitten with pleasant peltings of wisdom! I 'll lay
you ten to one you cannot tell me the present condition of your last
patient.

D.--Done!

F.--You have won the wager.

FOOL.--I once read the report of an actual conversation upon a
scientific subject between a fool and a physician.

DOCTOR.--Indeed! That sort of conversation commonly takes place
between fools only.

F.--The reporter had chosen to confound orthography: he spelt fool
"phool," and physician "fysician." What the fool said was, therefore,
preceded by "PH;" the remarks of the physician were indicated by the
letter "F."

D.--This must have been very confusing.

F.--It was. But no one discovered that any liberties had been taken
with orthography.

D.--You tumour!

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Suppose you had amongst your menials an ailing oyster?

DOCTOR.--Oysters do not ail.

F.--I have heard that the pearl is the result of a disease.

D.--Whether a functional derangement producing a valuable gem can be
properly termed, or treated as, a disease, is open to honest doubt.

F.--Then in the case supposed you would not favour excision of the
abnormal part?

D.--Yes; I would remove the oyster.

F.--But if the pearl were growing very rapidly this operation would
not be immediately advisable.

D.--That would depend upon the symptomatic diagnosis.

F.--Beast! Give me air!

       *       *       *       *       *

DOCTOR.--I have been thinking--

FOOL.--(Liar!)

D.--That you "come out" rather well for a fool.

Can it be that I have been entertaining an angel unawares?

F.--Dismiss the apprehension: I am as great a fool as yourself. But
there is a way by which in future you may resolve a similar doubt.

D.--Explain.

F.--Speak to your guest of symptomatic diagnosis. If he is an angel,
he will not resent it.

       *       *       *       *       *




III.


SOLDIER (_reading from "Napier"_).--"Who would not rather be buried by
an army upon the field of battle than by a sexton in a church-yard!"

FOOL.--I give it up.

S.--I am not aware that any one has asked you for an opinion.

F.--I am not aware that I have given one: there is a happiness yet in
store for you.

S.--I will revel in anticipation.

F.--You must revel somehow; without revelry there would be no
soldiering.

S.--Idiot.

F.--I beg your pardon: I had thought your profession had at least
taught you to call people by their proper titles. In the service of
mankind I hold the rank of Fool.

S.--What, ho! without there! Let the trumpets sound!

F.--I beg you will not.

S.--True; you beg: I will not.

F.--But why rob when stealing is more honourable?

S.--Consider the competition.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Sir Cut-throat, how many orphans have you made to-day?

SOLDIER.--The devil an orphan! Have you a family?

F.--Put up your iron; I am the last of my race.

S.--How? No more fools?

F.--Not one, so help me! They have all gone to the wars.

S.--And why, pray, have _you_ not enlisted?

F.--I should be no fool if I knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--You are somewhat indebted to me.

SOLDIER.--I do not acknowledge your claim. Let us submit the matter to
arbitration.

F.--The only arbiter whose decision you respect is on your own side.

S.--You allude to my sword, the most impartial of weapons: it cuts
both ways.

F.--And each way is peculiarly objectionable to your opponent.

S.--But for what am I indebted to you?

F.--For existence: the prevalence of me has made you possible.

S.--The benefit is not conspicuous; were it not for your quarrels, I
should enjoy a quantity of elegant leisure.

F.--As a clodhopper.

S.--I should at least hop my clods in a humble and Christian spirit;
and if some other fellow did did not so hop his--! I say no more.

F.--You have said enough; there would be war.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLDIER.--Why wear a cap and bells?

FOOL.--I hasten to crave pardon, and if spared will at once exchange
them.

S.--For what?

F.--A helmet and feather.

S.--G "hang a calf-skin on those recreant limbs."

F.--'T is only wisdom should be bound in calf.

S.--Why?

F.--Because wisdom is the veal of which folly is the matured beef.

S.--Then folly should be garbed in cow-skin?

F.--Aye, that it might the more speedily appear for what it is--the
naked truth.

S.--How should it?

F.--You would soon strip off its hide to make harness and trappings
withal. No one thinks how much conquerors owe to cows.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Tell me, hero, what is strategy?

SOLDIER.--The art of laying two knives against one throat.

F.--And what are tactics?

S.--The art of driving them home.

F.--Supermundane lexicographer!

S.--I'll bust thy crust! (_Attempts to draw his sword, gets it between
his legs, and falls along_.)

F. (_from a distance_)--Shall I summon an army, or a sexton? And will
you have it of bronze, or marble?

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--When you have gained a great victory, how much of the glory
goes to the horse whose back you bestrode?

SOLDIER.--Nonsense! A horse cannot appreciate glory; he prefers corn.

F.--And this you call non-appreciation! But listen. (_Reads_) "During
the Crusades, a part of the armament of a Turkish ship was two hundred
serpents." In the pursuit of glory you are at least not above
employing humble auxiliaries. These be curious allies.

S.--What stuff a fool may talk! No true soldier would pit a serpent
against a brave enemy. These worms were _sailors_.

F.--A nice distinction, truly! Did you ever, my most acute professor
of vivisection, employ your trenchant blade in the splitting of hairs?

S.--I have split masses of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOL.--Speaking of the Crusades: at the siege of Acre, when a part of
the wall had been thrown down by the Christians, the Pisans rushed
into the breach, but the greater part of their army being at dinner,
they were bloodily repulsed.

SOLDIER.--You appear to have a minute acquaintance with military
history.

F.--Yes--being a fool. But was it not a sin and a shame that those
feeders should not stir from their porridge to succour their suffering
comrades?

S.--Pray why should a man neglect his business to oblige a friend?

F.--But they might have taken and sacked the city.

S.--The selfish gluttons!

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLDIER.--Your presumption grows intolerable; I'll hold no further
parley with thee.

FOOL.--"Herculean gentleman, I dread thy drubs; pity the lifted whites
of both my eyes!"

S.--Then speak no more of the things you do but imperfectly
understand.

F.--Such censorship would doom all tongues to silence. But show me
wherein my knowledge is deficient.

S.--What is an _abattis_?

F.--Rubbish placed in front of a fort, to keep the rubbish outside
from getting at the rubbish inside.

S.--Egad! I'll part thy hair!




DIVERS TALES.




THE GRATEFUL BEAR.


I hope all my little readers have heard the story of Mr. Androcles and
the lion; so I will relate it as nearly as I can remember it, with the
caution that Androcles must not be confounded with the lion. If I had
a picture representing Androcles with a silk hat, and the lion with a
knot in his tail, the two might readily be distinguished; but the
artist says he won't make any such picture, and we must try to get on
without.

One day Androcles was gathering truffles in a forest, when he found a
lion's den; and, walking into it, he lay down and slept. It was a
custom, in his time, to sleep in lions' dens when practicable. The
lion was absent, inspecting a zoological garden, and did not return
until late; but he did return. He was surprised to find a stranger in
his menagerie without a ticket; but, supposing him to be some
contributor to a comic paper, did not eat him: he was very well
satisfied not to be eaten by him. Presently Androcles awoke, wishing
he had some seltzer water, or something. (Seltzer water is good after
a night's debauch, and something--it is difficult to say what--is good
to begin the new debauch with). Seeing the lion eyeing him, he began
hastily to pencil his last will and testament upon the rocky floor of
the den. What was his surprise to see the lion advance amicably and
extend his right forefoot! Androcles, however, was equal to the
occasion: he met the friendly overture with a cordial grasp of the
hand, whereat the lion howled--for he had a carpet-tack in his foot.
Perceiving that he had made a little mistake, Androcles made such
reparation as was in his power by pulling out the tack and putting it
in his own foot.

After this the beast could not do too much for him. He went out every
morning--carefully locking the door behind him--and returned every
evening, bringing in a nice fat baby from an adjacent village, and
laying it gratefully at his benefactor's feet. For the first few days
something seemed to have gone wrong with the benefactor's appetite,
but presently he took very kindly to the new diet; and, as he could
not get away, he lodged there, rent-free, all the days of his
life--which terminated very abruptly one evening when the lion had not
met with his usual success in hunting.

All this has very little to do with my story: I throw it in as a
classical allusion, to meet the demands of a literary fashion which
has its origin in the generous eagerness of writers to give the public
more than it pays for. But the story of Androcles was a favourite with
the bear whose adventures I am about to relate.

One day this crafty brute carefully inserted a thorn between two of
his toes, and limped awkwardly to the farm-house of Dame Pinworthy, a
widow, who with two beautiful whelps infested the forest where he
resided. He knocked at the open door, sent in his card, and was duly
admitted to the presence of the lady, who inquired his purpose. By way
of "defining his position" he held up his foot, and snuffled very
dolorously. The lady adjusted her spectacles, took the paw in her lap
(she, too, had heard the tale of Androcles), and, after a close
scrutiny, discovered the thorn, which, as delicately as possible, she
extracted, the patient making wry faces and howling dismally the
while.

[Illustration]

When it was all over, and she had assured him there was no charge, his
gratitude was a passion to observe! He desired to embrace her at once;
but this, although a widow of seven years' standing, she would by no
means permit; she said she was not personally averse to hugging, "but
what would her dear departed--boo-hoo!--say of it?" This was very
absurd, for Mr. Boo-hoo had seven feet of solid earth above him, and
it couldn't make much difference what he said, even supposing he had
enough tongue left to say anything, which he had not. However, the
polite beast respected her scruples; so the only way in which he could
testify his gratitude was by remaining to dinner. They had the
housedog for dinner that day, though, from some false notion of
hospitable etiquette, the woman and children did not take any.

On the next day, punctually at the same hour, the bear came again with
another thorn, and stayed to dinner as before. It was not much of a
dinner this time--only the cat, and a roll of stair-carpet, with one
or two pieces of sheet music; but true gratitude does not despise even
the humblest means of expression. The succeeding day he came as
before; but after being relieved of his torment, he found nothing
prepared for him. But when he took to thoughtfully licking one of the
little girl's hands, "that answered not with a caress," the mother
thought better of it, and drove in a small heifer.

He now came every day; he was so old a friend that the formality of
extracting the thorn was no longer observed; it would have contributed
nothing to the good understanding that existed between him and the
widow. He thought that three or four instances of Good Samaritanism
afforded ample matter for perpetual gratitude. His constant visits
were bad for the live stock of the farm; for some kind of beast had to
be in readiness each day to furnish forth the usual feast, and this
prevented multiplication. Most of the textile fabrics, too, had
disappeared; for the appetite of this animal was at the same time
cosmopolitan and exacting: it would accept almost anything in the way
of _entremets_, but something it would have. A hearthrug, a hall-mat,
a cushion, mattress, blanket, shawl, or other article of wearing
apparel--anything, in short, that was easy of ingestion was graciously
approved. The widow tried him once with a box of coals as dessert to
some barn-yard fowls; but this he seemed to regard as a doubtful
comestible, seductive to the palate, but obstinate in the stomach. A
look at one of the children always brought him something else, no
matter what he was then engaged on.

It was suggested to Mrs. Pinworthy that she should poison the bear;
but, after trying about a hundredweight of strychnia, arsenic, and
Prussic acid, without any effect other than what might be expected
from mild tonics, she thought it would not be right to go into
toxicology. So the poor Widow Pinworthy went on, patiently enduring
the consumption of her cattle, sheep, and hogs, the evaporation of her
poultry, and the taking off of her bed linen, until there were left
only the clothing of herself and children, some curtains, a sickly
lamb, and a pet pigeon. When the bear came for these she ventured to
expostulate. In this she was perfectly successful: the animal
permitted her to expostulate as long as she liked. Then he ate the
lamb and pigeon, took in a dish-cloth or two, and went away just as
contentedly as if she had not uttered a word.

Nothing edible now stood between her little daughters and the grave.
Her mental agony was painful to her mind; she could scarcely have
suffered more without an increase of unhappiness. She was roused to
desperation; and next day, when she saw the bear leaping across the
fields toward the house, she staggered from her seat and shut the
door. It was singular what a difference it made; she always remembered
it after that, and wished she had thought of it before.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SETTING SACHEM.


  'Twas an Injin chieftain, in feathers all fine,
    Who stood on the ocean's rim;
  There were numberless leagues of excellent brine--
    But there wasn't enough for him.
  So he knuckled a thumb in his painted eye,
  And added a tear to the scant supply.

  The surges were breaking with thund'rous voice,
    The winds were a-shrieking shrill;
  This warrior thought that a trifle of noise
    Was needed to fill the bill.
  So he lifted the top of his head off and scowled--
  Exalted his voice, did this chieftain, and howled!

  The sun was aflame in a field of gold
    That hung o'er the Western Sea;
  Bright banners of light were broadly unrolled,
    As banners of light should be.
  But no one was "speaking a piece" to that sun,
  And therefore this Medicine Man begun:

  "O much heap of bright! O big ball of warm!
    I've tracked you from sea to sea!
  For the Paleface has been at some pains to inform
    Me, _you_ are the emblem of _me_.
  He says to me, cheerfully: 'Westward Ho!'
  And westward I've hoed a most difficult row.

  "Since you are the emblem of me, I presume
    That I am the emblem of you,
  And thus, as we're equals, 't is safe to assume,
    That one great law governs us two.
  So now if I set in the ocean with thee,
  With thee I shall rise again out of the sea."

  His eloquence first, and his logic the last!
    Such orators die!--and he died:
  The trump was against him--his luck bad--he "passed"--
    And so he "passed out"--with the tide.
  This Injin is rid of the world with a whim--
  The world it is rid of his speeches and him.

       *       *       *       *       *




FEODORA.


Madame Yonsmit was a decayed gentlewoman who carried on her
decomposition in a modest wayside cottage in Thuringia. She was an
excellent sample of the Thuringian widow, a species not yet extinct,
but trying very hard to become so. The same may be said of the whole
genus. Madame Yonsmit was quite young, very comely, cultivated,
gracious, and pleasing. Her home was a nest of domestic virtues, but
she had a daughter who reflected but little credit upon the nest.
Feodora was indeed a "bad egg"--a very wicked and ungrateful egg. You
could see she was by her face. The girl had the most vicious
countenance--it was repulsive! It was a face in which boldness
struggled for the supremacy with cunning, and both were thrashed into
subjection by avarice. It was this latter virtue in Feodora which kept
her mother from having a taxable income.

Feodora's business was to beg on the highway. It wrung the heart of
the honest amiable gentlewoman to have her daughter do this; but the
h.a.g. having been reared in luxury, considered labour
degrading--which it is--and there was not much to steal in that part
of Thuringia. Feodora's mendicity would have provided an ample fund
for their support, but unhappily that ingrate would hardly ever fetch
home more than two or three shillings at a time. Goodness knows what
she did with the rest.

Vainly the good woman pointed out the sin of coveteousness; vainly she
would stand at the cottage door awaiting the child's return, and begin
arguing the point with her the moment she came in sight: the receipts
diminished daily until the average was less than tenpence--a sum upon
which no born gentlewoman would deign to exist. So it became a matter
of some importance to know where Feodora kept her banking account.
Madame Yonsmit thought at first she would follow her and see; but
although the good lady was as vigorous and sprightly as ever, carrying
a crutch more for ornament than use, she abandoned this plan because
it did not seem suitable to the dignity of a decayed gentlewoman. She
employed a detective.

The foregoing particulars I have from Madame Yonsmit herself; for
those immediately subjoining I am indebted to the detective, a skilful
officer named Bowstr.

[Illustration]

No sooner had the scraggy old hag communicated her suspicions than the
officer knew exactly what to do. He first distributed hand-bills all
over the country, stating that a certain person suspected of
concealing money had better look sharp. He then went to the Home
Secretary, and by not seeking to understate the real difficulties of
the case, induced that functionary to offer a reward of a thousand
pounds for the arrest of the malefactor. Next he proceeded to a
distant town, and took into custody a clergyman who resembled Feodora
in respect of wearing shoes. After these formal preliminaries he took
up the case with some zeal. He was not at all actuated by a desire to
obtain the reward, but by pure love of justice. The thought of
securing the girl's private hoard for himself never for a moment
entered his head.

He began to make frequent calls at the widow's cottage when Feodora
was at home, when, by apparently careless conversation, he would
endeavour to draw her out; but he was commonly frustrated by her old
beast of a mother, who, when the girl's answers did not suit, would
beat her unmercifully. So he took to meeting Feodora on the highway,
and giving her coppers carefully marked. For months he kept this up
with wonderful self-sacrifice--the girl being a mere uninteresting
angel. He met her daily in the roads and forest. His patience never
wearied, his vigilance never flagged. Her most careless glances were
conscientiously noted, her lightest words treasured up in his memory.
Meanwhile (the clergyman having been unjustly acquitted) he arrested
everybody he could get his hands on. Matters went on in this way until
it was time for the grand _coup_.

The succeeding-particulars I have from the lips of Feodora herself.

When that horrid Bowstr first came to the house Feodora thought he was
rather impudent, but said, little about it to her mother--not desiring
to have her back broken. She merely avoided him as much as she dared,
he was so frightfully ugly. But she managed to endure him until he
took to waylaying her on the highway, hanging about her all day,
interfering with the customers, and walking home with her at night.
Then her dislike deepened into disgust; and but for apprehensions not
wholly unconnected with a certain crutch, she would have sent him
about his business in short order. More than a thousand million times
she told him to be off and leave her alone, but men are such
fools--particularly this one.

What made Bowstr exceptionally disagreeable was his shameless habit of
making fun of Feodora's mother, whom he declared crazy as a loon. But
the maiden bore everything as well as she could, until one day the
nasty thing put his arm about her waist and kissed her before her very
face; _then_ she felt--well, it is not clear how she felt, but of one
thing she was quite sure: after having such a shame put upon her by
this insolent brute, she would never go back under her dear mother's
roof--never. She was too proud for _that_, at any rate. So she ran
away with Mr. Bowstr, and married him.

The conclusion of this history I learned for myself.

Upon hearing of her daughter's desertion Madame Yonsmit went clean
daft. She vowed she could bear betrayal, could endure decay, could
stand being a widow, would not repine at being left alone in her old
age (whenever she should become old), and could patiently submit to
the sharper than a serpent's thanks of having a toothless child
generally. But to be a mother-in-law! No, no; that was a plane of
degradation to which she positively would _not_ descend. So she
employed me to cut her throat. It was the toughest throat I ever cut
in all my life.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LEGEND OF IMMORTAL TRUTH.


  A bear, having spread him a notable feast,
    Invited a famishing fox to the place.
  "I've killed me," quoth he, "an edible beast
  As ever distended the girdle of priest
    With 'spread of religion,' or 'inward grace.'
  To my den I conveyed her,
  I bled her and flayed her,
    I hung up her skin to dry;
  Then laid her naked, to keep her cool,
  On a slab of ice from the frozen pool;
    And there we will eat her--you and I."

  The fox accepts, and away they walk,
  Beguiling the time with courteous talk.
  You'd ne'er have suspected, to see them smile,
  The bear was thinking, the blessed while,
    How, when his guest should be off his guard,
    With feasting hard,
  He'd give him a "wipe" that would spoil his style.
  You'd never have thought, to see them bow,
  The fox was reflecting deeply how
  He would best proceed, to circumvent
    His host, and prig
    The entire pig--
  Or other bird to the same intent.
  When Strength and Cunning in love combine,
  Be sure 't is to more than merely dine.

  The while these biters ply the lip,
  A mile ahead the muse shall skip:
  The poet's purpose she best may serve
  Inside the den--if she have the nerve.
  Behold! laid out in dark recess,
  A ghastly goat in stark undress,
  Pallid and still on her gelid bed,
  And indisputably very dead.
  Her skin depends from a couple of pins--
  And here the most singular statement begins;
    For all at once the butchered beast,
    With easy grace for one deceased,
    Upreared her head,
    Looked round, and said,
    Very distinctly for one so dead:
  "The nights are sharp, and the sheets are thin:
  I find it uncommonly cold herein!"

[Illustration]

  I answer not how this was wrought:
  All miracles surpass my thought.
  They're vexing, say you? and dementing?
  Peace, peace! they're none of my inventing.
  But lest too much of mystery
  Embarrass this true history,
  I'll not relate how that this goat
  Stood up and stamped her feet, to inform'em
  With--what's the word?--I mean, to warm'em;
  Nor how she plucked her rough _capote_
  From off the pegs where Bruin threw it,
  And o'er her quaking body drew it;
  Nor how each act could so befall:
  I'll only swear she did them all;
  Then lingered pensive in the grot,
  As if she something had forgot,
  Till a humble voice and a voice of pride
  Were heard, in murmurs of love, outside.
  Then, like a rocket set aflight,
  She sprang, and streaked it for the light!

  Ten million million years and a day
  Have rolled, since these events, away;
  But still the peasant at fall of night,
  Belated therenear, is oft affright
  By sounds of a phantom bear in flight;
  A breaking of branches under the hill;
  The noise of a going when all is still!
  And hens asleep on the perch, they say,
  Cackle sometimes in a startled way,
  As if they were dreaming a dream that mocks
  The lope and whiz of a fleeting fox!

  Half we're taught, and teach to youth,
    And praise by rote,
  Is not, but merely stands for, truth.
    So of my goat:
  She's merely designed to represent
  The truth--"immortal" to this extent:
  Dead she may be, and skinned--_frappé_--
  Hid in a dreadful den away;
  Prey to the Churches--(any will do,
  Except the Church of me and you.)
  The simplest miracle, even then,
  Will get her up and about again.




CONVERTING A PRODIGAL.


Little Johnny was a saving youth--one who from early infancy had
cultivated a provident habit. When other little boys were wasting
their substance in riotous gingerbread and molasses candy, investing
in missionary enterprises which paid no dividends, subscribing to the
North Labrador Orphan Fund, and sending capital out of the country
gene rally, Johnny would be sticking sixpences into the chimney-pot of
a big tin house with "BANK" painted on it in red letters above an
illusory door. Or he would put out odd pennies at appalling rates of
interest, with his parents, and bank the income. He was never weary of
dropping coppers into that insatiable chimney-pot, and leaving them
there. In this latter respect he differed notably from his elder
brother, Charlie; for, although Charles was fond of banking too, he
was addicted to such frequent runs upon the institution with a
hatchet, that it kept his parents honourably poor to purchase banks
for him; so they were reluctantly compelled to discourage the
depositing element in his panicky nature.

Johnny was not above work, either; to him "the dignity of labour" was
not a juiceless platitude, as it is to me, but a living, nourishing
truth, as satisfying and wholesome as that two sides of a triangle are
equal to one side of bacon. He would hold horses for gentlemen who
desired to step into a bar to inquire for letters. He would pursue the
fleeting pig at the behest of a drover. He would carry water to the
lions of a travelling menagerie, or do anything, for gain. He was
sharp-witted too: before conveying a drop of comfort to the parching
king of beasts, he would stipulate for six-pence instead of the usual
free ticket--or "tasting order," so to speak. He cared not a button
for the show.

The first hard work Johnny did of a morning was to look over the house
for fugitive pins, needles, hair-pins, matches, and other unconsidered
trifles; and if he sometimes found these where nobody had lost them,
he made such reparation as was in his power by losing them again where
nobody but he could find them. In the course of time, when he had
garnered a good many, he would "realize," and bank the proceeds.

Nor was he weakly superstitious, this Johnny. You could not fool _him_
with the Santa Claus hoax on Christmas Eve: he would lie awake all
night, as sceptical as a priest; and along toward morning, getting
quietly out of bed, would examine the pendent stockings of the other
children, to satisfy himself the predicted presents were not there;
and in the morning it always turned out that they were not. Then, when
the other children cried because they did not get anything, and the
parents affected surprise (as if they really believed in the venerable
fiction), Johnny was too manly to utter a whimper: he would simply
slip out of the back door, and engage in traffic with affluent
orphans; disposing of woolly horses, tin whistles, marbles, tops,
dolls, and sugar archangels, at a ruinous discount for cash. He
continued these provident courses for nine long years, always banking
his accretions with scrupulous care. Everybody predicted he would one
day be a merchant prince or a railway king; and some added he would
sell his crown to the junk-dealers.

His unthrifty brother, meanwhile, kept growing worse and worse. He was
so careless of wealth--so so wastefully extravagant of lucre--that
Johnny felt it his duty at times to clandestinely assume control of
the fraternal finances, lest the habit of squandering should wreck the
fraternal moral sense. It was plain that Charles had entered upon the
broad road which leads from the cradle to the workhouse--and that he
rather liked the travelling. So profuse was his prodigality that there
were grave suspicions as to his method of acquiring what he so openly
disbursed. There was but one opinion as to the melancholy termination
of his career--a termination which he seemed to regard as eminently
desirable. But one day, when the good pastor put it at him in so many
words, Charles gave token of some apprehension.

"Do you really think so, sir?" said he, thoughtfully; "ain't you
playin' it on me?"

"I assure you, Charles," said the good man, catching a ray of hope
from the boy's dawning seriousness, "you will certainly end your days
in a workhouse, unless you speedily abandon your course of
extravagance. There is nothing like habit--nothing!"

Charles may have thought that, considering his frequent and lavish
contributions to the missionary fund, the parson was rather hard upon
him; but he did not say so. He went away in mournful silence, and
began pelting a blind beggar with coppers.

One day, when Johnny had been more than usually provident, and Charles
proportionately prodigal, their father, having exhausted moral suasion
to no apparent purpose, determined to have recourse to a lower order
of argument: he would try to win Charles to economy by an appeal to
his grosser nature. So he convened the entire family, and,

"Johnny," said he, "do you think you have much money in your bank?
You ought to have saved a considerable sum in nine years."

Johnny took the alarm in a minute: perhaps there was some barefooted
little girl to be endowed with Sunday-school books.

"No," he answered, reflectively, "I don't think there can be much.
There's been a good deal of cold weather this winter, and you know how
metal shrinks! No-o-o, I'm sure there can't be only a little."

"Well, Johnny, you go up and bring down your bank. We'll see. Perhaps
Charles may be right, after all; and it's not worth while to save
money. I don't want a son of mine to get into a bad habit unless it
pays."

So Johnny travelled reluctantly up to his garret, and went to the
corner where his big tin bank-box had sat on a chest undisturbed for
years. He had long ago fortified himself against temptation by vowing
never to even shake it; for he remembered that formerly when Charles
used to shake his, and rattle the coins inside, he always ended by
smashing in the roof. Johnny approached his bank, and taking hold of
the cornice on either side, braced himself, gave a strong lift
upwards, and keeled over upon his back with the edifice atop of him,
like one of the figures in a picture of the great Lisbon earthquake!
There was but a single coin in it; and that, by an ingenious device,
was suspended in the centre, so that every piece popped in at the
chimney would clink upon it in passing through Charlie's little hole
into Charlie's little stocking hanging innocently beneath.

Of course restitution was out of the question; and even Johnny felt
that any merely temporal punishment would be weakly inadequate to the
demands of justice. But that night, in the dead silence of his
chamber, Johnny registered a great and solemn swear that so soon as he
could worry together a little capital, he would fling his feeble
remaining energies into the spendthrift business. And he did so.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOUR JACKS AND A KNAVE.


In the "backwoods" of Pennsylvania stood a little mill. The miller
appertaining unto this mill was a Pennsylvania Dutchman--a species of
animal in which for some centuries _sauerkraut_ has been usurping the
place of sense. In Hans Donnerspiel the usurpation was not complete;
he still knew enough to go in when it rained, but he did not know
enough to stay there after the storm had blown over. Hans was known to
a large circle of friends and admirers as about the worst miller in
those parts; but as he was the only one, people who quarrelled with an
exclusively meat diet continued to patronize him. He was honest, as
all stupid people are; but he was careless. So absent-minded was he,
that sometimes when grinding somebody's wheat he would thoughtlessly
turn into the "hopper" a bag of rye, a lot of old beer-bottles, or a
basket of fish. This made the flour so peculiar, that the people about
there never knew what it was to be well a day in all their lives.
There were so many local diseases in that vicinity, that a doctor from
twenty miles away could not have killed a patient in a week.

Hans meant well; but he had a hobby--a hobby that he did not ride:
that does not express it: it rode him. It spurred him so hard, that
the poor wretch could not pause a minute to see what he was putting
into his mill. This hobby was the purchase of jackasses. He expended
all his income in this diversion, and his mill was fairly sinking
under its weight of mortgages. He had more jackasses than he had hairs
on his head, and, as a rule, they were thinner. He was no mere amateur
collector either, but a sharp discriminating _connoisseur_. He would
buy a fat globular donkey if he could not do better; but a lank shabby
one was the apple of his eye. He rolled such a one, as it were, like a
sweet morsel under his tongue.

Hans's nearest neighbour was a worthless young scamp named Jo Garvey,
who lived mainly by hunting and fishing. Jo was a sharp-witted rascal,
without a single scruple between, himself and fortune. With a tithe of
Hans's industry he might have been almost anything; but his dense
laziness always rose up like a stone wall about him, shutting him in
like a toad in a rock. The exact opposite of Hans in almost every
respect, he was notably similar in one: he had a hobby. Jo's hobby was
the selling of jackasses.

One day, while Hans's upper and nether mill-stones were making it
lively for a mingled grist of corn, potatoes, and young chickens, he
heard Joseph calling outside. Stepping to the door, he saw him holding
three halters to which were appended three donkeys.

"I say, Hans," said he, "here are three fine animals for your stud. I
have brought 'em up from the egg, and I know 'em to be first-class.
But they 're not so big as I expected, and you may have 'em for a sack
of oats each."

Hans was delighted. He had not the least doubt in the world that Joe
had stolen them; but it was a fixed principle with him never to let a
donkey go away and say he was a hard man to deal with. He at once
brought out and delivered the oats. Jo gravely examined the quality,
and placing a sack across each animal, calmly led them away.

[Illustration]

When he had gone, it occurred to Hans that he had less oats and no
more asses than he had before.

"Tuyfel!" he exclaimed, scratching his pow; "I puy dot yackasses, und
I don't vos god 'im so mooch as I didn't haf 'im before--ain't it?"

Very much to his comfort it was, therefore, to see Jo come by next day
leading the same animals.

"Hi!" he shrieked; "you prings me to my yackasses. You gif me to my
broberdy back!"

"Oh, very well, Hans. If you want to crawfish out of a fair bargain,
all right. I'll give you back your donkeys, and you give me back my
oats."

"Yaw, yaw," assented the mollified miller; "you his von honest
shentlemans as I vos efer vent anyvhere. But I don't god ony more
oats, und you moost dake vheat, eh?"

And fetching out three sacks of wheat, he handed them over. Jo was
proceeding to lay these upon the backs of the animals; but this was
too thin for even Hans.

"Ach! you tief-veller! you leabs dis yackasses in me, und go right
avay off; odther I bust your het mid a gloob, don't it?"

So Joseph was reluctantly constrained to hang the donkeys to a fence.
While he did this, Hans was making a desperate attempt to think.
Presently he brightened up:

"Yo, how you coom by dot vheat all de dime?"

"Why, old mudhead, you gave it to me for the jacks."

"Und how you coom by dot oats pooty soon avhile ago?"

"Why, I gave that to you for them," said Joseph, pressed very hard for
a reply.

"Vell, den, you goes vetch me back to dot oats so gwicker as a lamb
gedwinkle his dail--hay?"

"All right, Hans. Lend me the donkeys to carry off my wheat, and I 'll
bring back your oats on 'em."

Joseph was beginning to despair; but no objection being made, he
loaded up the grain, and made off with his docile caravan. In a
half-hour he returned with the donkeys, but of course without anything
else.

"I zay, Yo, where is dis oats I hear zo mooch dalk aboud still?"

"Oh, curse you and your oats!" growled Jo, with simulated anger. "You
make such a fuss about a bargain, I have decided not to trade. Take
your old donkeys, and call it square!"

"Den vhere mine vheat is?"

"Now look here, Hans; that wheat is yours, is it?"

"Yaw, yaw."

"And the donkeys are yours, eh?"

"Yaw, yaw."

"And the wheat's been yours all the time, has it?"

"Yaw, yaw."

"Well, so have the donkeys. I took 'em out of your pasture in the
first place. Now what have you got to complain of?"

The Dutchman reflected all over his head with' his forefinger-nail.

"Gomblain? I no gomblain ven it is all right. I zee now I vos made a
mistaken. Coom, dake a drinks."

Jo left the animals standing, and went inside, where they pledged one
another in brimming mugs of beer. Then taking Hans by the hand,

"I am sorry," said he, "we can't trade. Perhaps some other day you
will be more reasonable. Good bye!"

And Joseph departed leading away the donkeys!

Hans stood for some moments gazing after him with a complacent smile
making his fat face ridiculous. Then turning to his mill-stones, he
shook his head with an air of intense self-satisfaction:

"Py donner! Dot Yo Garfey bees a geen, shmard yockey, but he gonnot
spiel me svoppin' yackasses!"

       *       *       *       *       *




DR. DEADWOOD, I PRESUME.


My name is Shandy, and this is the record of my Sentimental Journey.
Mr. Ames Jordan Gannett, proprietor's son of the "York----," with
which paper I am connected by marriage, sent me a post-card in a
sealed envelope, asking me to call at a well-known restaurant in
Regent Street. I was then at a well-known restaurant in Houndsditch. I
put on my worst and only hat, and went. I found Mr. Gannett, at
dinner, eating pease with his knife, in the manner of his countrymen.
He opened the conversation, characteristically, thus:

"Where's Dr. Deadwood?"

After several ineffectual guesses I had a happy thought. I asked him:

"Am I my brother's bar-keeper?"

Mr. Gannett pondered deeply, with his forefinger alongside his nose.
Finally he replied:

"I give it up."

He continued to eat for some moments in profound silence, as that of a
man very much in earnest. Suddenly he resumed:

"Here is a blank cheque, signed. I will send you all my father's
personal property to-morrow. Take this and find Dr. Deadwood. Find him
actually if you can, but find him. Away!"

I did as requested; that is, I took the cheque. Having supplied myself
with such luxuries as were absolutely necessary, I retired to my
lodgings. Upon my table in the centre of the room were spread some
clean white sheets of foolscap, and sat a bottle of black ink. It was
a good omen: the virgin paper was typical of the unexplored interior
of Africa; the sable ink represented the night of barbarism, or the
hue of barbarians, indifferently.

Now began the most arduous undertaking mentioned in the "York----," I
mean in history. Lighting my pipe, and fixing my eye upon the ink and
paper, I put my hands behind my back and took my departure from the
hearthrug toward the Interior. Language fails me; I throw myself upon
the reader's imagination. Before I had taken two steps, my vision
alighted upon the circular of a quack physician, which I had brought
home the day before around a bottle of hair-wash. I now saw the words,
"Twenty-one fevers!" This prostrated me for I know not how long.
Recovering, I took a step forward, when my eyes fastened themselves
upon my pen-wiper, worked into the similitude of a tiger. This
compelled me to retreat to the hearthrug for reinforcements. The
red-and-white dog displayed upon that article turned a deaf ear to my
entreaties; nothing would move him.

A torrent of rain now began falling outside, and I knew the roads were
impassable; but, chafing with impatience, I resolved upon another
advance. Cautiously proceeding _viâ_ the sofa, my attention fell upon
a scrap of newspaper; and, to my unspeakable disappointment, I read:

"The various tribes of the Interior are engaged in a bitter warfare."

It may have related to America, but I could not afford to hazard all
upon a guess. I made a wide _détour_ by way of the coal-scuttle, and
skirted painfully along the sideboard. All this consumed so much time
that my pipe expired in gloom, and I went back to the hearthrug to get
a match off the chimney-piece. Having done so, I stepped over to the
table and sat down, taking up the pen and spreading the paper between
myself and the ink-bottle. It was late, and something must be done.
Writing the familiar word Ujijijijijiji, I caught a neighbourly
cockroach, skewered him upon a pin, and fastened him in the centre of
the word. At this supreme moment I felt inclined to fall upon his neck
and devour him with kisses; but knowing by experience that cockroaches
are not good to eat, I restrained my feelings. Lifting my hat, I said:

"Dr. Deadwood, I presume?"

_He did not deny it!_

Seeing he was feeling sick, I gave him a bit of cheese and cheered him
up a trifle. After he was well restored,

"Tell me," said I, "is it true that the Regent's Canal falls into Lake
Michigan, thence running uphill to Omaha, as related by Ptolemy,
thence spirally to Melbourne, where it joins the delta of the Ganges
and becomes an affluent of the Albert Nicaragua, as Herodotus
maintains?"

HE DID NOT DENY IT!

The rest is known to the public.

       *       *       *       *       *




NUT-CRACKING.


In the city of Algammon resided the Prince Champou, who was madly
enamoured of the Lady Capilla. She returned his affection--unopened.

In the matter of back-hair the Lady Capilla was blessed even beyond
her deserts. Her natural pigtail was so intolerably long that she
employed two pages to look after it when she walked out; the one a few
yards behind her, the other at the extreme end of the line. Their
names were Dan and Beersheba, respectively.

[Illustration]

Aside from salaries to these dependents, and quite apart from the
consideration of macassar, the possession of all this animal filament
was financially unprofitable: the hair market was buoyant, and hers
represented a large amount of idle capital. And it was otherwise a
source of annoyance and irritation; for all the young men of the city
were hotly in love with her, and skirmishing for a love-lock. They
seldom troubled Dan much, but the outlying Beersheba had an animated
time of it. He was subject to constant incursions, and was always in a
riot.

The picture I have drawn to illustrate this history shows nothing of
all these squabbles. My pen revels in the battle's din, but my
peaceful pencil loves to depict the scenes I know something about.

Although the Lady Capilla was unwilling to reciprocate the passion of
Champou the man, she was not averse to quiet interviews with Champou
the Prince. In the course of one of these (see my picture), as she sat
listening to his carefully-rehearsed and really artistic avowals, with
her tail hanging out of the window, she suddenly interrupted him:

"My dear Prince," said she, "it is all nonsense, you know, to ask for
my heart; but I am not mean; you shall have a lock of my hair."

"Do you think," replied the Prince, "that I could be so sordid as to
accept a single jewel from that glorious crown? I love this hair of
yours very dearly, I admit, but only because of its connection with
your divine head. Sever that connection, and I should value it no more
than I would a tail plucked from its native cow."

This comparison seems to me a very fine one, but tastes differ, and to
the Lady Capilla it seemed quite the reverse. Rising indignantly, she
marched away, her queue running in through the window and gradually
tapering off the interview, as it were. Prince Champou saw that he had
missed his opportunity, and resolved to repair his error. Straightway
he forged an order on Beersheba for thirty yards of love-lock. To
serve this writ he sent his business partner; for the Prince was wont
to beguile his dragging leisure by tonsorial diversions in an obscure
quarter of the town. At first Beersheba was sceptical, but when he saw
the writing in real ink, his scruples vanished, and he chopped off the
amount of souvenir demanded.

Now Champou's partner was the Court barber, and by the use of a
peculiar hair oil which the two of them had concocted, they soon
managed to balden the pates of all the male aristocracy of the place.
Then, to supply the demand so created, they devised beautiful wigs
from the Lady Capilla's lost tresses, which they sold at a marvellous
profit. And so they were enabled to retire from this narrative with
good incomes.

It was known that the Lady Capilla, who, since the alleged murder of
one Beersheba, had shut herself up like a hermit, or a jack-knife,
would re-enter society; and a great ball was given to do her honour.
The feauty, bank, and rashion of Algammon had assembled in the
Guildhall for that purpose. While the revelry was at its fiercest, the
dancing at its loosest, the rooms at their hottest, and the
perspiration at spring-tide, there was a sound of wheels outside,
begetting an instant hush of expectation within. The dancers ceased to
spin, and all the gentlemen crowded about the door. As the Lady
Capilla entered, these instinctively fell into two lines, and she
passed down the space between, with her little tail behind her. As the
end of the latter came into the room, the wigs of the two gentlemen
nearest the door leaped off to join their parent stem. In their haste
to recover them the two gentlemen bent eagerly forward, knocking their
shining pows together with a vehemence that shattered them like
egg-shells. The wigs of the next pair were similarly affected; and in
seeking to recover them the pair similarly perished. Then, _crack!
spat! pash!_--at every step the lady took there were two heads that
beat as one. In three minutes there was but a single living male in
the room. He was an odd one, who, having a lady opposite him, had
merely pitched himself headlong into her stomach, doubling her like a
lemon-squeezer.

It was merry to see the Lady Capilla floating through the mazy dance
that night, with all those wigs fighting for their old places in her
pigtail.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MAGICIAN'S LITTLE JOKE.


About the middle of the fifteenth century there dwelt in the Black
Forest a pretty but unfashionable young maiden named Simprella
Whiskiblote. The first of these names was hers in monopoly; the other
she enjoyed in common with her father. Simprella was the most
beautiful fifteenth-century girl I ever saw. She had coloured eyes, a
complexion, some hair, and two lips very nearly alike, which partially
covered a lot of teeth. She was gifted with the complement of legs
commonly worn at that period, supporting a body to which were loosely
attached, in the manner of her country, as many arms as she had any
use for, inasmuch as she was not required to hold baby. But all these
charms were only so many objective points for the operations of the
paternal cudgel; for this father of hers was a hard, unfeeling man,
who had no bowels of compassion for his bludgeon. He would put it to
work early, and keep it going all day; and when it was worn out with
hard service, instead of rewarding it with steady employment, he would
cruelly throw it aside and get a fresh one. It is scarcely to be
wondered at that a girl harried in this way should be driven to the
insane expedient of falling in love.

Near the neat mud cottage in which Simprella vegetated was a dense
wood, extending for miles in various directions, according to the
point from which it was viewed. By a method readily understood, it had
been so arranged that it was the next easiest thing in the world to
get into it, and the very easiest thing in the world to stay there.

In the centre of this labyrinth was a castle of the early promiscuous
order of architecture--an order which was until recently much employed
in the construction of powder-works, but is now entirely exploded. In
this baronial hall lived an eligible single party--a giant so tall he
used a step-ladder to put on his hat, and could not put his hands into
his pockets without kneeling. He lived entirely alone, and gave
himself up to the practice of iniquity, devising prohibitory liquor
laws, imposing the income tax, and drinking shilling claret. But,
seeing Simprella one day, he bent himself into the form of a
horse-shoe magnet to look into her eyes. Whether it was his magnetic
attitude acting upon a young heart steeled by adversity, or his
chivalric forbearance in not eating her, I know not: I only know that
from that moment she became riotously enamoured of him; and the reader
may accept either the scientific or the popular explanation, according
to the bent of his mind.

She at once asked the giant in marriage, and obtained the consent of
his parents by betraying her father into their hands; explaining to
them, however, that he was not good to eat, but might be drunk on the
premises.

The marriage proved a very happy one, but the household duties of the
bride were extremely irksome. It fatigued her to dress the beeves for
dinner; it nearly broke her back to black her lord's boots without any
scaffolding. It took her all day to perform any kindly little office
for him. But she bore it all uncomplainingly, until one morning he
asked her to part his back hair; then the bent sapling of her spirit
flew up and hit him in the face. She gathered up some French novels,
and retired to a lonely tower to breathe out her soul in unavailing
regrets.

One day she saw below her in the forest a dear gazelle, gladding her
with its soft black eye. She leaned out of the window, and said
_Scat!_ The animal did not move. Then she waved her arms--above
described--and said _Shew!_ This time he did not move as much as he
did before. Simprella decided he must have a bill against her; so she
closed her shutters, drew down the blind, and pinned the curtains
together. A moment later she opened them and peeped out. Then she went
down to examine his collar, that she might order one like it.

When the gazelle saw Simprella approach, he arose, and, beckoning with
his tail, made off slowly into the wood. Then Simprella perceived this
was a supernatural gazelle--a variety now extinct, but which then
pervaded the Schwarzwald in considerable quantity--sent by some good
magician, who owed the giant a grudge, to pilot her out of the forest.
Nothing could exceed her joy at this discovery: she whistled a dirge,
sang a Latin hymn, and preached a funeral discourse all in one breath.
Such were the artless methods by which the full heart in the fifteenth
century was compelled to express its gratitute for benefits; the
advertising columns of the daily papers were not then open to the
benefactor's pen.

[Illustration]

All would now have been well, but for the fact that it was not. In
following her deliverer, Simprella observed that his golden collar was
inscribed with the mystic words--HANDS OFF! She tried hard to obey the
injunction; she did her level best; she--but why amplify? Simprella
was a woman.

No sooner had her fingers touched the slender chain depending from the
magic collar, than the poor animal's eyes emitted twin tears, which
coursed silently but firmly down his nose, vacating it more in sorrow
than in anger. Then he looked up reproachfully into her face. Those
were his first tears--this was his last look. In two minutes by the
watch he was blind as a mole!

There is but little more to tell. The giant ate himself to death; the
castle mouldered and crumbled into pig-pens; empires rose and fell;
kings ascended their thrones, and got down again; mountains grew grey,
and rivers bald-headed; suits in chancery were brought and decided,
and those from the tailor were paid for; the ages came, like maiden
aunts, uninvited, and lingered till they became a bore--and still
Simprella, with the magician's curse upon her, conducted her sightless
guide through the interminable wilderness!

To all others the labyrinth had yielded up its clue. The hunter
threaded its maze; the woodman plunged confidently into its innermost
depths; the peasant child gathered ferns unscared in its sunless
dells. But often the child abandoned his botany in terror, the woodman
bolted for home, and the hunter's heart went down into his boots, at
the sight of a fair young spectre leading a blind phantom through the
silent glades. I saw them there in 1860, while I was gunning. I shot
them.




SEAFARING.


My envious rivals have always sought to cast discredit upon the
following tale, by affirming that mere unadorned truth does not
constitute a work of literary merit. Be it so: I care not what they
call it. A rose with any other smell would be as sweet.

In the autumn of 1868 I wanted to go from Sacramento, California, to
San Francisco. I at once went to the railway office and bought a
ticket, the clerk telling me that would take me there. But when I
tried it, it wouldn't. Vainly I laid it on the railway and sat down
upon it: it would not move; and every few minutes an engine would come
along and crowd me off the track. I never travelled by so badly
managed a line!

I then resolved to go by way of the river, and took passage on a
steamboat. The engineer of this boat had once been a candidate for the
State Legislature while I was editing a newspaper. Stung to madness by
the arguments I had advanced against his election (which consisted
mainly in relating how that his cousin was hanged for horse-stealing,
and how that his sister had an intolerable squint which a free people
could never abide), he had sworn to be revenged. After his defeat I
had confessed the charges were false, so far as he personally was
concerned, but this did not seem to appease him. He declared he would
"get even on me," and he did: he blew up the boat.

Being thus summarily set ashore, I determined that I would be
independent of common carriers destitute of common courtesy. I
purchased a wooden box, just large enough to admit one, and not
transferable. I lay down in this, double-locked it on the outside, and
carrying it to the river, launched it upon the watery waste. The box,
I soon discovered, had an hereditary tendency to turn over. I had
parted my hair in the middle before embarking, but the precaution was
inadequate; it secured not immunity, only impartiality, the box
turning over one way as readily as the other. I could counteract this
evil only by shifting my tobacco from cheek to cheek, and in this way
I got on tolerably well until my navy sprang a leak near the stern.

I now began to wish I had not locked down the cover; I could have got
out and walked ashore. But it was childish to give way to foolish
regrets; so I lay perfectly quiet, and yelled. Presently I thought of
my jack-knife. By this time the ship was so water-logged as to be a
little more stable. This enabled me to get the knife from my pocket
without upsetting more than six or eight times, and inspired hope.
Taking the whittle between my teeth, I turned over upon my stomach,
and cut a hole through the bottom near the bow. Turning back again, I
awaited the result. Most men would have awaited the result, I think,
if they could not have got out. For some time there was no result. The
ship was too deeply laden astern, where my feet were, and water will
not run up hill unless it is paid to do it. But when I called in all
my faculties for a good earnest think, the weight of my intellect
turned the scale. It was like a cargo of pig-lead in the forecastle.
The water, which for nearly an hour I had kept down by drinking it as
it rose about my lips, began to run out at the hole I had scuttled,
faster than it could be admitted at the one in the stern; and in a few
moments the bottom was so dry you might have lighted a match upon it,
if you had been there, and obtained the captain's permission.

[Illustration]

I was all right now. I had got into San Pablo Bay, where it was all
plain sailing. If I could manage to keep off the horizon I should be
somewhere before daylight. But a new annoyance was in store for me.
The steamboats on these waters are constructed of very frail
materials, and whenever one came into collision with my flotilla, she
immediately sank. This was most exasperating, for the piercing shrieks
of the hapless crews and passengers prevented my getting any sleep.
Such disagreeable voices as these people had would have tortured an
ear of corn. I felt as if I would like to step out and beat them
soft-headed with a club; though of course I had not the heart to do
so while the padlock held fast.

The reader, if he is obliging, will remember that there was formerly
an obstruction in the harbour of San Francisco, called Blossom Rock,
which was some fathoms under water, but not fathoms enough to suit
shipmasters. It was removed by an engineer named Von Schmidt. This
person bored a hole in it, and sent down some men who gnawed out the
whole interior, leaving the rock a mere shell. Into this drawing-room
suite were inserted thirty tons of powder, ten barrels of
nitro-glycerine, and a woman's temper. Von Schmidt then put in
something explosive, and corked up the opening, leaving a long wire
hanging out. When all these preparations were complete, the
inhabitants of San Francisco came out to see the fun. They perched
thickly upon Telegraph Hill from base to summit; they swarmed
innumerable upon the beach; the whole region was black with them. All
that day they waited, and came again the next. Again they were
disappointed, and again they returned full of hope. For three long
weeks they did nothing but squat upon that eminence, looking fixedly
at the wrong place. But when it transpired that Von Schmidt had
hastily left the State directly he had completed his preparations,
leaving the wire floating in the water, in the hope that some
electrical eel might swim against it and ignite the explosives, the
people began to abate their ardour, and move out of town. They said it
might be a good while before a qualified gymnotus would pass that way,
although the State Ichthyologer assured them that he had put some
eels' eggs into the head waters of the Sacramento River not two weeks
previously. But the country was very beautiful at that time of the
year, and the people would not wait. So when the explosion really
occurred, there wasn't anybody in the vicinity to witness it. It was a
stupendous explosion all the same, as the unhappy gymnotus discovered
to his cost.

Now, I have often thought that if this mighty convulsion had occurred
a year or two earlier than it really did, it would have been bad for
me as I floated idly past, unconscious of danger. As it was, my little
bark was carried out into the broad Pacific, and sank in ten thousand
fathoms of the coldest water!--it makes my teeth chatter to relate it!

       *       *       *       *       *




TONY ROLLO'S CONCLUSION.


To a degree unprecedented in the Rollo family, of Illinois, Antony was
an undutiful son. He was so undutiful that he may be said to have been
preposterous. There were seven other sons--Antony was the eldest. His
younger brothers were a nice, well-behaved bevy of boys as ever you
saw. They always attended Sunday School regularly; arriving just
before the Doxology (I think Sunday School exercises terminate that
way), and sitting in a solemn row on a fence outside, waiting with
pious patience for the girls to come forth; then they walked home with
them as far as their respective gates. They were an obedient seven,
too; they knew well enough the respect due to paternal authority, and
when their father told them what was what, and which side up it ought
to lie, they never tarried until he had more than picked up a hickory
cudgel before tacitly admitting the correctness of the riper judgment.
Had the old gentleman commanded the digging of seven graves, and the
fabrication of seven board coffins to match, these necessaries would
have been provided with unquestioning alacrity.

But Antony, I bleed to state, was of an impractical, pensive turn. He
despised industry, scoffed at Sunday-schooling, set up a private
standard of morals, and rebelled against natural authority. He
wouldn't be a dutiful son--not for money! He had no natural
affections, and loved nothing so well as to sit and think. He was
tolerably thoughtful all the time; but with some farming implement in
his hand he came out strong. He has been known to take an axe between
his knees, and sit on a stump in a "clearing" all day, wrapt in a
single continuous meditation. And when interrupted by the
interposition of night, or by the superposition of the paternal
hickory, he would resume the meditation, next day, precisely where he
left off, going on, and on, and on, in one profound and inscrutable
think. It was a common remark in the neighbourhood that "If Tony Rollo
didn't let up, he'd think his ridiculous white head off!" And on
divers occasions when the old man's hickory had fallen upon that
fleecy globe with unusual ardour, Tony really did think it off--until
the continued pain convinced him it was there yet.

You would like to know what Tony was thinking of, all these years.
That is what they all wanted to know; but he didn't seem to tell. When
the subject was mentioned he would always try to get away; and if he
could not avoid a direct question, he would blush and stammer in so
distressing a confusion that the doctor forbade all allusion to the
matter, lest the young man should have a convulsion. It was clear
enough, however, that the subject of Tony's meditation was "more than
average inter_est_in'," as his father phrased it; for sometimes he
would give it so grave consideration that observers would double their
anxiety about the safety of his head, which he seemed in danger of
snapping off with solemn nods; and at other times he would laugh
immoderately, smiting his thigh or holding his sides in uncontrollable
merriment. But it went on without abatement, and without any
disclosure; went on until his poor mother's curiosity had worried her
grey hairs in sorrow to the grave; went on until his father, having
worn out all the hickory saplings on the place, had made a fair
beginning upon the young oaks; went on until all the seven brothers,
having married a Sunday-school girl each, had erected comfortable
log-houses upon outlying corners of the father-in-legal farms; on, and
ever on, until Tony was forty years of age! This appeared to be a
turning-point in Tony's career--at this time a subtle change stole
into his life, affecting both his inner and his outer self: he worked
less than formerly, and thought a good deal more!

Years afterwards, when the fraternal seven were well-to-do
freeholders, with clouds of progeny, making their hearts light and
their expenses heavy--when the old homestead was upgrown with rank
brambles, and the live-stock long extinct--when the aged father had so
fallen into the sere and yellow leaf that he couldn't hit hard enough
to hurt--Tony, the mere shadow of his former self, sat, one evening,
in the chimney corner, thinking very hard indeed. His father and three
or four skeleton hounds were the only other persons present; the old
gentleman quietly shelling a peck of Indian corn given by a grateful
neighbour whose cow he had once pulled out of the mire, and the hounds
thinking how cheerfully they would have assisted him had Nature
kindly made them graminivorous. Suddenly Tony spake.

"Father," said he, looking straight across the top of the axe-handle
which he held between his knees as a mental stimulant, "father, I've
been thinking of something a good bit lately."

"Jest thirty-five years, Tony, come next Thanksgiving," replied the
old man, promptly, in a thin asthmatic falsetto. "I recollect your
mother used to say it dated from the time your Aunt Hannah was here
with the girls."

"Yes, father, I think it may be a matter of thirty-five years; though
it don't seem so long, does it? But I've been thinking harder for the
last week or two, and I'm going to speak out."

Unbounded amazement looked out at the old man's eyes; his tongue,
utterly unprepared for the unexpected contingency, refused its office;
a corncob imperfectly denuded dropped from his nerveless hand, and was
critically examined, in turn, by the gossamer dogs, hoping against
hope. A smoking brand in the fireplace fell suddenly upon a bed of hot
coals, where, lacking the fortitude of Guatimozin, it emitted a
sputtering protest, followed by a thin flame like a visible agony. In
the resulting light Tony's haggard face shone competitively with a
ruddy blush, which spread over his entire scalp, to the imminent
danger of firing his flaxen hair.

"Yes, father," he answered, making a desperate clutch at calmness, but
losing his grip, "I'm going to make a clean breast of it this time,
for sure! Then you can do what you like about it."

The paternal organ of speech found sufficient strength to grind out an
intimation that the paternal ear was open for business.

"I've studied it all over, father; I've looked at it from every side;
I've been through it with a lantern! And I've come to the conclusion
that, seeing as I'm the oldest, it's about time I was beginning to
think of getting married!"

       *       *       *       *       *




NO CHARGE FOR ATTENDANCE.


Near the road leading from Deutscherkirche to Lagerhaus may be seen
the ruins of a little cottage. It never was a very pretentious pile,
but it has a history. About the middle of the last century it was
occupied by one Heinrich Schneider, who was a small farmer--so small a
farmer his clothes wouldn't fit him without a good deal of taking-in.
But Heinrich Schneider was young. He had a wife, however--most small
farmers have when young. They were rather poor: the farm was just
large enough to keep them comfortably hungry.

Schneider was not literary in his taste; his sole reading was an old
dog's-eared copy of the "Arabian Nights" done into German, and in that
he read nothing but the story of "Aladdin and his Wonderful Lamp."
Upon his five hundredth perusal of that he conceived a valuable idea:
he would rub _his_ lamp and _corral_ a Genie! So he put a thick
leather glove on his right hand, and went to the cupboard to get out
the lamp. He had no lamp. But this disappointment, which would have
been instantly fatal to a more despondent man, was only an agreeable
stimulus to him. He took out an old iron candle-snuffer, and went to
work upon that.

Now, iron is very hard; it requires more rubbing than any other metal.
I once chafed a Genie out of an anvil, but I was quite weary before I
got him all out; the slightest irritation of a leaden water-pipe would
have fetched the same Genie out of it like a rat from his hole. But
having planted all his poultry, sown his potatoes, and set out his
wheat, Heinrich had the whole summer before him, and he was patient;
he devoted all his time to compelling the attendance of the
Supernatural.

When the autumn came, the good wife reaped the chickens, dug out the
apples, plucked the pigs and other cereals; and a wonderfully abundant
harvest it was. Schneider's crops had flourished amazingly. That was
because he did not worry them all summer with agricultural implements.
One evening when the produce had been stored, Heinrich sat at his
fireside operating upon his candle-snuffer with the same simple faith
as in the early spring. Suddenly there was a knock at the door, and
the expected Genie put in an appearance. His advent begot no little
surprise in the good couple.

He was a very substantial incarnation, indeed, of the Supernatural.
About eight feet in length, extremely fat, thick-limbed, ill-favoured,
heavy of movement, and generally unpretty, he did not at first sight
impress his new master any too favourably.

However, he was given a stool at the fireside, and Heinrich plied him
with a multitude of questions: Where did he come from? whom had he
last served? how did he like Aladdin? and did he think _they_ should
get on well? To all these queries the Genie returned evasive answers;
he was Delphic to the verge of unintelligibility. He would only nod
mysteriously, muttering beneath his breath in some unknown tongue,
probably Arabic--in which, however, his master thought he could
distinguish the words "roast" and "boiled" with significant
frequency. This Genie must have served last in the capacity of cook.

[Illustration]

This was a gratifying discovery: for the next four months or so there
would be nothing to do about the farm; the Slave could prepare the
family meals during the winter, and in the spring go regularly to
work. Schneider was too shrewd to risk everything by extravagant
demands all at once. He remembered the roc's egg of the legend, and
thought he would proceed with caution. So the good couple brought out
their cooking utensils, and by pantomime inducted the Slave into the
mystery of their use. They showed him the larder, the cellars, the
granary, the chicken-coops, and everything. He appeared interested and
intelligent, apprehended the salient points of the situation with
marvellous ease, and nodded like he would drop his big head off--did
everything but talk.

After this the _frau_ prepared the evening meal, the Genie assisting
very satisfactorily, except that his notions of quantity were rather
too liberal; perhaps this was natural in one accustomed to palaces and
courts. When all was on the table, by way of testing his Slave's
obedience Heinrich sat down at the board and carelessly rubbed the
candle-snuffer. The Genie was there in a second! Not only so, but he
fell upon the viands with an ardour and sincerity that were alarming.
In two minutes he had got away with everything on the table. The
rapidity with which that spirit crowded all manner of edibles into his
neck was simply shocking!

Having finished his repast he stretched himself before the fire and
went to sleep. Heinrich and Barbara were depressed in spirit; they sat
up until nearly morning in silence, waiting for the Genie to vanish
for the night; but he did not perceptibly vanish any. Moreover, he had
not vanished next morning; he had risen with the lark, and was
preparing breakfast, having made his estimates upon a basis of most
immoderate consumption. To this he soon sat down with the same
catholicity of appetite that had distinguished him the previous
evening. Having bolted this preposterous breakfast he arrayed his fat
face in a sable scowl, beat his master with a stewpan, stretched
himself before the fire, and again addressed himself to sleep. Over a
furtive and clandestine meal in the larder, Heinrich and Barbara
confessed themselves thoroughly heart-sick of the Supernatural.

"I told you so," said he; "depend upon it, patient industry is a
thousand per cent. better than this invisible agency. I will now take
the fatal candle-snuffer a mile from here, rub it real hard, fling it
aside, and run away."

But he didn't. During the night ten feet of snow had fallen. It lay
all winter too.

Early the next spring there emerged from that cottage by the wayside
the unstable framework of a man dragging through seas of melting snow
a tottering female of dejected aspect. Forlorn, crippled, famishing,
and discouraged, these melancholy relics held on their way until they
came to a cross-roads (all leading to Lagerhaus), where they saw
clinging to an upright post the tatter of an old placard. It read as
follows:

   LOST, strayed, or stolen, from Herr Schaackhofer's Grand
   Museum, the celebrated Patagonian Giant, Ugolulah. Height 8 ft.
   2 in., elegant figure, handsome, intelligent features,
   sprightly and vivacious in conversation, of engaging address,
   temperate in diet, harmless and tractable in disposition.
   Answers to the nickname of Fritz Sneddeker. Any one returning
   him to Herr Schaackhofer will receive Seven Thalers Reward, and
   no questions asked.

It was a tempting offer, but they did not go back for the giant. But
he was afterwards discovered sleeping sweetly upon the hearthstone,
after a hearty meal of empty barrels and boxes. Being secured he was
found to be too fat for egress by the door. So the house was pulled
down to let him out; and that is how it happens to be in ruins now.

       *       *       *       *       *




PERNICKETTY'S FRIGHT.


_"Sssssst!"_

Dan Golby held up his hand to enjoin silence; in a breath we were as
quiet as mice. Then it came again, borne upon the night wind from away
somewhere in the darkness toward the mountains, across miles of
treeless plain--a low, dismal, sobbing sound, like the wail of a
strangling child! It was nothing but the howl of a wolf, and a wolf is
about the last thing a man who knows the cowardly beast would be
afraid of; but there was something so weird and unearthly in this "cry
between the silences"--something so banshee-like in its suggestion of
the grave--that, old mountaineers that we were, and long familiar with
it, we felt an instinctive dread--a dread which was not fear, but only
a sense of utter solitude and desolation. There is no sound known to
mortal ear that has in it so strange a power upon the imagination as
the night-howl of this wretched beast, heard across the dreary wastes
of the desert he disgraces.

Involuntarily we drew nearer together, and some one of the party
stirred the fire till it sent up a tall flame, widening the black
circle shutting us in on all sides. Again rose the faint far cry, and
was answered by one fainter and more far in the opposite quarter.
Then another, and yet another, struck in--a dozen, a hundred all at
once; and in three minutes the whole invisible outer world seemed to
consist mainly of wolves, jangled out of tune by some convulsion of
nature.

About this time it was a pleasing study to watch the countenance of
Old Nick. This party had joined us at Fort Benton, whither he had come
on a steamboat, up the Missouri. This was his maiden venture upon the
plains, and his habit of querulous faultfinding had, on the first day
out, secured him the _sobriquet_ of Old Pernicketty, which the
attrition of time had worn down to Old Nick. He knew no more of wolves
and other animals than a naturalist, and he was now a trifle
frightened. He was crouching beside his saddle and kit, listening with
all his soul, his hands suspended before him with divergent fingers,
his face ashy pale, and his jaw hanging unconsidered below.

Suddenly Dan Golby, who had been watching him with an amused smile,
assumed a grave aspect, listened a moment very intently, and remarked:

"Boys, if I didn't _know_ those were wolves, I should say we'd better
get out of this."

"Eh?" exclaimed Nick, eagerly; "if you did not know they were
_wolves_? Why, what else, and what worse, could they be?"

"Well, there's an innocent!" replied Dan, winking slyly at the rest of
us. "Why, they _might_ be Injuns, of course. Don't you know, you old
bummer, that that's the way the red devils run a surprise party? Don't
you know that when you hear a parcel of wolves letting on like that,
at night, it's a hundred to one they carry bows and arrows?"

Here one or two old hunters on the opposite side of the fire, who had
not caught Dan's precautionary wink, laughed good-humouredly, and made
derisive comments. At this Dan seemed much vexed, and getting up, he
strode over to them to argue it out. It was surprising how easily they
were brought round to his way of thinking!

By this time Old Nick was thoroughly perturbed. He fidgeted about,
examining his rifle and pistols, tightened his belt, and looked in the
direction of his horse. His anxiety became so painful that he did not
attempt to conceal it. Upon our part, we affected to partially share
it. One of us finally asked Dan if he was quite _sure_ they were
wolves. Then Dan listened a long time with his ear to the ground,
after which he said, hesitatingly:

"Well, no; there's no such thing as _absolute_ certainty, I suppose;
but I _think_ they're wolves. Still, there's no harm in being ready
for anything--always well to be ready, I suppose."

Nick needed nothing more; he pounced upon his saddle and bridle, slung
them upon his mustang, and had everything snug in less time than it
takes to tell it. The rest of the party were far too comfortable to
co-operate with Dan to any considerable extent; we contented ourselves
with making a show of examining our weapons. All this time the wolves,
as is their way when attracted by firelight, were closing in,
clamouring like a legion of fiends. If Nick had known that a single
pistol-shot would have sent them scampering away for dear life, I
presume he would have fired one; as it was, he had Indian on the
brain, and just stood by his horse, quaking till his teeth rattled
like dice in a box.

"No," pursued the implacable Dan, "these _can't_ be Injuns; for if
they were, we should, perhaps, hear an owl or two among them. The
chiefs sometimes hoot, owl-fashion, just to let the rabble know
they're standing up to the work like men, and to show where they are."

_"Too-hoo-hoo-hoo-hooaw!"_

It took us all by surprise. Nick made one spring and came down astride
his sleepy mustang, with force enough to have crushed a smaller beast.
We all rose to our feet, except Jerry Hunker, who was lying flat on
his stomach, with his head buried in his arms, and whom we had thought
sound asleep. One look at _him_ reassured us as to the "owl" business,
and we settled back, each man pretending to his neighbour that he had
got up merely for effect upon Nick.

That man was now a sight to see. He sat in his saddle gesticulating
wildly, and imploring us to get ready. He trembled like a jelly-fish.
He took out his pistols, cocked them, and thrust them so back into the
holsters, without knowing what he was about. He cocked his rifle,
holding it with the muzzle directed anywhere, but principally our way;
grasped his bowie-knife between his teeth, and cut his tongue trying
to talk; spurred his nag into the fire, and backed him out across our
blankets; and finally sat still, utterly unnerved, while we roared
with the laughter we could no longer suppress.

_Hwissss! pft! swt! cheew!_ Bones of Cæsar! The arrows flitted and
clipt amongst us like a flight of bats! Dan Golby threw a
double-summersault, alighting on his head. Dory Durkee went smashing
into the fire. Jerry Hunker was pinned to the sod where he lay fast
asleep. Such dodging and ducking, and clawing about for weapons I
never saw. And such genuine Indian yelling--it chills my marrow to
write of it!

Old Nick vanished like a dream; and long before we could find our
tools and get to work we heard the desultory reports of his pistols
exploding in his holsters, as his pony measured off the darkness
between us and safety.

For some fifteen minutes we had tolerable warm work of it,
individually, collectively, and miscellaneously; single-handed, and
one against a dozen; struggling with painted savages in the firelight,
and with one another in the dark; shooting the living, and stabbing
the dead; stampeding our horses, and fighting _them_; battling with
anything that would battle, and smashing our gunstocks on whatever
would not!

When all was done--when we had renovated our fire, collected our
horses, and got our dead into position--we sat down to talk it over.
As we sat there, cutting up our clothing for bandages, digging the
poisoned arrow-heads out of our limbs, readjusting our scalps, or
swapping them for such vagrant ones as there was nobody to identify,
we could not help smiling to think how we had frightened Old Nick. Dan
Golby, who was sinking rapidly, whispered that "it was the one sweet
memory he had to sustain and cheer him in crossing the dark river into
everlasting f----." It is uncertain how Dan would have finished that
last word; he may have meant "felicity"--he may have meant "fire." It
is nobody's business.

       *       *       *       *       *




JUNIPER.


He was a dwarf, was Juniper. About the time of his birth Nature was
executing a large order for prime giants, and had need of all her
materials. Juniper infested the wooded interior of Norway, and dwelt
in a cave--a miserable hole in which a blind bat in a condition of
sempiternal torpor would have declined to hibernate, rent-free.
Juniper was such a feeble little wretch, so inoffensive in his way of
life, so modest in his demeanour, that every one was disposed to love
him like a cousin; there was not enough of him to love like a brother.
He, too, was inclined to return the affection; he was too weak to love
very hard, but he made the best stagger at it he could. But a singular
fatality prevented a perfect communion of soul between him and his
neighbours. A strange destiny had thrown its shadow upon him, which
made it cool for him in summer. There was a divinity that shaped his
ends extremely rough, no matter how he hewed them.

Somewhere in that vicinity lived a monstrous bear--a great hulking
obnoxious beast who had no more soul than tail. This rascal had
somehow conceived a notion that the appointed function of his
existence was the extermination of the dwarf. If you met the latter
you might rely with cheerful confidence upon seeing the ferocious
brute in eager pursuit of him in less than a minute. No sooner would
Juniper fairly accost you, looking timidly over his shoulder the
while, than the raging savage would leap out of some contiguous jungle
and make after him like a locomotive engine too late for the train.
Then poor Juniper would streak it for the nearest crowd of people,
diving and dodging amongst their shins with nimble skill, shrieking
all the time like a panther. He was as earnest about it as if he had
made a bet upon the result of the race. Of course everybody was too
busy to stop, but in his blind terror the dwarf would single out some
luckless wight--commonly some well-dressed person; Juniper
instinctively sought the protection of the aristocracy--getting
behind him, ducking between his legs, surrounding him, dancing through
him--doing anything to save the paltry flitch of his own bacon.
Presently the bear would lose all patience and nip the other fellow.
Then, ashamed of losing his temper, he would sneak sullenly away,
taking along the body. When he had gone, poor Juniper would fall upon
his knees, tearing his beard, pounding his breast, and crying _Mea
culpa_ in deep remorse. Afterwards he would pay a visit of condolence
to the bereaved relations and offer to pay the funeral expenses; but
of course there never were any funeral expenses. Everybody, as before
stated, liked the unhappy dwarf, but nobody liked the company he kept,
and people were not at home to him as a rule. Whenever he came into a
village traffic was temporarily suspended, and he was made the centre
of as broad a solitude as could be hastily improvised.

Many were the attempts to capture the terrible beast; hundreds of the
country people would assemble to hunt him with guns and dogs. But even
the dogs seemed to have an instinctive sense of some occult connection
between him and the dwarf, and could never be made to understand that
it was the former that was wanted. Directly they were laid on the
scent they would forsake it to invest the dwarf's abode; and it was
with much difficulty the pitying huntsmen could induce them to raise
the siege. Things went on in this unsatisfactory fashion for years;
the population annually decreasing, and Juniper making the most
miraculous escapes.

Now there resided in a small village near by, a brace of twins; little
orphan girls, named Jalap and Ginseng. Their considerate neighbours
had told them such pleasing tales about the bear that they decided to
leave the country. So they got their valuables together in a box and
set out. They met Juniper! He approached to inform them it was a fine
morning, when the great beast of a bear "rose like the steam of rich
distilled perfume" from the earth in front of them, and made a mouth
at him. Juniper did not run, as might have been expected; he stood for
a moment peering into the brute's cavernous jaws, and then flew! He
absented himself with such extraordinary nimbleness that after he was
a mile distant his image appeared to be standing there yet; and
looking back he saw it himself. Baffled of his dwarf, the bear thought
he would make a shift to get on, for the present, with an orphan. So
he picked up Jalap by her middle, and thoughtfully withdrew.

[Illustration]

The thankful but disgusted Ginseng continued her emigration, but soon
missed the jewel-box, which in their alarm had been dropped and burst
asunder. She did not much care for the jewels, but it contained some
valuable papers, among them the "Examiner" (a print which once had the
misfortune to condemn a book written by the author of this tale) and
this she doted on. Returning for her property, she peered cautiously
around the angle of a rock, and saw a spectacle that begot in her mind
a languid interest. The bear had returned upon a similar mission; he
was calmly distending his cheeks with the contents of the broken box.
And perched on a rock near at hand sat Juniper waiting for him!

It was natural that a suspicion of collusion between the two should
dawn upon that infant's mind. It did dawn; it brightened and broadened
into the perfect day of conviction. It was a revelation to the child.
"At that moment," said she afterwards, "I felt that I could lay my
finger on the best-trained bear in Christendom." But with praiseworthy
moderation she controlled herself and didn't do it; she just stood
still and allowed the beast to proceed. Having stored all the jewels
in his capacious mouth, he began taking in the valuable papers. First
some title-deeds disappeared; then some railway bonds; presently a
roll of rent-receipts. All these seemed to be as honey to his tongue;
he smiled a smile of tranquil happiness. Finally the newspaper
vanished into his face like a wisp of straw drawn into a threshing
machine.

Then the brute expanded his mouth with a ludicrous gape, spilling out
the jewels, a glittering shower. Then he snapped his jaws like a steel
trap afflicted with _tetanus_, and stood on his head awhile. Next he
made a feeble endeavour to complicate the relations between his
parts--to tie himself into a love-knot. Failing in this he lay flat
upon his side, wept, retched, and finally, fashioning his visage into
the semblance of sickly grin, gave up the ghost. I don't know what he
died of; I suppose it was hereditary in his family.

The guilty come always to grief. Juniper was arrested, charged with
conspiracy to kill, tried, convicted, sentenced to be hanged, and
before the sun went down was pardoned. In searching his cavern the
police discovered countless human bones, much torn clothing, and a
mighty multitude of empty purses. But nothing of any value--not an
article of any value. It was a mystery what Juniper had done with his
ill-gotten valuables. The police confessed it was a mystery!

       *       *       *       *       *




FOLLOWING THE SEA.


At the time of "the great earthquake of '68," I was at Arica, Peru. I
have not a map by me, and am not certain that Arica is not in Chili,
but it can't make much difference; there was earthquake all along
there. As nearly as I can remember it occured in August--about the
middle of August, 1869 or '70.

Sam Baxter was with me; I think we had gone from San Francisco to make
a railway, or something. On the morning of the 'quake, Sam and I had
gone down to the beach to bathe. We had shed our boots and begun to
moult, when there was a slight tremor of the earth, as if the elephant
who supports it were pushing upwards, or lying down and getting up
again. Next, the surges, which were flattening themselves upon the
sand and dragging away such small trifles as they could lay hold of,
began racing out seaward, as if they had received a telegraphic
dispatch that somebody was not expected to live. This was needless,
for _we_ did not expect to live.

When the sea had receded entirely out of sight, we started after it;
for it will be remembered we had come to bathe; and bathing without
some kind of water is not refreshing in a hot climate. I have heard
that bathing in asses' milk is invigorating, but at that time I had no
dealings with other authors. I have had no dealings with them since.

For the first four or five miles the walking was very difficult,
although the grade was tolerably steep. The ground was soft, there
were tangled forests of sea-weed, old rotting ships, rusty anchors,
human skeletons, and a multitude of things to impede the pedestrian.
The floundering sharks bit our legs as we toiled past them, and we
were constantly slipping down upon the flat fish strewn about like
orange-peel on a sidewalk. Sam, too, had stuffed his shirt-front with
such a weight of Spanish doubloons from the wreck of an old galleon,
that I had to help him across all the worst places. It was very
dispiriting.

Presently, away on the western horizon, I saw the sea coming back. It
occurred to me then that I did not wish it to come back. A tidal wave
is nearly always wet, and I was now a good way from home, with no
means of making a fire.

The same was true of Sam, but he did not appear to think of it in that
way. He stood quite still a moment with his eyes fixed on the
advancing line of water; then turned to me, saying, very earnestly:

"Tell you what, William; I never wanted a ship so bad from the cradle
to the grave! I would give m-o-r-e for a ship!--more than for all the
railways and turnpikes you could scare up! I'd give more than a
hundred, thousand, million dollars! I would--I'd give all I'm worth,
and all my Erie shares, for--just--one--little--ship!"

To show how lightly he could part with his wealth, he lifted his shirt
out of his trousers, unbosoming himself of his doubloons, which
tumbled about his feet, a golden storm.

By this time the tidal wave was close upon us. Call _that_ a wave! It
was one solid green wall of water, higher than Niagara Falls,
stretching as far as we could see to right and left, without a break
in its towering front! It was by no means clear what we ought to do.
The moving wall showed no projections by means of which the most
daring climber could hope to reach the top. There was no ivy; there
were no window-ledges. Stay!--there was the lightning-conductor! No,
there wasn't any lightning-conductor. Of course, not!

Looking despairingly upward, I made a tolerably good beginning at
thinking of all the mean actions I had wrought in the flesh, when I
saw projecting beyond the crest of the wave a ship's bowsprit, with a
man sitting on it, reading a newspaper! Thank fortune, we were saved!

Falling upon our knees with tearful gratitude, we got up again and
ran--ran as fast as we could, I suspect; for now the whole fore-part
of the ship bulged through the water directly above our heads, and
might lose its balance any moment. If we had only brought along our
umbrellas!

I shouted to the man on the bowsprit to drop us a line. He merely
replied that his correspondence was already very onerous, and he
hadn't any pen and ink.

Then I told him I wanted to get aboard. He said I would find one on
the beach, about three leagues to the south'ard, where the "Nancy
Tucker" went ashore.

At these replies I was disheartened. It was not so much that the man
withheld assistance, as that he made puns. Presently, however, he
folded his newspaper, put it carefully away in his pocket, went and
got a line, and let it down to us just as we were about to give up the
race. Sam made a lunge at it, and got it--right into his side! For the
fiend above had appended a shark-hook to the end of the line--which
was _his_ notion of humour. But this was no time for crimination and
recrimination. I laid hold of Sam's legs, the end of the rope was
passed about the capstan, and as soon as the men on board had had a
little grog, we were hauled up. I can assure you that it was no fine
experience to go up in that way, close to the smooth vertical front of
water, with the whales tumbling out all round and above us, and the
sword-fishes nosing us pointedly with vulgar curiosity.

We had no sooner set foot on deck, and got Sam disengaged from the
hook, than the purser stepped up with book and pencil.

"Tickets, gentlemen."

We told him we hadn't any tickets, and he ordered us to be set ashore
in a boat. It was represented to him that this was quite impossible
under the circumstances; but he replied that he had nothing to do with
circumstances--did not know anything about circumstances. Nothing
would move him till the captain, who was a really kind-hearted man,
came on deck and knocked him overboard with a spare topmast. We were
now stripped of our clothing, chafed all over with stiff brushes,
rolled on our stomachs, wrapped in flannels, laid before a hot stove
in the saloon, and strangled with scalding brandy. We had not been
wet, nor had we swallowed any sea-water, but the surgeon said this was
the proper treatment. I suspect, poor man, he did not often get the
opportunity to resuscitate anybody; in fact, he admitted he had not
had any such case as ours for years. It is uncertain what he might
have done to us if the tender-hearted captain had not thrashed him
into his cabin with a knotted hawser, and told us to go on deck.

By this time the ship was passing above the town of Arica, and the
sailors were all for'd, sitting on the bulwarks, snapping peas and
small shot at the terrified inhabitants flitting through the streets a
hundred feet below. These harmless projectiles rattled very merrily
upon the upturned boot-soles of the fleeting multitude; but not seeing
any fun in this, we were about to go astern and fish a little, when
the ship grounded on a hill-top. The captain hove out all the anchors
he had about him; and when the water went swirling back to its legal
level, taking the town along for company, there we were, in the midst
of a charming agricultural country, but at some distance from any
sea-port.

At sunrise next morning we were all on deck. Sam sauntered aft to the
binnacle, cast his eye carelessly upon the compass, and uttered an
ejaculation of astonishment.

"Tell _you_, captain," he called out, "this has been a direr
convulsion of nature than you have any idea. Everything's been screwed
right round. Needle points due south!"

"Why, you cussed lubber!" growled the skipper, moving up and taking a
look, "it p'ints d'rectly to labbard, an' there's the sun, dead
ahead!"

Sam turned and confronted him, with a steady gaze of ineffable
contempt.

"Now, who said it wasn't dead ahead?--tell me _that_. Shows how much
_you_ know about earthquakes. 'Course, I didn't mean just this
continent, nor just this earth: I tell you, the _whole thing's_
turned!"

       *       *       *       *       *




A TALE OF SPANISH VENGEANCE.


Don Hemstitch Blodoza was an hidalgo--one of the highest dalgos of old
Spain. He had a comfortably picturesque castle on the Guadalquiver,
with towers, battlements, and mortages on it; but as it belonged, not
to his own creditors, but to those of his bitterest enemy, who
inhabited it, Don Hemstitch preferred the forest as a steady
residence. He had that curse of Spanish pride which will not permit
one to be a burden upon the man who may happen to have massacred all
one's relations, and set a price upon the heads of one's family
generally. He had made a vow never to accept the hospitality of Don
Symposio--not if he died for it. So he pervaded the romantic dells,
and the sunless jungle was infected with the sound of his guitar. He
rose in the morning and laved him in the limpid brooklet; and the
beams of the noonday sun fell upon him in the pursuit of diet--

  "The thistle's downy seed his fare,
    His drink the morning dew."

He throve but indifferently upon this meagre regimen, but beyond all
other evils a true Spaniard of the poorer sort dreads obesity. During
the darkest night of the season he will get up at an absurd hour and
stab his best friend in the back rather than grow fat.

It will of course be suspected by the experienced reader that Don
Hemstitch did not have any bed. Like the Horatian lines above quoted--

  "He perched at will on every spray."

In translating this tale into the French, M. Victor Hugo will please
twig the proper meaning of the word "spray"; I shall be very angry if
he make it appear that my hero is a gull.

One morning while Don Hemstitch was dozing upon his leafy couch--not
his main couch, but a branch--he was roused from his tranquil nap by
the grunting of swine; or, if you like subtle distinctions, by the
sound of human voices. Peering cautiously through his bed-hangings, he
saw below him at a little distance two of his countrymen in
conversation. The fine practised phrenzy of their looks, their
excellently rehearsed air of apprehensive secrecy, showed him they
were merely conspiring against somebody's life; and he dismissed the
matter from his mind until the mention of his own name recalled his
attention. One of the conspirators was urging the other to make one of
a joint-stock company for the Don's assassination; but the more
conscientious plotter would not consent.

"The laws of Spain," said the latter, "with which we have an
acquaintance meanly withheld from the attorneys, enjoin that when one
man murders another, except for debt, he must make provision for the
widow and orphans. I leave it to you if, after the summer's
unprofitable business, we are in a position to assume the care and
education of a large family. We have not a single asset, and our
liabilities amount to fourteen widows, and more than thirty children
of strong and increasing appetite.

"_Car-r-rajo!"_ hissed the other through his beard; "we will slaughter
the lot of them!"

At this cold-blooded proposition his merciful companion recoiled
aghast.

"_Diablo_!" he shrieked. "Tempt me no farther. What! immolate a whole
hecatomb of guiltless women and children? Consider the funeral
expense!"

There is really no moving the law-abiding soul to crime of doubtful
profit. But Don Hemstitch was not at ease; he could not say how soon
it might transpire that he had nor chick nor child. Should Don
Symposio pass that way and communicate this information--and he was in
a position to know--the moral scruples of the conscientious plotter
would vanish like the baseless fabric of a beaten cur. Moreover, it is
always unpleasant to be included in a conspiracy in which one is not a
conspirator. Don Hemstitch resolved to sell his life at the highest
market price.

Hastily descending his tree, he wrapped his cloak about him and
stood for some time, wishing he had a poniard. Trying the temper of
this upon his thumbnail, he found it much more amiable than his own.
It was a keen Toledo blade--keen enough to sever a hare. To nerve
himself for the deadly work before him, he began thinking of a lady
whom he had once met--the lovely Donna Lavaca, beloved of El
Toro-blanco. Having thus wrought up his Castilian soul to a high pitch
of jealously, he felt quite irresistible, and advanced towards the two
ruffians with his poniard deftly latent in his flowing sleeve. His
mien was hostile, his stride puissant, his nose tip-tilted--not to put
too fine a point upon it, petallic. Don Hemstitch was upon the
war-path with all his might. The forest trembled as he trode, the
earth bent like thin ice beneath his heel. Birds, beasts, serpents,
and poachers fled affrighted to the right and left of his course. He
came down upon the unsuspecting assassins like a mild Spanish
avalanche.

[Illustration]

"_Senores!_" he thundered, with a frightful scowl and a faint aroma of
garlic, "patter your _pater-nosters_ as fast as you conveniently may.
You have but ten minutes to exist. Has either of you a watch?"

Then might you have seen a guilty dismay over-spreading the faces of
two sinners, like a sudden snow paling twin mountain peaks. In the
presence of Death, Crime shuddered and sank into his boots. Conscience
stood appalled in the sight of Retribution. In vain the villains
essayed speech; each palsied tongue beat out upon the yielding air
some weak words of supplication, then clave to its proper concave. Two
pairs of brawny knees unsettled their knitted braces, and bent limply
beneath their loads of incarnate wickedness swaying unsteadily above.
With clenched hands and streaming eyes these wretched men prayed
silently. At this supreme moment an American gentleman sitting by,
with his heels upon a rotted oaken stump, tilted back his chair, laid
down his newspaper, and began operating upon a half-eaten apple-pie.
One glance at the title of that print--one look at that calm angular
face clasped in its crescent of crisp crust--and Don Hemstitch Blodoza
reeled, staggered like an exhausted spinning-top. He spread his
baffled hand upon his eyes, and sank heavily to earth!

"Saved! saved!" shrieked the penitent conspirators, springing to their
feet. The far deeps of the forest whispered in consultation, and a
distant hillside echoed back the words. "Saved!" sang the
rocks--"Saved!" the glad birds twittered from the leaves above. The
hare that Don Hemstitch Blodoza's poniard would have severed limped
awkwardly but confidently about, saying, "Saved!" as well as he knew
how.

Explanation is needless. The American gentleman was the Special
Correspondent of the "New York Herald." It is tolerably well known
that except beneath his searching eye no considerable event can
occur--and his whole attention was focused upon that apple-pie!

That is how Spanish vengeance was balked of its issue.

       *       *       *       *       *




MRS. DENNISON'S HEAD.


While I was employed in the Bank of Loan and Discount (said Mr.
Applegarth, smiling the smile with which he always prefaced a nice old
story), there was another clerk there, named Dennison--a quiet,
reticent fellow, the very soul of truth, and a great favourite with
us all. He always wore crape on his hat, and once when asked for whom
he was in mourning he replied his wife, and seemed much affected. We
all expressed our sympathy as delicately as possible, and no more was
said upon the subject. Some weeks after this he seemed to have arrived
at that stage of tempered grief at which it becomes a relief to give
sorrow words--to speak of the departed one to sympathizing friends;
for one day he voluntarily began talking of his bereavement, and of
the terrible calamity by which his wife had been deprived of her head!

This sharpened our curiosity to the keenest edge; but of course we
controlled it, hoping he would volunteer some further information with
regard to so singular a misfortune; but when day after day went by and
he did not allude to the matter, we got worked up into a fever of
excitement about it. One evening after Dennison had gone, we held a
kind of political meeting about it, at which all possible and
impossible methods of decapitation were suggested as the ones to which
Mrs. D. probably owed her extraordinary demise. I am sorry to add that
we so far forgot the grave character of the event as to lay small
wagers that it was done this way or that way; that it was accidental
or premeditated; that she had had a hand in it herself or that it was
wrought by circumstances beyond her control. All was mere conjecture,
however; but from that time Dennison, as the custodian of a secret
upon which we had staked our cash, was an object of more than usual
interest. It wasn't entirely that, either; aside from our paltry
wagers, we felt a consuming curiosity to know the truth for its own
sake. Each set himself to work to elicit the dread secret in some way;
and the misdirected ingenuity we developed was wonderful. All sorts
of pious devices were resorted to to entice poor Dennison into
clearing up the mystery. By a thousand indirect methods we sought to
entrap him into divulging all. History, fiction, poesy--all were laid
under contribution, and from Goliah down, through Charles I., to Sam
Spigger, a local celebrity who got his head entangled in mill
machinery, every one who had ever mourned the loss of a head received
his due share of attention during office hours. The regularity with
which we introduced, and the pertinacity with which we stuck to, this
one topic came near getting us all discharged; for one day the cashier
came out of his private office and intimated that if we valued our
situations the subject of hanging would afford us the means of
retaining them. He added that he always selected his subordinates with
an eye to their conversational abilities, but variety of subject was
as desirable, at times, as exhaustive treatment.

During all this discussion Dennison, albeit he had evinced from the
first a singular interest in the theme, and shirked not his fair share
of the conversation, never once seemed to understand that it had any
reference to himself. His frank truthful nature was quite unable to
detect the personal significance of the subject. It was plain that
nothing short of a definite inquiry would elicit the information we
were dying to obtain; and at a "caucus," one evening, we drew lots to
determine who should openly propound it. The choice fell upon me.

Next morning we were at the bank somewhat earlier than usual, waiting
impatiently for Dennison and the time to open the doors: they always
arrived together. When Dennison stepped into the room, bowing in his
engaging manner to each clerk as he passed to his own desk, I
confronted him, shaking him warmly by the hand. At that moment all
the others fell to writing and figuring with unusual avidity, as if
thinking of anything under the sun except Dennison's wife's head.

"Oh, Dennison," I began, as carelessly as I could manage it; "speaking
of decapitation reminds me of something I would like to ask you. I
have intended asking it several times, but it has always slipped my
memory. Of course you will pardon me if it is not a fair question."

As if by magic, the scratching of pens died away, leaving a dead
silence which quite disconcerted me; but I blundered on:

"I heard the other day--that is, you said--or it was in the
newspapers--- or somewhere--something about your poor wife, you
understand--about her losing her head. Would you mind telling me how
such a distressing accident--if it was an accident--occurred?"

When I had finished, Dennison walked straight past me as if he didn't
see me, went round the counter to his stool, and perched himself
gravely on the top of it, facing the other clerks. Then he began
speaking, calmly, and without apparent emotion:

"Gentlemen, I have long desired to speak of this thing, but you gave
me no encouragement, and I naturally supposed you were indifferent. I
now thank you all for the friendly interest you take in my affairs. I
will satisfy your curiosity upon this point at once, if you will
promise never hereafter to allude to the matter, and to ask not a
single question now."

We all promised upon our sacred honour, and collected about him with
the utmost eagerness. He bent his head a moment, then raised it,
quietly saying:

"My poor wife's head was bitten off!"

"By what?" we all exclaimed eagerly, with suspended breath.

He gave us a look full of reproach, turned to his desk, and went at
his work.

We went at ours.

       *       *       *       *       *




A FOWL WITCH.


Frau Gaubenslosher was strongly suspected of witchcraft. I don't think
she was a witch, but would not like to swear she was not, in a court
of law, unless a good deal depended upon my testimony, and I had been
properly suborned beforehand. A great many persons accused of
witchcraft have themselves stoutly disbelieved the charge, until, when
subjected to shooting with a silver bullet or boiling in oil, they
have found themselves unable to endure the test. And it must be
confessed appearances were against the Frau. In the first place, she
lived quite alone in a forest, and had no visiting list. This was
suspicious. Secondly--and it was thus, mainly, that she had acquired
her evil repute--all the barn-yard fowls in the vicinity seemed to
bear her the most uncompromising ill-will. Whenever she passed a flock
of hens, or ducks, or turkeys, or geese, one of them, with dropped
wings, extended neck, and open bill, would start in hot pursuit.
Sometimes the whole flock would join in for a few moments with shrill
clamour; but there would always be one fleeter and more determined
than the rest, and that one would keep up the chase with unflagging
zeal clean out of sight.

Upon these occasions the dame's fright was painful to behold. She
would not scream--her organs of screech seemed to have lost their
power--nor, as a rule, would she curse; she would just address herself
to silent prayerful speed, with every symptom of abject terror!

The Frau's explanation of this unnatural persecution was singularly
weak. Upon a certain night long ago, said she, a poor bedraggled and
attenuated gander had applied at her door for relief. He stated in
piteous accents that he had eaten nothing for months but tin-tacks and
an occasional beer-bottle; and he had not roosted under cover for so
long a time he did not know what it was like. Would she give him a
place on her fender, and fetch out six or eight cold pies to amuse him
while she was preparing his supper? To this plea she turned a deaf
ear, and he went away. He came again the next night, however, bringing
a written certificate from a clergyman that his case was a deserving
one. She would not aid him, and he departed. The night after he
presented himself again, with a paper signed by the relieving officer
of the parish, stating that the necessity for help was most urgent.

By this time the Frau's good-nature was quite exhausted: she slew him,
dressed him, put him in a pot, and boiled him. She kept him boiling
for three or four days, but she did not eat him because her teeth were
just like anybody's teeth--no weaker, perhaps, but certainly no
stronger nor sharper. So she fed him to a threshing machine of her
acquaintance, which managed to masticate some of the more modern
portions, but was hopelessly wrecked upon the neck. From that time the
poor beldame had lived under the ban of a great curse. Hens took
after her as naturally as after the soaring beetle; geese pursued her
as if she were a fleeting tadpole; ducks, turkeys, and guinea fowl
camped upon her trail with tireless pertinacity.

Now there was a leaven of improbability in this tale, and it leavened
the whole lump. Ganders do not roost; there is not one in a hundred of
them that could sit on a fender long enough to say Jack Robinson. So,
as the Frau lived a thousand years before the birth of common
sense--say about a half century ago--when everything uncommon had a
smell of the supernatural, there was nothing for it but to consider
her a witch. Had she been very feeble and withered, the people would
have burned her, out of hand; but they did not like to proceed to
extremes without perfectly legal evidence. They were cautious, for
they had made several mistakes recently. They had sentenced two or
three females to the stake, and upon being stripped the limbs and
bodies of these had not redeemed the hideous promise of their
shrivelled faces and hands. Justice was ashamed of having toasted
comparatively plump and presumably innocent women; and the punishment
of this one was wisely postponed until the proof should be all in.

But in the meantime a graceless youth, named Hans Blisselwartle, made
the startling discovery that none of the fowls that pursued the Frau
ever came back to boast of it. A brief martial career seemed to have
weaned them from the arts of peace and the love of their kindred. Full
of unutterable suspicion, Hans one day followed in the rear of an
exciting race between the timorous dame and an avenging pullet. They
were too rapid for him; but bursting suddenly in at the lady's door
some fifteen minutes afterward, he found her in the act of placing
the plucked and eviscerated Nemesis upon her cooking range. The Frau
betrayed considerable confusion; and although the accusing
Blisselwartle could not but recognize in her act a certain poetic
justice, he could not conceal from himself that there was something
grossly selfish and sordid in it. He thought it was a good deal like
bottling an annoying ghost and selling him for clarified moonlight; or
like haltering a nightmare and putting her to the cart.

When it transpired that the Frau ate her feathered persecutors, the
patience of the villagers refused to honour the new demand upon it:
she was at once arrested, and charged with prostituting a noble
superstition to a base selfish end. We will pass over the trial;
suffice it she was convicted. But even then they had not the heart to
burn a middle-aged woman, with full rounded outlines, as a witch, so
they broke her upon the wheel as a thief.

[Illustration]

The reckless antipathy of the domestic fowls to this inoffensive lady
remains to be explained. Having rejected her theory, I am bound in
honour to set up one of my own. Happily an inventory of her effects,
now before me, furnishes a tolerably safe basis. Amongst the articles
of personal property I note "One long, thin, silken fishing line, and
hook." Now if I were a barn-yard fowl--say a goose--and a lady not a
friend of mine were to pass me, munching sweetmeats, and were to drop
a nice fat worm, passing on apparently unconscious of her loss, I
think I should try to get away with that worm. And if after swallowing
it I felt drawn towards that lady by a strong personal attachment, I
suppose that I should yield if I could not help it. And then if the
lady chose to run and I chose to follow, making a good deal of noise,
I suppose it would look as if I were engaged in a very reprehensible
pursuit, would it not? With the light I have, that is the way in
which the case presents itself to my intelligence; though, of course,
I may be wrong.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CIVIL SERVICE IN FLORIDA.


Colonel Bulper was of a slumberous turn. Most people are not: they
work all day and sleep all night--are always in one or the other
condition of unrest, and never slumber. Such persons, the Colonel used
to remark, are fit only for sentry duty; they are good to watch our
property while we take our rest--and they take the property. But this
tale is not of them; it is of Colonel Bulper.

There was a fellow named Halsey, a practical joker, and one of the
most disagreeable of his class. He would remain broad awake for a year
at a time, for no other purpose than to break other people of their
natural rest. And I must admit that from the wreck of his faculties
upon the rock of _insomnia_ he had somehow rescued a marvellous
ingenuity and fertility of expedient. But this tale is not so much of
him as of Colonel Bulper.

At the time of which I write, the Colonel was the Collector of Customs
at a sea-port town in Florida, United States. The climate there is
perpetual summer; it never rains, nor anything; and there was no good
reason why the Colonel should not have enjoyed it to the top of his
bent, as there was enough for all. In point of fact, the Collectorship
had been given him solely that he might repair his wasted vitality by
a short season of unbroken repose; for during the Presidential canvass
immediately preceding his appointment he had been kept awake a long
time by means of strong tea, in order to deliver an able and
exhaustive political argument prepared by the candidate, who was
ultimately successful in spite of it. Halsey, who had favoured the
other aspirant, was a merchant, and had nothing in the world to do but
annoy the collector. If the latter could have kept away from him, the
dignity of the office might have been preserved, and the object of the
incumbent's appointment to it attained; but sneak away whithersoever
he might--into the heart of the dismal swamp, or anywhere in the
Everglades--some vagrom Indian or casual negro was sure to stumble
over him before long, and go and tell Halsey, securing a plug of
tobacco for reward. Or if he was not found in this way, some company
was tolerably certain, in the course of time, to survey a line of
railway athwart his leafy couch, and laying his prostrate trunk aside
out of the way, send word to his persecutor; who, as soon as the line
was as nearly completed as it ever would be, would come down on
horseback with some diabolical device for waking the slumberer. I will
confess there is a subtle seeming of unlikelihood about all this; but
in the land where Ponce de Leon searched for the Fountain of Youth
there is an air of unreality in everything. I can only say I have had
the story by me a long time, and it seems to me just as true as it was
the day I wrote it.

Sometimes the Colonel would seek out a hillside with a southern
exposure; but no sooner would he compose his members for a bit of
slumber, than Halsey would set about making inquiries for him, under
pretence that a ship was _en route_ from Liverpool, and the
collector's signature might be required for her anchoring papers.
Having traced him--which, owing to the meddlesome treachery of the
venal natives, he was always able to do--Halsey would set off to Texas
for a seed of the prickly pear, which he would plant exactly beneath
the slumberer's body. This he called a triumph of modern engineering!
As soon as the young vegetable had pushed its spines above the soil,
of course the Colonel would have to get up and seek another spot--and
this nearly always waked him.

Upon one occasion the Colonel existed five consecutive days without
slumber--travelling all day and sleeping in the weeds at night--to
find an almost inaccessible crag, on the summit of which he hoped to
be undisturbed until the action of the dew should wear away the rock
all round his body, when he expected and was willing to roll off and
wake. But even there Halsey found him out, and put eagles' eggs in his
southern pockets to hatch. When the young birds were well grown, they
pecked so sharply at the Colonel's legs that he had to get up and
wring their necks. The malevolence of people who scorn slumber seems
to be practically unlimited.

At last the Colonel resolved upon revenge, and having dreamed out a
feasible plan, proceeded to put it into execution. He had in the
warehouse some Government powder, and causing a keg of this to be
conveyed into his private office, he knocked out the head. He next
penned a note to Halsey, asking him to step down to the office "upon
important business;" adding in a postscript, "As I am liable to be
called out for a few moments at any time, in case you do not find me
in, please sit down and amuse yourself with the newspaper until I
return." He knew Halsey was at his counting-house, and would certainly
come if only to learn what signification a Government official
attached to the word "business." Then the Colonel procured a brief
candle and set it into the powder. His plan was to light the candle,
dispatch a porter with the message, and bolt for home. Having
completed his preparations, he leaned back in his easy chair and
smiled. He smiled a long time, and even achieved a chuckle. For the
first time in his life, he felt a serene sense of happiness in being
particularly wide awake. Then, without moving from his chair, he
ignited the taper, and put out his hand toward the bell-cord, to
summon the porter. At this stage of his vengeance the Colonel fell
into a tranquil and refreshing slumber.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is nothing omitted here; that is merely the Colonel's present
address.

       *       *       *       *       *




A TALE OF THE BOSPHORUS.


Pollimariar was the daughter of a Mussulman--she was, in fact, a
Mussulgirl. She lived at Stamboul, the name of which is an admirable
rhyme to what Pollimariar was profanely asserted to be by her two
sisters, Djainan and Djulya. These were very much older than
Pollimariar, and proportionately wicked. In wickedness they could
discount her, giving her the first innings.

The relations between Pollimariar and her sisters were in all respects
similar to those that existed between Cinderella and _her_ sisters.
Indeed, these big girls seldom read anything but the story of
Cinderella; and that work, no doubt, had its influence in forming
their character. They were always apparelling themselves in gaudy
dresses from Paris, and going away to balls, leaving their meritorious
little sister weeping at home in their every-day finery. Their father
was a commercial traveller, absent with his samples in Damascus most
of the time; and the poor girl had no one to protect her from the
outrage of exclusion from the parties to which she was not invited.
She fretted and chafed very much at first, but after forbearance
ceased to be a virtue it came rather natural to her to exercise a
patient endurance. But perceiving this was agreeable to her sisters
she abandoned it, devising a rare scheme of vengeance. She sent to the
"Levant Herald" the following "personal" advertisement:

   "G.V.--Regent's Canal 10.30 p.m., Q.K.X. is O.K.! With coals at
   48 sh-ll-ngs I cannot endure existence without you! Ask for
   G-field St-ch. J.G. + ¶ pro rata. B-tty's N-bob P-ckles.
   Oz-k-r-t! Meet me at the 'Turban and Scimitar,' Bebeck Road,
   Thursday morning at three o'clock; blue cotton umbrella, wooden
   shoes, and Ulster overskirt Polonaise all round the bottom.

   One Who Wants to Know Yer."

The latter half of this contained the gist of the whole matter; the
other things were put in just to prevent the notice from being
conspicuously sensible. Next morning, when the Grand Vizier took up
his newspaper, he could not help knowing he was the person addressed;
and at the appointed hour he kept the tryst. What passed between them
the sequel will disclose, if I can think it out to suit me.

Soon afterwards Djainan and Djulya received cards of invitation to a
grand ball at the Sultan's palace, given to celebrate the arrival of a
choice lot of Circassian beauties in the market. The first thing the
wicked sisters did was to flourish these invitations triumphantly
before the eyes of Pollimariar, who declared she did not believe a
word of it; indeed, she professed such aggressive incredulity that she
had to be severely beaten. But she denied the invitations to the last.
She thought it was best to deny them.

The invitations stated that at the proper hour the old original
Sultana would call personally, and conduct the young ladies to the
palace; and she did so. They thought, at the time, she bore a striking
resemblance to a Grand Vizier with his beard shaven off, and this led
them into some desultory reflections upon the sin of nepotism and
family favour at Court; but, like all moral reflections, these came to
nothing. The old original Sultana's attire, also, was, with the
exception of a reticule and fan, conspicuously epicene; but, in a
country where popular notions of sex are somewhat confused, this
excited no surprise.

As the three marched off in stately array, poor little deserted
Pollimariar stood cowering at one side, with her fingers spread
loosely upon her eyes, weeping like--a crocodile. The Sultana said it
was late; they would have to make haste. She had not fetched a cab,
however, and a recent inundation of dogs very much impeded their
progress. By-and-by the dogs became shallower, but it was near eleven
o'clock before they arrived at the Sublime Porte--very old and fruity.
A janizary standing here split his visage to grin, but it was
surprising how quickly the Sultana had his head off.

Pretty soon afterwards they came to a low door, where the Sultana
whistled three times and kicked at the panels. It soon yielded,
disclosing two gigantic Nubian eunuchs, black as the ace of clubs,
who stared at first, but when shown a very cleverly-executed
signet-ring of paste, knocked their heads against the ground with
respectful violence. Then one of them consulted a thick book, and took
from a secret drawer two metal badges numbered 7,394 and 7,395, which
he fastened about the necks of the now frightened girls, who had just
observed that the Sultana had vanished. The numbers on the badges
showed that this would be a very crowded ball.

The other black now advanced with a measuring tape, and began gravely
measuring Djainan from head to heel. She ventured to ask the sable
guardian with what article of dress she was to be fitted.

"Bedad, thin, av ye must know," said he, grinning, "it is to be a
_sack_."

"What! a _sacque_ for a ball?"

"Indade, it's right ye are, mavourneen; it is fer a ball--fer a
cannon-ball--as will make yer purty body swim to the bothom nately as
ony shtone."

And the eunuch toyed lovingly with his measuring-tape, which the
wretched girls now observed was singularly like a bow-string.

"O, sister," shrieked Djainan, "this is--"

"O, sister," shrieked Djulya, "this is--"

"That horrid--"

"That horrid--"

_"Harem!"_

It was even so. A minute later the betrayed maidens were carried,
feet-foremost-and-fainting, through a particularly dirty portal, over
which gleamed the infernal legend: "Who enters here leaves soap
behind!" I wash my hands of them.

[Illustration]

Next morning the following "personal" appeared in the "Levant Herald:"

"P-ll-m-r-r.--All is over. The S-lt-n cleared his shelves of the old
stock at midnight. If you purchased the Circ-n B-ties with the money
I advanced, be sure you don't keep them too long on hand. Prices are
sure to fall when I have done buying for the H-r-m. Meet me at time
and place agreed upon, and divide profits. G--d V--r."

       *       *       *       *       *




JOHN SMITH.

AN EDITORIAL ARTICLE FROM A JOURNAL. OF MAY 3rd, A.D. 3873.


At the quiet little village of Smithcester (the ancient London) will
be celebrated to-day the twentieth, centennial anniversary of this
remarkable man, the foremost figure of antiquity. The recurrence of
what, no longer than six centuries ago, was a popular _fête_ day, and
which even now is seldom allowed to pass without some recognition by
those to whom the word liberty means something more precious than
gold, is provocative of peculiar emotion. It matters little whether or
no tradition has correctly fixed the date of Smith's birth; that he
_was_ born--that being born he wrought nobly at the work his hand
found to do--that by the mere force of his intellect he established
our present perfect form of government, under which civilization has
attained its highest and ripest development--these are facts beside
which a mere question of chronology sinks into insignificance.

That this extraordinary man originated the Smitharchic system of
government is, perhaps, open to honest doubt; very possibly it had a
_de facto_ existence in various debased and uncertain shapes as early
as the sixteenth century. But that he cleared it of its overlying
errors and superstitions, gave it a definite form, and shaped it into
an intelligible scheme, there is the strongest evidence in the
fragments of twentieth-century literature that have descended to us,
disfigured though they are with amazingly contradictory statements of
his birth, parentage, and manner of life before he strode upon the
political stage as the liberator of mankind. It is stated that
Snakeshear--one of his contemporaries, a poet whose works had in their
day some reputation (though it is difficult to say why)--alludes to
him as "the noblest Roman of them all;" our ancestors at the time
being called Englishmen or Romans, indifferently. In the only fragment
of Snakeshear extant, however, we have been unable to find this
passage.

Smith's military power is amply attested in an ancient manuscript of
undoubted authenticity, which has just been translated from the
Japanese. It is an account of the water-battle of Loo, by an
eyewitness whose name, unfortunately, has not reached us. In this
battle it is stated that Smith overthrew the great Neapolitan general,
whom he captured and conveyed in chains to the island of Chickenhurst.

In his Political History of the Twentieth Century, the late
Mimble--or, as he would have been called in the time of which he
writes, _Mister_ Mimble--has this luminous sentence: "With the single
exception of Coblentz, there was no European government the Liberator
did not upset, and which he did not erect into a pure Smitharchy; and
though some of them afterward relapsed temporarily into the crude
forms of antiquity, and others fell into fanciful systems begotten of
the intellectual activity he had stirred up, yet so firmly did he
establish the principle, that in the Thirty-second Century the
enlightened world was, what it has since remained, practically
Smitharchic."

It may be noted here as a curious coincidence, that the same year
which saw the birth of him who established rational government
witnessed the death of him who perfected literature. In 1873, Martin
Farquhar Tupper--next to Smith the most notable name in history--died
of starvation in the streets of London. Like that of Smith, his origin
is wrapped in profoundest obscurity. No less than seven British cities
claimed the honour of his birth. Meagre indeed is our knowledge of
this only bard whose works have descended to us through the changes of
twenty centuries entire. All that is positively established is that
during his life he was editor of "The Times 'magazine,'" a word of
disputed meaning--and, as quaint old Dumbleshaw says, "an accomplished
Greek and Latin scholar," whatever "Greek" and "Latin" may have been.
Had Smith and Tupper been contemporaries, the iron deeds of the former
would doubtless have been immortalized in the golden pages of the
latter. Upon such chances does History depend for her materials!

Strangely unimpressible indeed must be the mind which, looking
backward through the vista of twenty centuries upon the singular race
from whom we are supposed to be descended, can repress a feeling of
emotional interest. The names of John Smith and Martin Farquhar
Tupper, blazoned upon the page of the dim past, and surrounded by the
lesser names of Snakeshear, the first Neapolitan, Oliver Cornwell,
Close, "Queen" Elizabeth, or Lambeth, the Dutch Bismarch, Julia Cæsar,
and a host of contemporary notables are singularly suggestive. They
call to mind the odd old custom of covering the body with "clothes;"
the curious error of Copernicus and other wide guesses of antique
"science;" the lost arts of telegramy, steam locomotion, and printing
with movable types; and the exploded theory of gunpowder. They set us
thinking upon the zealous idolatry which led men to make pious
pilgrimages to the then accessible regions about the North Pole and
into the interior of Africa, which at that time was but little better
than a wilderness. They conjure up visions of bloodthirsty "Emperors,"
tyrannical "Kings," vampire "Presidents," and useless
"Parliaments"--strangely horrible shapes contrasted with the serene
and benevolent aspect of our modern Smithocracy!

Let us to-day rejoice that the old order of things has for ever passed
away; let us be thankful that our lot has been cast in more wholesome
days than those in which John Smith chalked out the better destinies
of a savage race, and Tupper sang divine philosophy to inattentive
ears. And yet let us keep green the memory of whatever there was of
good--if any--in the dark pre-Smithian ages, when men cherished quaint
superstitions and rode on the backs of "horses"--when they passed
_over_ the seas instead of under them--when science had not yet dawned
to chase away the shadows of imagination--and when the cabalistic
letters A.D., which from habit we still affix to the numerals
designating the age of the world, had perhaps a known signification.

       *       *       *       *       *




SUNDERED HEARTS.


Deidrick Schwackenheimer was a lusty young goatherd. He stood six feet
two in his _sabots_, and there was not an ounce of superfluous bone or
brain in his composition. If he had a fault, it was a tendency to
sleep more than was strictly necessary. The nature of his calling
fostered this weakness: after being turned into some neighbour's
pasture, his animals would not require looking after until the owner
of the soil turned them out again. Their guardian naturally devoted
the interval to slumber. Nor was there danger of oversleeping: the
pitchfork of the irate husbandman always roused him at the proper
moment.

At nightfall Deidrick would marshal his flock and drive it homeward to
the milking-yard. Here he was met by the fair young Katrina
Buttersprecht, the daughter of his employer, who relieved the tense
udders of their daily secretion. One evening after the milking,
Deidrick, who had for years been nourishing a secret passion for
Katrina, was smitten with an idea. Why should she not be his wife? He
went and fetched a stool into the yard, led her tenderly to it, seated
her, and _asked_ her why. The girl thought a moment, and then was at
some pains to explain. She was too young. Her old father required all
her care. Her little brother would cry. She was engaged to Max
Manglewurzzle. She amplified considerably, but these were the
essential points of objection. She set them before him _seriatim_ with
perfect frankness, and without mental reservation. When she had done,
her lover, with that instinctive sense of honour characteristic of the
true goatherd, made no attempt to alter her decision. Indeed, he had
nodded a heart-broken assent to each separate proposition, and at the
conclusion of the last was fast asleep. The next morning he jocundly
drove his goats afield and appeared the same as usual, except that he
slept a good deal more, and thought of Katrina a good deal less.

[Illustration]

That evening when he returned with his spraddling milch-nannies, he
found a second stool placed alongside the first. It was a happy
augury; his attentions, then, were not altogether distasteful. He
seated himself gravely upon the stool, and when Katrina had done
milking, she came and occupied the other. He mechanically renewed his
proposal. Then the artless maid proceeded to recapitulate the
obstacles to the union. She was too young. Her old father required all
her care. Her little brother would cry. She was engaged to Max
Manglewurzzle. As each objection was stated and told off on the
_fraülein's_ fingers, Deidrick nodded a resigned acquiescence, and at
the finish was fast asleep. Every evening after that Deidrick proposed
in perfect good faith, the girl repeated her objections with equal
candour, and they were received with somnolent approval. Love-making
is very agreeable, and by the usuage of long years it becomes a
confirmed habit. In less than a decade it became impossible for
Katrina to enjoy her supper without the regular proposal, and Deidrick
could not sleep of a night without the preliminary nap in the
goat-yard to taper off his wakefulness. Both would have been wretched
had they retired to bed with a shade of misunderstanding between them.

And so the seasons went by. The earth grayed and greened herself anew;
the planets sailed their appointed courses; the old goats died, and
their virtues were perpetuated in their offspring. Max Manglewurzzle
married the miller's daughter; Katrina's little brother, who would
have cried at her wedding, did not cry any at his own; the aged
Buttersprecht was long gathered to his fathers; and Katrina was
herself well stricken in years. And still at fall of night she defined
her position to the sleeping lover who had sought her hand--defined it
in the self-same terms as upon that eventful eve. The gossiping
_frauen_ began to whisper it would be a match; but it did not look
like it as yet. Slanderous tongues even asserted that it ought to have
been a match long ago, but I don't see how it could have been, without
the girl's consent. The parish clerk began to hanker after his fee;
but, lacking patience, he was unreasonable.

The whole countryside was now taking a deep interest in the affair.
The aged did not wish to die without beholding the consummation of the
love they had seen bud in their youth; and the young did not wish to
die at all. But no one liked to interfere; it was feared that counsel
to the woman would be rejected, and a thrashing to the man would be
misunderstood. At last the parson took heart of grace to make or mar
the match. Like a reckless gambler he staked his fee upon the cast of
a die. He went one day and removed the two stools--now worn extremely
thin--to another corner of the milking-yard.

That evening, when the distended udders had been duly despoiled, the
lovers repaired to their trysting-place. They opened their eyes a bit
to find the stools removed. They were tormented with a vague
presentiment of evil, and stood for some minutes irresolute; then,
assisted to a decision by their weakening knees, they seated
themselves flat upon the ground. Deidrick stammered a weak proposal,
and Katrina essayed an incoherent objection. But she trembled and
became unintelligible; and when he attempted to throw in a few nods of
generous approval they came in at the wrong places. With one accord
they arose and sought their stools. Katrina tried it again. She
succeeded in saying her father was over-young to marry, and Max
Manglewurzzle would cry if she took care of him. Deidrick executed a
reckless nod that made his neck snap, and was broad awake in a minute.
A second time they arose. They conveyed the stools back to their
primitive position, and began again. She remarked that her little
brother was too old to require all her care, and Max would cry to
marry her father. Deidrick addressed himself to sleep, but a horrid
nightmare galloped rough-shod into his repose and set him off with a
strangled snort. The good understanding between those two hearts was
for ever dissipated; neither one knew if the other were afoot or on
horseback. Like the sailor's thirtieth stroke with the rope's-end, it
was perfectly disgusting! Their meetings after this were so
embarrassing that they soon ceased meeting altogether. Katrina died
soon after, a miserable broken-spirited maiden of sixty; and Deidrick
drags out a wretched existence in a remote town, upon an income of
eight _silbergroschen_ a week.

Oh, friends and brethren, if you did but know how slight an act may
sunder for ever the bonds of love--how easily one may wreck the peace
of two faithful hearts--how almost without an effort the waters of
affection may be changed to gall and bitterness--I suspect you would
make even more more mischief than you do now.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EARLY HISTORY OF BATH.


Bladud was the eldest son of a British King (whose name I perfectly
remember, but do not choose to write) _temp_. Solomon--who does not
appear to have known Bladud, however. Bladud was, therefore, Prince of
Wales. He was more than that: he was a leper--had it very bad, and the
Court physician, Sir William Gull, frequently remarked that the
Prince's death was merely a question of time. When a man gets to that
stage of leprosy he does not care much for society, particularly if no
one will have anything to do with him. So Bladud bade a final adieu to
the world, and settled in Liverpool. But not agreeing with the
climate, he folded his tent into the shape of an Arab, as Longfellow
says, and silently stole away to the southward, bringing up in
Gloucestershire.

Here Bladud hired himself out to a farmer named Smith, as a
swineherd. But Fate, as he expressed it in the vernacular, was
"ferninst him." Leprosy is a contagious disease, within certain
degrees of consanguinity, and by riding his pigs afield he
communicated it to them; so that in a few weeks, barring the fact that
they were hogs, they were no better off than he. Mr. Smith was an
irritable old gentleman, so choleric he made his bondsmen
tremble--though he was now abroad upon his own recognizances. Dreading
his wrath, Bladud quitted his employ, without giving the usual week's
notice, but so far conforming to custom in other respects as to take
his master's pigs along with him.

We find him next at a place called Swainswick--or Swineswig--a mile or
two to the north-east of Bath, which, as yet, had no existence, its
site being occupied by a smooth level reach of white sand, or a stormy
pool of black water, travellers of the time disagree which. At
Swainswick Bladud found his level; throwing aside all such nonsense
as kingly ambition, and the amenities of civilized society--utterly
ignoring the deceitful pleasures of common sense--he contented his
simple soul with composing _bouts rimés_ for Lady Miller, at
Batheaston Villa; that one upon a buttered muffin, falsely ascribed by
Walpole to the Duchess of Northumberland, was really constructed by
Bladud.

A brief glance at the local history of the period cannot but prove
instructive. Ralph Allen was then residing at Sham Castle, where Pope
accused him of doing good like a thief in the night and blushing to
find it unpopular. Fielding was painfully evolving "Tom Jones" from an
inner consciousness that might have been improved by soap and any
water but that of Bath. Bishop Warburton had just shot the Count Du
Barré in a duel with Lord Chesterfield; and Beau Nash was disputing
with Dr. Johnson, at the Pelican Inn, Walcot, upon a question of
lexicographical etiquette. It is necessary to learn these things in
order the better to appreciate the interest of what follows.

During all this time Bladud never permitted his mind to permanently
desert his calling; he found family matters a congenial study, and he
thought of his swine a good deal, off and on. One day while baiting
them amongst the hills, he observed a cloud of steam ascending from
the valley below. Having always believed steam a modern invention,
this ancient was surprised, and when his measly charge set up a wild
squeal, rushing down a steep place into the aspiring vapour, his
astonishment ripened into dismay. As soon as he conveniently could
Bladud followed, and there he heard the saw--I mean he saw the herd
wallowing and floundering multitudinously in a hot spring, and
punctuating the silence of nature with grunts of quiet satisfaction,
as the leprosy left them and clave to the waters--to which it cleaves
yet. It is not probable the pigs went in there for a medicinal
purpose; how could they know? Any butcher will tell you that a pig,
after being assassinated, is invariably boiled to loosen the hair. By
long usage the custom of getting into hot water has become a habit
which the living pig inherits from the dead pork. (See Herbert Spencer
on "Heredity.")

Now Bladud (who is said to have studied at Athens, as most Britons of
his time did) was a rigid disciple of Bishop Butler; and Butler's line
of argument is this: Because a rose-bush blossoms this year, a
lamppost will blossom next year. By this ingenious logic he proves the
immortality of the human soul, which is good of him; but in so doing
he proves, also, the immortality of the souls of snakes, mosquitos,
and everything else, which is less commendable. Reasoning by analogy,
Bladud was convinced that if these waters would cure a pig, they would
cure a prince: and without waiting to see _how_ they had cured the
bacon, he waded in.

When asked the next day by Sir William Waller if he intended trying
the waters again, and if he retained his fondness for that style of
bathing, he replied, "Not any, thank you; I am quite cured!" Sir
William at once noised abroad the story of the wonderful healing, and
when it reached the king's ears, that potentate sent for Bladud to
"come home at once and succeed to the throne, just the same as if he
had a skin"--which Bladud did. Some time afterwards he thought to
outdo Dædalus and Icarus, by flying from the top of St. Paul's
Cathedral. He outdid them handsomely; he fell a good deal harder than
they did, and broke his precious neck.

Previously to his melancholy end he built the City of Bath, to
commemorate his remarkable cure. He endowed the Corporation with ten
millions sterling, every penny of the interest of which is annually
devoted to the publication of guide-books to Bath, to lure the unwary
invalid to his doom. From motives of mercy the Corporation have now
set up a contrivance for secretly extracting the mineral properties of
the fluid before it is ladled out, but formerly a great number of
strangers found a watery grave.

If King Bladud was generous to Bath, Bath has been grateful in return.
One statue of him adorns the principal street, and another graces the
swimming pond, both speaking likenesses. The one represents him as he
was before he divided his leprosy with the pigs; the other shows him
as he appeared after breaking his neck.

Writing in 1631, Dr. Jordan says: "The baths are bear-gardens, where
both sexes bathe promiscuously, while the passers-by pelt them with
dead dogs, cats, and pigs; and even human creatures are hurled over
the rails into the water." It is not so bad as that now, but lodgings
are still held at rates which might be advantageously tempered to the
shorn.

I append the result of a chemical analysis I caused to be made of
these incomparable Waters, that the fame of their virtues may no
longer rest upon the inadequate basis of their observed effects.

One hundred parts of the water contain:

Brandate of Sodium                       9.50 parts.
Sulphuretted Hydrogen                    3.50   "
Citrate of Magnesia                     15.00   "
Calves'-foot Jelly                      10.00   "
Protocarbonate of Brass                 11.00   "
Nitric Acid                              7.50   "
Devonshire Cream                         6.00   "
Treaclate of Soap                        2.00   "
Robur                                    3.50   "
Superheated Mustard                     11.50   "
Frogs                                   20.45   "
Traces of Guano, Leprosy, Picallilly,
  and Scotch Whiskey                      .05   "

Temperature of the four baths, 117 degrees each--or 468 altogether.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FOLLOWING DORG.


Dad Petto, as everybody called him, had a dog, upon whom he lavished
an amount of affection which, had it been disbursed in a proper
quarter, would have been adequate to the sentimental needs of a dozen
brace of lovers. The name of this dog was Jerusalem, but it might more
properly have been Dan-to-Beersheba. He was not a fascinating dog to
look at; you can buy a handsomer dog in any shop than this one. He had
neither a graceful exterior nor an engaging address. On the contrary,
his exceptional plainness had passed into a local proverb; and such
was the inbred coarseness of his demeanour, that in the dark you might
have thought him a politician.

If you will take two very bandy-legged curs, cut one off just abaft
the shoulders, and the other immediately forward of the haunches,
rejecting the fore-part of the first and the rear portion of the
second, you will have the raw material for constructing a dog
something like Dad Petto's. You have only to effect a junction between
the accepted sections, and make the thing eat.

Had he been favoured with as many pairs of legs as a centipede,
Jerusalem would not have differed materially from either of his race;
but it was odd to see such a wealth of dog wedded to such a poverty of
leg. He was so long that the most precocious pupil of the public
schools could not have committed him to memory in a week.

It was beautiful to see Jerusalem rounding the angle of a wall, and
turning his head about to observe how the remainder of the procession
was coming on. He was once circumnavigating a small out-house, when,
catching sight of his own hinder-quarters, he flew into a terrible
rage. The sight of another dog always had this effect upon Jerusalem,
and more especially when, as in this case, he thought he could grasp
an unfair advantage. So Jerusalem took after that retreating foe as
hard as ever he could hook it. Round and round he flew, but the faster
he went, the more his centrifugal force widened his circle, until he
presently lost sight of his enemy altogether. Then he slowed down,
determined to accomplish his end by strategy. Sneaking closely up to
the wall, he moved cautiously forward, and when he had made the full
circuit, he came smack up against his own tail. Making a sudden
spring, which must have stretched him like a bit of India-rubber, he
fastened his teeth into his ham, hanging on like a country visitor. He
felt sure he had nailed the other dog, but he was equally confident
the other dog had nailed him; so the problem was simplified to a mere
question of endurance--and Jerusalem was an animal of pluck. The grim
conflict was maintained all one day--maintained with deathless
perseverance, until Dad Petto discovered the belligerent and uncoupled
him. Then Jerusalem looked up at his master with a shake of the head,
as much as to say: "It's a precious opportune arrival for the other
pup; but who took _him_ off _me_?"

I don't think I can better illustrate the preposterous longitude of
this pet, than by relating an incident that fell under my own
observation. I was one day walking along the highway with a friend who
was a stranger in the neighbourhood, when a rabbit flashed past us,
going our way, but evidently upon urgent business. Immediately upon
his heels followed the first instalment of Dad Petto's mongrel,
enveloped in dust, his jaws distended, the lower one shaving the
ground to scoop up the rabbit. He was going at a rather lively gait,
but was some time in passing. My friend stood a few moments looking
on; then rubbed his eyes, looked again, and finally turned to me, just
as the brute's tail flitted by, saying, with a broad stare of
astonishment:

"Did you ever see a pack of hounds run so perfectly in line? It beats
anything! And the speed, too--they seem fairly blended! If a fellow
didn't know better, he would swear there was but a single dog!"

I suppose it was this peculiarity of Jerusalem that had won old
Petto's regard. He liked as much of anything as he could have for his
money; and the expense of this creature, generally speaking, was no
greater than that of a brief succinct bull pup. But there were times
when he was costly. All dogs are sometimes "off their feed"--will eat
nothing for a whole day but a few ox-tails, a pudding or two, and such
towelling as they can pick up in the scullery. When Jerusalem got that
way, which, to do him justice, was singularly seldom, it made things
awkward in the near future. For in a few days after recovering his
passion for food, the effect of his former abstemiousness would begin
to reach his stomach; but of course all he could _then_ devour would
work no immediate relief. This he would naturally attribute to the
quality of his fare, and would change his diet a dozen times a day,
his _menu_ in the twelve working hours comprising an astonishing range
of articles, from a wood-saw to a kettle of soft soap--edibles as
widely dissimilar as the zenith and the nadir, which, also, he would
eat. So catholic an appetite was, of course, exceptional: ordinarily
Jerusalem was as narrow and illiberal as the best of us. Give him
plenty of raw beef, and he would not unsettle his gastric faith by
outside speculation or tentative systems.

I could relate things of this dog by the hour. Such, for example, as
his clever device for crossing a railway. He never attempted to do
this endwise, like other animals, for the obvious reason that, like
every one else, he was unable to make any sense of the time-tables;
and unless he should by good luck begin the manoeuvre when a train was
said to be due, it was likely he would be abbreviated; for of course
no one is idiot enough to cross a railway track when the time-table
says it is all clear--at least no one as long as Jerusalem. So he
would advance his head to the rails, calling in his outlying
convolutions, and straightening them alongside the track, parallel
with it; and then at a signal previously agreed upon--a short wild
bark--this sagacious dog would make the transit unanimously, as it
were. By this method he commonly avoided a quarrel with the engine.

Altogether he was a very interesting beast, and his master was fond of
him no end. And with the exception of compelling Mr. Petto to remove
to the centre of the State to avoid double taxation upon him, he was
not wholly unprofitable; for he was the best sheep-dog in the country:
he always kept the flock well together by the simple device of
surrounding them. Having done so, he would lie down, and eat, and eat,
and eat, till there wasn't a sheep left, except a few old rancid ones;
and even those he would tear into small spring lambs.

Dad Petto never went anywhere without the superior portion of
Jerusalem at his side; and he always alluded to him as "the following
dorg." But the beast finally became a great nuisance in Illinois. His
body obstructed the roads in all directions; and the Representative of
that district in the National Congress was instructed by his
constituents to bring in a bill taxing dogs by the linear yard,
instead of by the head, as the law then stood. Dad Petto proceeded at
once to Washington to "lobby" against the measure. He knew the wife of
a clerk in the Bureau of Statistics; armed with this influence he felt
confident of success. I was myself in Washington, at the time, trying
to secure the removal of a postmaster who was personally obnoxious to
me, inasmuch as I had been strongly recommended for the position by
some leading citizens, who to their high political characters
superadded the more substantial merit of being my relations.

Dad and I were standing, one morning, in front of Willard's Hotel,
when he stooped over and began patting Jerusalem on the head. All of a
sudden the smiling brute sprang open his mouth and bade farewell to a
succession of yells which speedily collected ten thousand miserable
office-seekers, and an equal quantity of brigadier-generals, who, all
in a breath, inquired who had been stabbed, and what was the name of
the lady.

Meantime nothing would pacify the pup; he howled most dismally,
punctuating his wails with quick sharp shrieks of mortal agony. More
than an hour--more than two hours--we strove to discover and allay the
canine grievance, but to no purpose.

Presently one of the hotel pages stepped up to Mr. Petto, handing him
a telegraphic dispatch just received. It was dated at his home in
Cowville, Illinois, and making allowance for the difference in time,
something more than two hours previously. It read as follows:

"A pot of boiling glue has just been upset upon Jerusalem's
hind-quarters. Shall I try rhubarb, or let it get cold and chisel it
off?

"P.S. He did it himself, wagging his tail in the kitchen. Some
Democrat has been bribing that dog with cold victuals.--PENELOPE
PETTO."

Then we knew what ailed "the following dorg."

I should like to go on giving the reader a short account of this
animal's more striking personal peculiarities, but the subject seems
to grow under my hand. The longer I write, the longer he becomes, and
the more there is to tell; and after all, I shall not get a copper
more for pourtraying all this length of dog than I would for depicting
an orbicular pig.




SNAKING.


Very talkative people always seemed to me to be divided into two
classes--those who lie for a purpose and those who lie for the love of
lying; and Sam Baxter belonged, with broad impartiality, to both. With
him falsehood was not more frequently a means than an end; for he
would not only lie without a purpose but at a sacrifice. I heard him
once reading a newspaper to a blind aunt, and deliberately falsifying
the market reports. The good old lady took it all in with a trustful
faith, until he quoted dried apples at fifty cents a yard for unbolted
sides; then she arose and disinherited him. Sam seemed to regard the
fountain of truth as a stagnant pool, and himself an angel whose
business it was to stand by and trouble the waters.

"You know Ben Dean," said Sam to me one day; "I'm down on that fellow,
and I'll tell you why. In the winter of '68 he and I were snaking
together in the mountains north of the Big Sandy."

"What do you mean by snaking, Sam?"

"Well, _I_ like _that_! Why, gathering snakes, to be
sure--rattlesnakes for zoological gardens, museums, and side-shows to
circuses. This is how it is done: a party of snakers go up to the
mountains in the early autumn, with provisions for all winter, and
putting up a snakery at some central point, get to work as soon as the
torpid season sets in, and before there is much snow. I presume you
know that when the nights begin to get cold, the snakes go in under
big flat stones, snuggle together, and lie there frozen stiff until
the warm days of spring limber them up for business.

"We go about, raise up the rocks, tie the worms into convenient
bundles and carry them to the snakery, where, during the snow season,
they are assorted, labelled according to quality, and packed away for
transportation. Sometimes a single showman will have as many as a
dozen snakers in the mountains all winter.

"Ben and I were out, one day, and had gathered a few sheaves of prime
ones, when we discovered a broad stone that showed good indications,
but we couldn't raise it. The whole upper part of the mountain seemed
to be built mostly upon this one stone. There was nothing to be done
but mole it--dig under, you know; so taking the spade I soon widened
the hole the creatures had got in at, until it would admit my body.
Crawling in, I found a kind of cell in the solid rock, stowed nearly
full of beautiful serpents, some of them as long as a man. You would
have revelled in those worms! They were neatly disposed about the
sides of the cave, an even dozen in each berth, and some odd ones
swinging from the ceiling in hammocks, like sailors. By the time I had
counted them roughly, as they lay, it was dark, and snowing like the
mischief. There was no getting back to head-quarters that night, and
there was room for but one of us inside."

"Inside what, Sam?"

"See here! have you been listening to what I'm telling you, or not?
There is no use telling _you_ anything. Perhaps you won't mind waiting
till I get done, and then you can tell something of your own. We drew
straws to decide who should sleep inside, and it fell to me. Such luck
as that fellow Ben always had drawing straws when I held them! It was
sinful! But even inside it was coldish, and I was more than an hour
getting asleep. Toward morning, though, I woke, feeling very warm and
peaceful. The moon was at full, just rising in the valley below, and,
shining in at the hole I'd entered at, it made everything light as
day."

"But, Sam, according to _my_ astronomy a full moon never rises towards
morning."

"Now, who said anything about your astronomy? I'd like to know who is
telling this--you or I? Always think you know more than I do--and
always swearing it isn't so--and always taking the words out of my
mouth, and--but what's the use of arguing with _you_? As I was saying,
the snakes began waking about the same time I did; I could hear them
turn over on their other sides and sigh. Presently one raised himself
up and yawned. He meant well, but it was not the regular thing for an
ophidian to do at that season. By-and-by they began to poke their
heads up all round, nodding good morning to one another across the
room; and pretty soon one saw me lying there and called attention to
the fact. Then they all began to crowd to the front and hang out over
the sides of the beds in a fringe, to study my habits. I can't
describe the strange spectacle: you would have supposed it was the
middle of March and a forward season! There were more worms than I had
counted, and they were larger ones than I had thought. And the more
they got awake the wider they yawned, and the longer they stretched.
The fat fellows in the hammocks above me were in danger of toppling
out and breaking their necks every minute.

"Then it went through my mind like a flash what was the matter.
Finding it cold outside, Ben had made a roaring fire on the top of the
rock, and the heat had deceived the worms into the belief that it was
late spring. As I lay there and thought of a full-grown man who hadn't
any better sense than to do such a thing as _that_, I was mad enough
to kill him. I lost confidence in mankind. If I had not stopped up the
entrance before lying down, with a big round stone which the heat had
swollen so that a hydraulic ram couldn't have butted it loose, I
should have put on my clothes and gone straight home."

"But, Sam, you said the entrance was open, and the moon shining in."

"There you go again! Always contradicting--and insinuating that the
moon must remain for hours in one position--and saying you've heard it
told better by some one else--and wanting to fight! I've told this
story to your brother over at Milk River more than a hundred million
times, and he never said a word against it."

"I believe you, Samuel; for he is deaf as a tombstone."

"Tell you what to do for him! I know a fellow in Smith's Valley will
cure him in a minute. That fellow has cleaned the deafness all out of
Washington County a dozen times. I never knew a case of it that could
stand up against him ten seconds. Take three parts of snake-root to a
gallon of waggon-grease, and--I'll go and see if I can find the
prescription!"

And Sam was off like a rocket.

       *       *       *       *       *




MAUD'S PAPA.

That is she in the old black silk--the one with the gimlet curls and
the accelerated lap-cat. Doesn't she average about as I set her forth?

"Never told you anything about her?" Well, I will.

Twenty years ago, many a young man, of otherwise good character,
would have ameliorated his condition for that girl; and would have
thought himself overpaid if she had restored a fosy on his sepulchre.
Maud would have been of the same opinion--and wouldn't have construed
the fosy. And she was the most sagacious girl I ever experienced! As
you shall hear.

I was her lover, and she was mine. We loved ourselves to detraction.
Maud lived a mile from any other house--except one brick barn. Not
even a watch-dog about the place--except her father. This pompous old
weakling hated me boisterously; he said I was dedicated to hard drink,
and when in that condition was perfectly incompatible. I did not like
him, too.

One evening I called on Maud, and was surprised to meet her at the
gate, with a shawl drawn over her head, and apparently in great
combustion. She told me, hastily, the old man was ill of a fever, and
had nearly derided her by going crazy.

This was all a lie; something had gone wrong with the old party's
eyes--amanuensis of the equinox, or something; he couldn't see well,
but he was no more crazy than I was sober.

"I was sitting quietly by him," said Maud, "when he sat up in bed and
be-_gan!_ You never in all your born life! I'm so glad you've come;
you can take care of him while I fetch the doctor. He's quiet enough
now, but you just wait till he gets another paralogism. When _they_'re
on--oh my! You mustn't let him talk, nor get out of bed; doctor says
it would prolong the diagnosis. Go right in, now. Oh dear! whatever
shall I ought to do?"

And, blowing her eyes on the corner of her shawl, Maud shot away like
a comic.

I walked hurriedly into the house, and entered the old man's
dromedary, without knocking.

The playful girl had left that room a moment before, with every
appearance of being frightened. She had told the old one there was a
robber in the house, and the venerable invalid was a howling coward--I
tell you this because I scorn to deceive you.

I found the old gentleman with his head under the blankets, very quiet
and speaceful: but the moment he heard me he got up, and yelled like a
heliotrope. Then he fixed on me a wild spiercing look from his
bloodshot eyes, and for the first time in my life I believed Maud had
told me the truth for the first time in hers. Then he reached out for
a heavy cane. But I was too punctual for him, and, clapping my hand on
his breast, I crowded him down, holding him tight. He curvetted some;
then lay still, and swore weak oaths that wouldn't have hurt a sick
chicken! All this time I was firm as a rock of amaranth. Presently,
moreover, he spoke very low and resigned like--except his teeth
chattered:

"Desperate man, there is no need; you will find it to the north-west
corner of my upper secretary drawer. I spromise not to appear."

"All right, my lobster-snouted bulbul," said I, delighted with the
importunity of abusing him; "that is the dryest place you could keep
it in, old spoolcotton! Be sure you don't let the light get to it,
angleworm! Meantime, therefore, you must take this draught."

"Draught!" he shrieked, meandering from the subject. "O my poor
child!"--and he sprang up again, screaming a multiple of things.

I had him by the shoulders in a minute, and crushed him back--except
his legs kept agitating.

"Keep still, will you?" said I, "you sugarcoated old mandible, or
I'll conciliate your exegesis with a proletarian!"

I never had such a flow of language in my life; I could say anything I
wanted to.

He quailed at that threat, for, deleterious as I thought him, he saw I
meant it; but he affected to prefer it that way to taking it out of
the bottle.

"Better," he moaned, "better even that than the poison. Spare me the
poisoned chalice, and you may do it in the way you mention."

The "draught," it may be sproper to explain, was comprised in a large
bottle sitting on the table. I thought it was medicine--except it was
black--and although Maud (sweet screature!) had not told me to give
him anything, I felt sure this was nasty enough for him, or anybody.
And it was; it was ink. So I treated his proposed compromise with
silent contempt, merely remarking, as I uncorked the bottle:
"Medicine's medicine, my fine friend; and it is for the sick." Then,
spinioning his arms with one of mine, I concerted the neck of the
bottle between his teeth.

"Now, you lacustrine old cylinder-escapement," I exclaimed, with some
warmth, "hand up your stomach for this healing precoction, or I'm
blest if I won't controvert your _raison d'être!_"

He struggled hard, but, owing to my habit of finishing what I
undertake, without any success. In ten minutes it was all down--except
that some of it was spouted about rather circumstantially over the
bedding, and walls, and me. There was more of the draught than I had
thought. As he had been two days ill, I had supposed the bottle must
be nearly empty; but, of course, when you think of it, a man doesn't
abrogate much ink in an ordinary attack--except editors.

Just as I got my knees off the spatient's breast, Maud peeped in at
the door. She had remained in the lane till she thought the charm had
had time to hibernate, then came in to have her laugh. She began
having it, gently; but seeing me with the empty bottle in my sable
hand, and the murky inspiration rolling off my face in gasconades, she
got graver, and came in very soberly.

Wherewith, the draught had done its duty, and the old gentleman was
enjoying the first rest he had known since I came to heal him. He is
enjoying it yet, for he was as dead as a monogram.

As there was a good deal of scandal about my killing a sprospective
father-in-law, I had to live it down by not marrying Maud--who has
lived single, as a rule, ever since. All this epigastric tercentenary
might have been avoided if she had only allowed a good deal of margin
for my probable condition when she splanned her little practicable
joke.

"Why didn't they hang me?"--- Waiter, bring me a brandy spunch.--Well,
that is the most didactic question! But if you must know--they did.

       *       *       *       *       *




JIM BECKWOURTH'S POND.


Not long after _that_ (said old Jim Beckwourth, beginning a new story)
there was a party of about a dozen of us down in the Powder River
country, after buffalo. It was the _worst_ place! Just think of the
most barren and sterile spot you ever saw, or ever will see. Now take
that spot and double it: that is where _we_ were. One day, about noon,
we halted near a sickly little _arroyo_, that was just damp enough to
have deluded some feeble bunches of bonnet-wire into setting up as
grass along its banks. After picketing the horses and pack-mules we
took luncheon, and then, while the others smoked and played cards for
half-dollars, I took my rifle and strolled off into the hills to see
if I could find a blind rabbit, or a lame antelope, that had been
unable to leave the country. As I went on I heard, at intervals of
about a quarter of an hour, a strange throbbing sound, as of smothered
thunder, which grew more distinct as I advanced. Presently I came upon
a lake of near a mile in diameter, and almost circular. It was as calm
and even as a mirror, but I could see by a light steamy haze above it
that the water was nearly at boiling heat--a not very uncommon
circumstance in that region. While I looked, big bubbles began to rise
to the surface, chase one another about, and burst; and suddenly,
without any other preliminary movement, there occurred the most awful
and astounding event that (with a single exception) it has ever been
my lot to witness! I stood rooted to the spot with horror, and when it
was all over, and again the lake lay smiling placidly before me, I
silently thanked Heaven I had been standing at some distance from the
deceitful pool. In a quarter of an hour the frightful scene was
repeated, preceded as before by the rising and bursting of bubbles,
and producing in me the utmost terror; but after seeing it three or
four times I became calm. Then I went back to camp, and told the boys
there was a tolerably interesting pond near by, if they cared for such
things.

At first they did not, but when I had thrown in a few lies about the
brilliant hues of the water, and the great number of swans, they laid
down their cards, left Lame Dave to look after the horses, and
followed me back to see. Just before we crossed the last range of
hills we heard a thundering sound ahead, which somewhat astonished the
boys, but I said nothing till we stood on a low knoll overlooking the
lake. There it lay, as peaceful as a dead Indian, of a dull grey
colour, and as innocent of water-fowl as a new-born babe.

"There!" said I, triumphantly, pointing to it.

"Well," said Bill Buckster, leaning on his rifle and surveying it
critically, "what's the matter with the pond? I don't see nothin' in
_that_ puddle."

"Whar's yer swans?" asked Gus Jamison.

"And yer prismatic warter?" added Stumpy Jack.

"Well, I like _this!_" drawled Frenchwoman Pete. "What 'n thunder d'
ye mean, you derned saddle-coloured fraud?"

I was a little nettled at all this, particularly as the lake seemed to
have buried the hatchet for that day; but I thought I would "cheek it
through."

"Just you wait!" I replied, significantly.

"O yes!" exclaimed Stumpy, derisively; "'course, boys, you mus'
_wait_. 'Tain't no use a-hurryin' up the cattle; yer mustn't rush the
buck. Jest wait till some feller comes along with a melted rainbow,
and lays on the war-paint! and another feller fetches the swans' eggs,
and sets on 'em, and hatches 'em out!--and me a-holding both bowers
an' the ace!" he added, regretfully, thinking of the certainty he had
left, to follow a delusive hope.

Then I pointed out to them a wide margin of wet and steaming clay
surrounding the water on all sides, asking them if _that_ wasn't worth
coming to see.

"_That_!" exclaimed Gus. "I've seen the same thing a thousand million
times! It's the reg'lar thing in Idaho. Clay soaks up the water and
sweats it out."

To verify his theory he started away, down to the shore. I was
concerned for Gus, but I did not dare call him back for fear of
betraying my secret in some way. Besides, I knew he would not come;
and he ought not to have been so sceptical, anyhow.

Just then two or three big bubbles rose to the surface, and silently
exploded. Quick as lightning I dropped on my knees and raised my arms.

"Now may Heaven grant my prayer," I began with awful solemnity, "and
send the great Ranunculus to loose the binding chain of concupiscence,
heaving the multitudinous aquacity upon the heads of this wicked and
sententious generation, whelming these diametrical scoffers in a
supercilious Constantinople!"

I knew the long words would impress their simple souls with a belief
that I was actually praying; and I was right, for every man of them
pulled his hat off, and stood staring at me with a mixed look of
reverence, incredulity, and astonishment--but not for long. For before
I could say amen, yours truly, or anything, that entire body of water
shot upward five hundred feet into the air, as smooth as a column of
crystal, curled over in broad green cataracts, falling outward with a
jar and thunder like the explosion of a thousand subterranean cannon,
then surging and swirling back to the centre, one steaming, writhing
mass of snowy foam!

As I rose to my feet to put my hand in my pocket for a chew of
tobacco, I looked complacently about upon my comrades. Stumpy Jack
stood paralysed, his head thrown back at an alarming angle, precisely
as he had tilted it to watch the ascending column, and his neck
somehow out of joint, holding it there. All the others were down upon
their marrow-bones, white with terror, praying with extraordinary
fervency, each trying his best to master the ridiculous jargon they
had heard me use, but employing it with an even greater disregard of
sense and fitness than I did. Away over on the next range of hills,
toward camp, was something that looked like a giant spider, scrambling
up the steep side of the sand-hill, and sliding down a trifle faster
than it got up. It was Lame Dave, who had abandoned his equine trust,
to come up at the eleventh hour and see the swans. He had seen enough,
and was now trying, in his weak way, to get back to camp.

In a few minutes I had got Stumpy's head back into the position
assigned it by Nature, had crowded his eyes in, and was going about
with a reassuring smile, helping the pious upon their feet. Not a word
was spoken; I took the lead, and we strode solemnly to camp, picking
up Lame Dave at the foot of his acclivity, played a little game for
Gus Jamison's horse and "calamities," then mounted our steeds,
departing thence. Three or four days afterward I ventured cautiously
upon a covert allusion to peculiar lakes, but the simultaneous
clicking of ten revolvers convinced me that I need not trouble myself
to pursue the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *




STRINGING A BEAR.


"I was looking for my horse one morning, up in the San Joaquin
Valley," said old Sandy Fowler, absently stirring the camp fire, "when
I saw a big bull grizzly lying in the sunshine, picking his teeth with
his claws, and smiling, as if he said, 'You need not mind the horse,
old fellow; he's been found.' I at once gave a loud whoop, which I
thought would be heard by the boys in the camp, and prepared to string
the brute."

"Oh, I know how it goes," interrupted Smarty Mellor, as we called him;
"seen it done heaps o' times! Six or eight o' ye rides up to the b'ar,
and s'rounds him, every son-of-a-gun with a _riata_ a mile long, and
worries him till he gits his mad up, and while he's a-chasin' one
feller the others is a-goin' äter him, and a-floorin' of him by
loopin' his feet as they comes up behind, and when he turns onto them
fellers the other chappy turns onto him, and puts another loop onto
his feet as they comes up behind, and then--"

"I bound my _riata_ tightly about my wrist," resumed old Sandy,
composedly, "so that the beast should not jerk away when I had got
him. Then I advanced upon him--very slowly, so as not to frighten him
away. Seeing me coming, he rose upon his haunches, to have a look at
me. He was about the size of a house--say a small two-storey house,
with a Mansard roof. I paused a moment, to take another turn of the
thong about my wrist.

"Again I moved obliquely forward, trying to look as if I were thinking
about the new waterworks in San Francisco, or the next presidential
election, so as not to frighten him away. The brute now rose squarely
upon end, with his paws suspended before him, like a dog begging for a
biscuit, and I thought what a very large biscuit he must be begging
for! Halting a moment, to see if the _riata_ was likely to cut into my
wrist, I perceived the beast had an inkling of my design, and was
trying stupidly to stretch his head up out of reach.

"I now threw off all disguise, and whirled my cord with a wide
circular sweep, and in another moment it would have been very
unpleasant for Bruin, but somehow the line appeared to get foul. While
I was opening the noose, the animal settled upon his feet and came
toward me; but the moment he saw me begin to whirl again, he got
frightened, up-ended himself as before, and shut his eyes.

"Then I felt in my belt to see if my knife was there, when the bear
got down again and came forward, utterly regardless.

"Seeing he was frightened and trying to escape by coming so close I
could not have a fair fling at him, I dropped the noose on the ground
and walked away, trailing the line behind me. When it was all run out,
the rascal arrived at the loop. He first smelled it, then opened it
with his paws, and putting it about his neck, tilted up again, and
nodded significantly.

"I pulled out my knife, and severing the line at my wrist, walked
away, looking for some one to introduce me to Smarty Mellor."







The Moral Principle and the Material Interest . . .


A Moral Principle met a Material Interest on a bridge wide enough for but
one.

"Down, you base thing!" thundered the Moral Principle, "and let me pass
over you!"

The Material Interest merely looked in the other's eyes without saying
anything.

"Ah," said the Moral Principle, hesitatingly, "let us draw lots to see
which shall retire till the other has crossed."

The Material Interest maintained an unbroken silence and an unwavering
stare.

"In order to avoid a conflict," the Moral Principle resumed, somewhat
uneasily, "I shall myself lie down and let you walk over me."

Then the Material Interest found a tongue, and by a strange coincidence
it was its own tongue.  "I don't think you are very good walking," it
said.  "I am a little particular about what I have underfoot.  Suppose
you get off into the water."

It occurred that way.




The Crimson Candle


A man lying at the point of death called his wife to his bedside and
said:

"I am about to leave you forever; give me, therefore, one last proof of
your affection and fidelity, for, according to our holy religion, a
married man seeking admittance at the gate of Heaven is required to swear
that he has never defiled himself with an unworthy woman.  In my desk you
will find a crimson candle, which has been blessed by the High Priest and
has a peculiar mystical significance.  Swear to me that while it is in
existence you will not remarry."

The Woman swore and the Man died.  At the funeral the Woman stood at the
head of the bier, holding a lighted crimson candle till it was wasted
entirely away.




The Blotted Escutcheon and the Soiled Ermine


A Blotted Escutcheon, rising to a question of privilege, said:

"Mr. Speaker, I wish to hurl back an allegation and explain that the
spots upon me are the natural markings of one who is a direct descendant
of the sun and a spotted fawn.  They come of no accident of character,
but inhere in the divine order and constitution of things."

When the Blotted Escutcheon had resumed his seat a Soiled Ermine rose and
said:

"Mr. Speaker, I have heard with profound attention and entire approval
the explanation of the honourable member, and wish to offer a few remarks
on my own behalf.  I, too, have been foully calumniated by our ancient
enemy, the Infamous Falsehood, and I wish to point out that I am made of
the fur of the _Mustela maculata_, which is dirty from birth."




The Ingenious Patriot


Having obtained an audience of the King an Ingenious Patriot pulled a
paper from his pocket, saying:

"May it please your Majesty, I have here a formula for constructing
armour-plating which no gun can pierce.  If these plates are adopted in
the Royal Navy our warships will be invulnerable, and therefore
invincible.  Here, also, are reports of your Majesty's Ministers,
attesting the value of the invention.  I will part with my right in it
for a million tumtums."

After examining the papers, the King put them away and promised him an
order on the Lord High Treasurer of the Extortion Department for a
million tumtums.

"And here," said the Ingenious Patriot, pulling another paper from
another pocket, "are the working plans of a gun that I have invented,
which will pierce that armour.  Your Majesty's Royal Brother, the Emperor
of Bang, is anxious to purchase it, but loyalty to your Majesty's throne
and person constrains me to offer it first to your Majesty.  The price is
one million tumtums."

Having received the promise of another check, he thrust his hand into
still another pocket, remarking:

"The price of the irresistible gun would have been much greater, your
Majesty, but for the fact that its missiles can be so effectively averted
by my peculiar method of treating the armour plates with a new--"

The King signed to the Great Head Factotum to approach.

"Search this man," he said, "and report how many pockets he has."

"Forty-three, Sire," said the Great Head Factotum, completing the
scrutiny.

"May it please your Majesty," cried the Ingenious Patriot, in terror,
"one of them contains tobacco."

"Hold him up by the ankles and shake him," said the King; "then give him
a check for forty-two million tumtums and put him to death.  Let a decree
issue declaring ingenuity a capital offence."




Two Kings


The King of Madagao, being engaged in a dispute with the King of
Bornegascar, wrote him as follows:

"Before proceeding further in this matter I demand the recall of your
Minister from my capital."

Greatly enraged by this impossible demand, the King of Bornegascar
replied:

"I shall not recall my Minister.  Moreover, if you do not immediately
retract your demand I shall withdraw him!"

This threat so terrified the King of Madagao that in hastening to comply
he fell over his own feet, breaking the Third Commandment.




An Officer and a Thug


A Chief of Police who had seen an Officer beating a Thug was very
indignant, and said he must not do so any more on pain of dismissal.

"Don't be too hard on me," said the Officer, smiling; "I was beating him
with a stuffed club."

"Nevertheless," persisted the Chief of Police, "it was a liberty that
must have been very disagreeable, though it may not have hurt.  Please do
not repeat it."

"But," said the Officer, still smiling, "it was a stuffed Thug."

In attempting to express his gratification, the Chief of Police thrust
out his right hand with such violence that his skin was ruptured at the
arm-pit and a stream of sawdust poured from the wound.  He was a stuffed
Chief of Police.




The Conscientious Official


While a Division Superintendent of a railway was attending closely to his
business of placing obstructions on the track and tampering with the
switches he received word that the President of the road was about to
discharge him for incompetency.

"Good Heavens!" he cried; "there are more accidents on my division than
on all the rest of the line."

"The President is very particular," said the Man who brought him the
news; "he thinks the same loss of life might be effected with less damage
to the company's property."

"Does he expect me to shoot passengers through the car windows?"
exclaimed the indignant official, spiking a loose tie across the rails.
"Does he take me for an assassin?"




How Leisure Came


A Man to Whom Time Was Money, and who was bolting his breakfast in order
to catch a train, had leaned his newspaper against the sugar-bowl and was
reading as he ate.  In his haste and abstraction he stuck a pickle-fork
into his right eye, and on removing the fork the eye came with it.  In
buying spectacles the needless outlay for the right lens soon reduced him
to poverty, and the Man to Whom Time Was Money had to sustain life by
fishing from the end of a wharf.




The Moral Sentiment


A Pugilist met the Moral Sentiment of the Community, who was carrying a
hat-box.  "What have you in the hat-box, my friend?" inquired the
Pugilist.

"A new frown," was the answer.  "I am bringing it from the frownery--the
one over there with the gilded steeple."

"And what are you going to do with the nice new frown?" the Pugilist
asked.

"Put down pugilism--if I have to wear it night and day," said the Moral
Sentiment of the Community, sternly.

"That's right," said the Pugilist, "that is right, my good friend; if
pugilism had been put down yesterday, I wouldn't have this kind of Nose
to-day.  I had a rattling hot fight last evening with--"

"Is that so?" cried the Moral Sentiment of the Community, with sudden
animation.  "Which licked?  Sit down here on the hat-box and tell me all
about it!"




The Politicians


An Old Politician and a Young Politician were travelling through a
beautiful country, by the dusty highway which leads to the City of
Prosperous Obscurity.  Lured by the flowers and the shade and charmed by
the songs of birds which invited to woodland paths and green fields, his
imagination fired by glimpses of golden domes and glittering palaces in
the distance on either hand, the Young Politician said:

"Let us, I beseech thee, turn aside from this comfortless road leading,
thou knowest whither, but not I.  Let us turn our backs upon duty and
abandon ourselves to the delights and advantages which beckon from every
grove and call to us from every shining hill.  Let us, if so thou wilt,
follow this beautiful path, which, as thou seest, hath a guide-board
saying, 'Turn in here all ye who seek the Palace of Political
Distinction.'"

"It is a beautiful path, my son," said the Old Politician, without either
slackening his pace or turning his head, "and it leadeth among pleasant
scenes.  But the search for the Palace of Political Distinction is beset
with one mighty peril."

"What is that?" said the Young Politician.

"The peril of finding it," the Old Politician replied, pushing on.




The Thoughtful Warden


The Warden of a Penitentiary was one day putting locks on the doors of
all the cells when a mechanic said to him:

"Those locks can all be opened from the inside--you are very imprudent."

The Warden did not look up from his work, but said:

"If that is called imprudence, I wonder what would be called a thoughtful
provision against the vicissitudes of fortune."




The Treasury and the Arms


A Public Treasury, feeling Two Arms lifting out its contents, exclaimed:

"Mr. Shareman, I move for a division."

"You seem to know something about parliamentary forms of speech," said
the Two Arms.

"Yes," replied the Public Treasury, "I am familiar with the hauls of
legislation."




The Christian Serpent


A Rattlesnake came home to his brood and said: "My children, gather about
and receive your father's last blessing, and see how a Christian dies."

"What ails you, Father?" asked the Small Snakes.

"I have been bitten by the editor of a partisan journal," was the reply,
accompanied by the ominous death-rattle.




The Broom of the Temple


The city of Gakwak being about to lose its character of capital of the
province of Ukwuk, the Wampog issued a proclamation convening all the
male residents in council in the Temple of Ul to devise means of defence.
The first speaker thought the best policy would be to offer a fried
jackass to the gods.  The second suggested a public procession, headed by
the Wampog himself, bearing the Holy Poker on a cushion of
cloth-of-brass.  Another thought that a scarlet mole should be buried
alive in the public park and a suitable incantation chanted over the
remains.  The advice of the fourth was that the columns of the capitol be
rubbed with oil of dog by a person having a moustache on the calf of his
leg.  When all the others had spoken an Aged Man rose and said:

"High and mighty Wampog and fellow-citizens, I have listened attentively
to all the plans proposed.  All seem wise, and I do not suffer myself to
doubt that any one of them would be efficacious.  Nevertheless, I cannot
help thinking that if we would put an improved breed of polliwogs in our
drinking water, construct shallower roadways, groom the street cows,
offer the stranger within our gates a free choice between the poniard and
the potion, and relinquish our private system of morals, the other
measures of public safety would be needless."

The Aged Man was about to speak further, but the meeting informally
adjourned in order to sweep the floor of the temple--for the men of
Gakwak are the tidiest housewives in all that province.  The last speaker
was the broom.




The Critics


While bathing, Antinous was seen by Minerva, who was so enamoured of his
beauty that, all armed as she happened to be, she descended from Olympus
to woo him; but, unluckily displaying her shield, with the head of Medusa
on it, she had the unhappiness to see the beautiful mortal turn to stone
from catching a glimpse of it.  She straightway ascended to ask Jove to
restore him; but before this could be done a Sculptor and a Critic passed
that way and espied him.

"This is a very bad Apollo," said the Sculptor: "the chest is too narrow,
and one arm is at least a half-inch shorter than the other.  The attitude
is unnatural, and I may say impossible.  Ah! my friend, you should see my
statue of Antinous."

"In my judgment, the figure," said the Critic, "is tolerably good, though
rather Etrurian, but the expression of the face is decidedly Tuscan, and
therefore false to nature.  By the way, have you read my work on 'The
Fallaciousness of the Aspectual in Art'?"




The Foolish Woman


A Married Woman, whose lover was about to reform by running away,
procured a pistol and shot him dead.

"Why did you do that, Madam?" inquired a Policeman, sauntering by.

"Because," replied the Married Woman, "he was a wicked man, and had
purchased a ticket to Chicago."

"My sister," said an adjacent Man of God, solemnly, "you cannot stop the
wicked from going to Chicago by killing them."




Father and Son


"My boy," said an aged Father to his fiery and disobedient Son, "a hot
temper is the soil of remorse.  Promise me that when next you are angry
you will count one hundred before you move or speak."

No sooner had the Son promised than he received a stinging blow from the
paternal walking-stick, and by the time he had counted to seventy-five
had the unhappiness to see the old man jump into a waiting cab and whirl
away.




The Discontented Malefactor


A Judge having sentenced a Malefactor to the penitentiary was proceeding
to point out to him the disadvantages of crime and the profit of
reformation.

"Your Honour," said the Malefactor, interrupting, "would you be kind
enough to alter my punishment to ten years in the penitentiary and
nothing else?"

"Why," said the Judge, surprised, "I have given you only three years!"

"Yes, I know," assented the Malefactor--"three years' imprisonment and
the preaching.  If you please, I should like to commute the preaching."




A Call to Quit


Seeing that his audiences were becoming smaller every Sunday, a Minister
of the Gospel broke off in the midst of a sermon, descended the pulpit
stairs, and walked on his hands down the central aisle of the church.  He
then remounted his feet, ascended to the pulpit, and resumed his
discourse, making no allusion to the incident.

"Now," said he to himself, as he went home, "I shall have, henceforth, a
large attendance and no snoring."

But on the following Friday he was waited upon by the Pillars of the
Church, who informed him that in order to be in harmony with the New
Theology and get full advantage of modern methods of Gospel
interpretation they had deemed it advisable to make a change.  They had
therefore sent a call to Brother Jowjeetum-Fallal, the World-Renowned
Hindoo Human Pin-Wheel, then holding forth in Hoopitup's circus.  They
were happy to say that the reverend gentleman had been moved by the
Spirit to accept the call, and on the ensuing Sabbath would break the
bread of life for the brethren or break his neck in the attempt.




The Man and the Lightning


A Man Running for Office was overtaken by Lightning.

"You see," said the Lightning, as it crept past him inch by inch, "I can
travel considerably faster than you."

"Yes," the Man Running for Office replied, "but think how much longer I
keep going!"




The Lassoed Bear


A Hunter who had lassoed a Bear was trying to disengage himself from the
rope, but the slip-knot about his wrist would not yield, for the Bear was
all the time pulling in the slack with his paws.  In the midst of his
trouble the Hunter saw a Showman passing by, and managed to attract his
attention.

"What will you give me," he said, "for my Bear?"

"It will be some five or ten minutes," said the Showman, "before I shall
want a fresh Bear, and it looks to me as if prices would fall during that
time.  I think I'll wait and watch the market."

"The price of this animal," the Hunter replied, "is down to bed-rock; you
can have him for nothing a pound, spot cash, and I'll throw in the next
one that I lasso.  But the purchaser must remove the goods from the
premises forthwith, to make room for three man-eating tigers, a
cat-headed gorilla, and an armful of rattlesnakes."

But the Showman passed on, in maiden meditation, fancy free, and being
joined soon afterward by the Bear, who was absently picking his teeth, it
was inferred that they were not unacquainted.




The Ineffective Rooter


A Drunken Man was lying in the road with a bleeding nose, upon which he
had fallen, when a Pig passed that way.

"You wallow fairly well," said the Pig, "but, my fine fellow, you have
much to learn about rooting."




A Protagonist of Silver


Some Financiers who were whetting their tongues on their teeth because
the Government had "struck down" silver, and were about to "inaugurate" a
season of sweatshed, were addressed as follows by a Member of their
honourable and warlike body:

"Comrades of the thunder and companions of death, I cannot but regard it
as singularly fortunate that we who by conviction and sympathy are
designated by nature as the champions of that fairest of her products,
the white metal, should also, by a happy chance, be engaged mostly in the
business of mining it.  Nothing could be more appropriate than that those
who from unselfish motives and elevated sentiments are doing battle for
the people's rights and interests, should themselves be the chief
beneficiaries of success.  Therefore, O children of the earthquake and
the storm, let us stand shoulder to shoulder, heart to heart, and pocket
to pocket!"

This speech so pleased the other Members of the convention that, actuated
by a magnanimous impulse, they sprang to their feet and left the hall.  It
was the first time they had ever been known to leave anything having
value.




The Holy Deacon


An Itinerant Preacher who had wrought hard in the moral vineyard for
several hours whispered to a Holy Deacon of the local church:

"Brother, these people know you, and your active support will bear fruit
abundantly.  Please pass the plate for me, and you shall have one
fourth."

The Holy Deacon did so, and putting the money into his pocket waited till
the congregation was dismissed and said goodnight.

"But the money, brother, the money that you collected!" said the
Itinerant Preacher.

"Nothing is coming to you," was the reply; "the Adversary has hardened
their hearts, and one fourth is all they gave."




A Hasty Settlement


"Your Honour," said an Attorney, rising, "what is the present status of
this case--as far as it has gone?"

"I have given a judgment for the residuary legatee under the will," said
the Court, "put the costs upon the contestants, decided all questions
relating to fees and other charges; and, in short, the estate in
litigation has been settled, with all controversies, disputes,
misunderstandings, and differences of opinion thereunto appertaining."

"Ah, yes, I see," said the Attorney, thoughtfully, "we are making
progress--we are getting on famously."

"Progress?" echoed the Judge--"progress?  Why, sir, the matter is
concluded!"

"Exactly, exactly; it had to be concluded in order to give relevancy to
the motion that I am about to make.  Your Honour, I move that the
judgment of the Court be set aside and the case reopened."

"Upon what ground, sir?" the Judge asked in surprise.

"Upon the ground," said the Attorney, "that after paying all fees and
expenses of litigation and all charges against the estate there will
still be something left."

"There may have been an error," said His Honour, thoughtfully--"the Court
may have underestimated the value of the estate.  The motion is taken
under advisement."




The Wooden Guns


An Artillery Regiment of a State Militia applied to the Governor for
wooden guns to practise with.

"Those," they explained, "will be cheaper than real ones."

"It shall not be said that I sacrificed efficiency to economy," said the
Governor.  "You shall have real guns."

"Thank you, thank you," cried the warriors, effusively.  "We will take
good care of them, and in the event of war return them to the arsenal."




The Reform School Board


The members of the School Board in Doosnoswair being suspected of
appointing female teachers for an improper consideration, the people
elected a Board composed wholly of women.  In a few years the scandal was
at an end; there were no female teachers in the Department.




The Poet's Doom


An Object was walking along the King's highway wrapped in meditation and
with little else on, when he suddenly found himself at the gates of a
strange city.  On applying for admittance, he was arrested as a
necessitator of ordinances, and taken before the King.

"Who are you," said the King, "and what is your business in life?"

"Snouter the Sneak," replied the Object, with ready invention;
"pick-pocket."

The King was about to command him to be released when the Prime Minister
suggested that the prisoner's fingers be examined.  They were found
greatly flattened and calloused at the ends.

"Ha!" cried the King; "I told you so!--he is addicted to counting
syllables.  This is a poet.  Turn him over to the Lord High Dissuader
from the Head Habit."

"My liege," said the Inventor-in-Ordinary of Ingenious Penalties, "I
venture to suggest a keener affliction.

"Name it," the King said.

"Let him retain that head!"

It was so ordered.




The Noser and the Note


The Head Rifler of an insolvent bank, learning that it was about to be
visited by the official Noser into Things, placed his own personal note
for a large amount among its resources, and, gaily touching his guitar,
awaited the inspection.  When the Noser came to the note he asked,
"What's this?"

"That," said the Assistant Pocketer of Deposits, "is one of our
liabilities."

"A liability?" exclaimed the Noser.  "Nay, nay, an asset.  That is what
you mean, doubtless."

"Therein you err," the Pocketer explained; "that note was written in the
bank with our own pen, ink, and paper, and we have not paid a stationery
bill for six months."

"Ah, I see," the Noser said, thoughtfully; "it is a liability.  May I ask
how you expect to meet it?"

"With fortitude, please God," answered the Assistant Pocketer, his eyes
to Heaven raising--"with fortitude and a firm reliance on the laxity of
the law."

"Enough, enough," exclaimed the faithful servant of the State, choking
with emotion; "here is a certificate of solvency."

"And here is a bottle of ink," the grateful financier said, slipping it
into the other's pocket; "it is all that we have."




The Cat and the King


A Cat was looking at a King, as permitted by the proverb.

"Well," said the monarch, observing her inspection of the royal person,
"how do you like me?"

"I can imagine a King," said the Cat, "whom I should like better."

"For example?"

"The King of the Mice."

The sovereign was so pleased with the wit of the reply that he gave her
permission to scratch his Prime Minister's eyes out.




The Literary Astronomer


The Director of an Observatory, who, with a thirty-six-inch refractor,
had discovered the moon, hastened to an Editor, with a four-column
account of the event.

"How much?" said the Editor, sententiously, without looking up from his
essay on the circularity of the political horizon.

"One hundred and sixty dollars," replied the man who had discovered the
moon.

"Not half enough," was the Editor's comment.

"Generous man!" cried the Astronomer, glowing with warm and elevated
sentiments, "pay me, then, what you will."

"Great and good friend," said the Editor, blandly, looking up from his
work, "we are far asunder, it seems.  The paying is to be done by you."

The Director of the Observatory gathered up the manuscript and went away,
explaining that it needed correction; he had neglected to dot an m.




The Lion and the Rattlesnake


A Man having found a Lion in his path undertook to subdue him by the
power of the human eye; and near by was a Rattlesnake engaged in
fascinating a small bird.

"How are you getting on, brother?" the Man called out to the other
reptile, without removing his eyes from those of the Lion.

"Admirably," replied the serpent.  "My success is assured; my victim
draws nearer and nearer in spite of her efforts."

"And mine," said the Man, "draws nearer and nearer in spite of mine.  Are
you sure it is all right?"

"If you don't think so," the reptile replied as well as he then could,
with his mouth full of bird, "you better give it up."

A half-hour later, the Lion, thoughtfully picking his teeth with his
claws, told the Rattlesnake that he had never in all his varied
experience in being subdued, seen a subduer try so earnestly to give it
up.  "But," he added, with a wide, significant smile, "I looked him into
countenance."




The Man with No Enemies


An Inoffensive Person walking in a public place was assaulted by a
Stranger with a Club, and severely beaten.

When the Stranger with a Club was brought to trial, the complainant said
to the Judge:

"I do not know why I was assaulted; I have not an enemy in the world."

"That," said the defendant, "is why I struck him."

"Let the prisoner be discharged," said the Judge; "a man who has no
enemies has no friends.  The courts are not for such."




The Alderman and the Raccoon


"I see quite a number of rings on your tail," said an Alderman to a
Raccoon that he met in a zoological garden.

"Yes," replied the Raccoon, "and I hear quite a number of tales on your
ring."

The Alderman, being of a sensitive, retiring disposition, shrank from
further comparison, and, strolling to another part of the garden, stole
the camel.




The Flying-Machine


An Ingenious Man who had built a flying-machine invited a great concourse
of people to see it go up.  At the appointed moment, everything being
ready, he boarded the car and turned on the power.  The machine
immediately broke through the massive substructure upon which it was
builded, and sank out of sight into the earth, the aeronaut springing out
barely in time to save himself.

"Well," said he, "I have done enough to demonstrate the correctness of my
details.  The defects," he added, with a look at the ruined brick-work,
"are merely basic and fundamental."

Upon this assurance the people came forward with subscriptions to build a
second machine.




The Angel's Tear


An Unworthy Man who had laughed at the woes of a Woman whom he loved, was
bewailing his indiscretion in sack-cloth-of-gold and ashes-of-roses, when
the Angel of Compassion looked down upon him, saying:

"Poor mortal!--how unblest not to know the wickedness of laughing at
another's misfortune!"

So saying, he let fall a great tear, which, encountering in its descent a
current of cold air, was congealed into a hail-stone.  This struck the
Unworthy Man on the head and set him rubbing that bruised organ
vigorously with one hand while vainly attempting to expand an umbrella
with the other.

Thereat the Angel of Compassion did most shamelessly and wickedly laugh.




The City of Political Distinction


Jamrach the Rich, being anxious to reach the City of Political
Distinction before nightfall, arrived at a fork of the road and was
undecided which branch to follow; so he consulted a Wise-Looking Person
who sat by the wayside.

"Take _that_ road," said the Wise-Looking Person, pointing it out; "it is
known as the Political Highway."

"Thank you," said Jamrach, and was about to proceed.

"About how much do you thank me?" was the reply.  "Do you suppose I am
here for my health?"

As Jamrach had not become rich by stupidity, he handed something to his
guide and hastened on, and soon came to a toll-gate kept by a Benevolent
Gentleman, to whom he gave something, and was suffered to pass.  A little
farther along he came to a bridge across an imaginary stream, where a
Civil Engineer (who had built the bridge) demanded something for interest
on his investment, and it was forthcoming.  It was growing late when
Jamrach came to the margin of what appeared to be a lake of black ink,
and there the road terminated.  Seeing a Ferryman in his boat he paid
something for his passage and was about to embark.

"No," said the Ferryman.  "Put your neck in this noose, and I will tow
you over.  It is the only way," he added, seeing that the passenger was
about to complain of the accommodations.

In due time he was dragged across, half strangled, and dreadfully
beslubbered by the feculent waters.  "There," said the Ferryman, hauling
him ashore and disengaging him, "you are now in the City of Political
Distinction.  It has fifty millions of inhabitants, and as the colour of
the Filthy Pool does not wash off, they all look exactly alike."

"Alas!" exclaimed Jamrach, weeping and bewailing the loss of all his
possessions, paid out in tips and tolls; "I will go back with you."

"I don't think you will,", said the Ferryman, pushing off; "this city is
situated on the Island of the Unreturning."




The Party Over There


A Man in a Hurry, whose watch was at his lawyer's, asked a Grave Person
the time of day.

"I heard you ask that Party Over There the same question," said the Grave
Person.  "What answer did he give you?"

"He said it was about three o'clock," replied the Man in a Hurry; "but he
did not look at his watch, and as the sun is nearly down, I think it is
later."

"The fact that the sun is nearly down," the Grave Person said, "is
immaterial, but the fact that he did not consult his timepiece and make
answer after due deliberation and consideration is fatal.  The answer
given," continued the Grave Person, consulting his own timepiece, "is of
no effect, invalid, and absurd."

"What, then," said the Man in a Hurry, eagerly, "is the time of day?"

"The question is remanded to the Party Over There for a new answer,"
replied the Grave Person, returning his watch to his pocket and moving
away with great dignity.

He was a Judge of an Appellate Court.




The Poetess of Reform


One pleasant day in the latter part of eternity, as the Shades of all the
great writers were reposing upon beds of asphodel and moly in the Elysian
fields, each happy in hearing from the lips of the others nothing but
copious quotation from his own works (for so Jove had kindly bedeviled
their ears), there came in among them with triumphant mien a Shade whom
none knew.  She (for the newcomer showed such evidences of sex as cropped
hair and a manly stride) took a seat in their midst, and smiling a
superior smile explained:

"After centuries of oppression I have wrested my rights from the grasp of
the jealous gods.  On earth I was the Poetess of Reform, and sang to
inattentive ears.  Now for an eternity of honour and glory."

But it was not to be so, and soon she was the unhappiest of mortals,
vainly desirous to wander again in gloom by the infernal lakes.  For Jove
had not bedeviled her ears, and she heard from the lips of each blessed
Shade an incessant flow of quotation from his own works.  Moreover, she
was denied the happiness of repeating her poems.  She could not recall a
line of them, for Jove had decreed that the memory of them abide in
Pluto's painful domain, as a part of the apparatus.




The Unchanged Diplomatist


The republic of Madagonia had been long and well represented at the court
of the King of Patagascar by an officer called a Dazie, but one day the
Madagonian Parliament conferred upon him the superior rank of Dandee.  The
next day after being apprised of his new dignity he hastened to inform
the King of Patagascar.

"Ah, yes, I understand," said the King; "you have been promoted and given
increased pay and allowances.  There was an appropriation?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"And you have now two heads, have you not?"

"Oh, no, your Majesty--only one, I assure you."

"Indeed?  And how many legs and arms?"

"Two of each, Sire--only two of each."

"And only one body?"

"Just a single body, as you perceive."

Thoughtfully removing his crown and scratching the royal head, the
monarch was silent a moment, and then he said:

"I fancy that appropriation has been misapplied.  You seem to be about
the same kind of idiot that you were before."




An Invitation


A Pious Person who had overcharged his paunch with dead bird by way of
attesting his gratitude for escaping the many calamities which Heaven had
sent upon others, fell asleep at table and dreamed.  He thought he lived
in a country where turkeys were the ruling class, and every year they
held a feast to manifest their sense of Heaven's goodness in sparing
their lives to kill them later.  One day, about a week before one of
these feasts, he met the Supreme Gobbler, who said:

"You will please get yourself into good condition for the Thanksgiving
dinner."

"Yes, your Excellency," replied the Pious Person, delighted, "I shall
come hungry, I assure you.  It is no small privilege to dine with your
Excellency."

The Supreme Gobbler eyed him for a moment in silence; then he said:

"As one of the lower domestic animals, you cannot be expected to know
much, but you might know something.  Since you do not, you will permit me
to point out that being asked to dinner is one thing; being asked to dine
is another and a different thing."

With this significant remark the Supreme Gobbler left him, and
thenceforward the Pious Person dreamed of himself as white meat and dark
until rudely awakened by decapitation.




The Ashes of Madame Blavatsky


The two brightest lights of Theosophy being in the same place at once in
company with the Ashes of Madame Blavatsky, an Inquiring Soul thought the
time propitious to learn something worth while.  So he sat at the feet of
one awhile, and then he sat awhile at the feet of the other, and at last
he applied his ear to the keyhole of the casket containing the Ashes of
Madame Blavatsky.  When the Inquiring Soul had completed his course of
instruction he declared himself the Ahkoond of Swat, fell into the
baleful habit of standing on his head, and swore that the mother who bore
him was a pragmatic paralogism.  Wherefore he was held in high reverence,
and when the two other gentlemen were hanged for lying the Theosophists
elected him to the leadership of their Disastral Body, and after a quiet
life and an honourable death by the kick of a jackass he was reincarnated
as a Yellow Dog.  As such he ate the Ashes of Madame Blavatsky, and
Theosophy was no more.




The Opossum of the Future


One day an Opossum who had gone to sleep hanging from the highest branch
of a tree by the tail, awoke and saw a large Snake wound about the limb,
between him and the trunk of the tree.

"If I hold on," he said to himself, "I shall be swallowed; if I let go I
shall break my neck."

But suddenly he bethought himself to dissemble.

"My perfected friend," he said, "my parental instinct recognises in you a
noble evidence and illustration of the theory of development.  You are
the Opossum of the Future, the ultimate Fittest Survivor of our species,
the ripe result of progressive prehensility--all tail!"

But the Snake, proud of his ancient eminence in Scriptural history, was
strictly orthodox, and did not accept the scientific view.




The Life-Savers


Seventy-Five Men presented themselves before the President of the Humane
Society and demanded the great gold medal for life-saving.

"Why, yes," said the President; "by diligent effort so many men must have
saved a considerable number of lives.  How many did you save?"

"Seventy-five, sir," replied their Spokesman.

"Ah, yes, that is one each--very good work--very good work, indeed," the
President said.  "You shall not only have the Society's great gold medal,
but its recommendation for employment at the various life-boat stations
along the coast.  But how did you save so many lives?"

The Spokesman of the Men replied:

"We are officers of the law, and have just returned from the pursuit of
two murderous outlaws."




The Australian Grasshopper


A Distinguished Naturalist was travelling in Australia, when he saw a
Kangaroo in session and flung a stone at it.  The Kangaroo immediately
adjourned, tracing against the sunset sky a parabolic curve spanning
seven provinces, and evanished below the horizon.  The Distinguished
Naturalist looked interested, but said nothing for an hour; then he said
to his native Guide:

"You have pretty wide meadows here, I suppose?"

"No, not very wide," the Guide answered; "about the same as in England
and America."

After another long silence the Distinguished Naturalist said:

"The hay which we shall purchase for our horses this evening--I shall
expect to find the stalks about fifty feet long.  Am I right?"

"Why, no," said the Guide; "a foot or two is about the usual length of
our hay.  What can you be thinking of?"

The Distinguished Naturalist made no immediate reply, but later, as in
the shades of night they journeyed through the desolate vastness of the
Great Lone Land, he broke the silence:

"I was thinking," he said, "of the uncommon magnitude of that
grasshopper."




The Pavior


An Author saw a Labourer hammering stones into the pavement of a street,
and approaching him said:

"My friend, you seem weary.  Ambition is a hard taskmaster."

"I'm working for Mr. Jones, sir," the Labourer replied.

"Well, cheer up," the Author resumed; "fame comes at the most unexpected
times.  To-day you are poor, obscure, and disheartened, and to-morrow the
world may be ringing with your name."

"What are you giving me?" the Labourer said.  "Cannot an honest pavior
perform his work in peace, and get his money for it, and his living by
it, without others talking rot about ambition and hopes of fame?"

"Cannot an honest writer?" said the Author.




The Tried Assassin


An Assassin being put upon trial in a New England court, his Counsel rose
and said: "Your Honour, I move for a discharge on the ground of 'once in
jeopardy': my client has been already tried for that murder and
acquitted."

"In what court?" asked the Judge.

"In the Superior Court of San Francisco," the Counsel replied.

"Let the trial proceed--your motion is denied," said the Judge.  "An
Assassin is not in jeopardy when tried in California."




The Bumbo of Jiam


The Pahdour of Patagascar and the Gookul of Madagonia were disputing
about an island which both claimed.  Finally, at the suggestion of the
International League of Cannon Founders, which had important branches in
both countries, they decided to refer their claims to the Bumbo of Jiam,
and abide by his judgment.  In settling the preliminaries of the
arbitration they had, however, the misfortune to disagree, and appealed
to arms.  At the end of a long and disastrous war, when both sides were
exhausted and bankrupt, the Bumbo of Jiam intervened in the interest of
peace.

"My great and good friends," he said to his brother sovereigns, "it will
be advantageous to you to learn that some questions are more complex and
perilous than others, presenting a greater number of points upon which it
is possible to differ.  For four generations your royal predecessors
disputed about possession of that island, without falling out.  Beware,
oh, beware the perils of international arbitration!--against which I feel
it my duty to protect you henceforth."

So saying, he annexed both countries, and after a long, peaceful, and
happy reign was poisoned by his Prime Minister.




The Two Poets


Two Poets were quarrelling for the Apple of Discord and the Bone of
Contention, for they were very hungry.

"My sons," said Apollo, "I will part the prizes between you.  You," he
said to the First Poet, "excel in Art--take the Apple.  And you," he said
to the Second Poet, "in Imagination--take the Bone."

"To Art the best prize!" said the First Poet, triumphantly, and
endeavouring to devour his award broke all his teeth.  The Apple was a
work of Art.

"That shows our Master's contempt for mere Art," said the Second Poet,
grinning.

Thereupon he attempted to gnaw his Bone, but his teeth passed through it
without resistance.  It was an imaginary Bone.




The Thistles upon the Grave


A Mind Reader made a wager that he would be buried alive and remain so
for six months, then be dug up alive.  In order to secure the grave
against secret disturbance, it was sown with thistles.  At the end of
three months, the Mind Reader lost his money.  He had come up to eat the
thistles.




The Shadow of the Leader


A Political Leader was walking out one sunny day, when he observed his
Shadow leaving him and walking rapidly away.

"Come back here, you scoundrel," he cried.

"If I had been a scoundrel," answered the Shadow, increasing its speed,
"I should not have left you."




The Sagacious Rat


A Rat that was about to emerge from his hole caught a glimpse of a Cat
waiting for him, and descending to the colony at the bottom of the hole
invited a Friend to join him in a visit to a neighbouring corn-bin.  "I
would have gone alone," he said, "but could not deny myself the pleasure
of such distinguished company."

"Very well," said the Friend, "I will go with you.  Lead on."

"Lead?" exclaimed the other.  "What!  _I_ precede so great and
illustrious a rat as you? No, indeed--after you, sir, after you."

Pleased with this great show of deference, the Friend went ahead, and,
leaving the hole first, was caught by the Cat, who immediately trotted
away with him.  The other then went out unmolested.




The Member and the Soap


A Member of the Kansas Legislature meeting a Cake of Soap was passing it
by without recognition, but the Cake of Soap insisted on stopping and
shaking hands.  Thinking it might possibly be in the enjoyment of the
elective franchise, he gave it a cordial and earnest grasp.  On letting
it go he observed that a portion of it adhered to his fingers, and
running to a brook in great alarm he proceeded to wash it off.  In doing
so he necessarily got some on the other hand, and when he had finished
washing, both were so white that he went to bed and sent for a physician.




Alarm and Pride


"Good-Morning, my friend," said Alarm to Pride; "how are you this
morning?"

"Very tired," replied Pride, seating himself on a stone by the wayside
and mopping his steaming brow.  "The politicians are wearing me out by
pointing to their dirty records with _me_, when they could as well use a
stick."

Alarm sighed sympathetically, and said:

"It is pretty much the same way here.  Instead of using an opera-glass
they view the acts of their opponents with _me_!"

As these patient drudges were mingling their tears, they were notified
that they must go on duty again, for one of the political parties had
nominated a thief and was about to hold a gratification meeting.




A Causeway


A Rich Woman having returned from abroad disembarked at the foot of Knee-
deep Street, and was about to walk to her hotel through the mud.

"Madam," said a Policeman, "I cannot permit you to do that; you would
soil your shoes and stockings."

"Oh, that is of no importance, really," replied the Rich Woman, with a
cheerful smile.

"But, madam, it is needless; from the wharf to the hotel, as you observe,
extends an unbroken line of prostrate newspaper men who crave the honour
of having you walk upon them."

"In that case," she said, seating herself in a doorway and unlocking her
satchel, "I shall have to put on my rubber boots."




Two in Trouble


Meeting a fat and patriotic Statesman on his way to Washington to beseech
the President for an office, an idle Tramp accosted him and begged twenty-
five cents with which to buy a suit of clothes.

"Melancholy wreck," said the Statesman, "what brought you to this state
of degradation?  Liquor, I suppose."

"I am temperate to the verge of absurdity," replied the Tramp.  "My
foible was patriotism; I was ruined by the baneful habit of trying to
serve my country.  What ruined you?"

"Indolence."




The Witch's Steed


A Broomstick which had long served a witch as a steed complained of the
nature of its employment, which it thought degrading.

"Very well," said the Witch, "I will give you work in which you will be
associated with intellect--you will come in contact with brains.  I shall
present you to a housewife."

"What!" said the Broomstick, "do you consider the hands of a housewife
intellectual?"

"I referred," said the Witch, "to the head of her good man."




The All Dog


A Lion seeing a Poodle fell into laughter at the ridiculous spectacle.

"Who ever saw so small a beast?" he said.

"It is very true," said the Poodle, with austere dignity, "that I am
small; but, sir, I beg to observe that I am all dog."




The Farmer's Friend


A Great Philanthropist who had thought of himself in connection with the
Presidency and had introduced a bill into Congress requiring the
Government to loan every voter all the money that he needed, on his
personal security, was explaining to a Sunday-school at a railway station
how much he had done for the country, when an angel looked down from
Heaven and wept.

"For example," said the Great Philanthropist, watching the teardrops
pattering in the dust, "these early rains are of incalculable advantage
to the farmer."




Physicians Two


A Wicked Old Man finding himself ill sent for a Physician, who prescribed
for him and went away.  Then the Wicked Old Man sent for another
Physician, saying nothing of the first, and an entirely different
treatment was ordered.  This continued for some weeks, the physicians
visiting him on alternate days and treating him for two different
disorders, with constantly enlarging doses of medicine and more and more
rigorous nursing.  But one day they accidently met at his bedside while
he slept, and the truth coming out a violent quarrel ensued.

"My good friends," said the patient, awakened by the noise of the
dispute, and apprehending the cause of it, "pray be more reasonable.  If
I could for weeks endure you both, can you not for a little while endure
each other?  I have been well for ten days, but have remained in bed in
the hope of gaining by repose the strength that would justify me in
taking your medicines.  So far I have touched none of it."




The Overlooked Factor


A Man that owned a fine Dog, and by a careful selection of its mate had
bred a number of animals but a little lower than the angels, fell in love
with his washerwoman, married her, and reared a family of dolts.

"Alas!" he exclaimed, contemplating the melancholy result, "had I but
chosen a mate for myself with half the care that I did for my Dog I
should now be a proud and happy father."

"I'm not so sure of that," said the Dog, overhearing the lament.  "There's
a difference, certainly, between your whelps and mine, but I venture to
flatter myself that it is not due altogether to the mothers.  You and I
are not entirely alike ourselves."




A Racial Parallel


Some White Christians engaged in driving Chinese Heathens out of an
American town found a newspaper published in Peking in the Chinese
tongue, and compelled one of their victims to translate an editorial.  It
turned out to be an appeal to the people of the Province of Pang Ki to
drive the foreign devils out of the country and burn their dwellings and
churches.  At this evidence of Mongolian barbarity the White Christians
were so greatly incensed that they carried out their original design.




The Honest Cadi


A Robber who had plundered a Merchant of one thousand pieces of gold was
taken before the Cadi, who asked him if he had anything to say why he
should not be decapitated.

"Your Honour," said the Robber, "I could do no otherwise than take the
money, for Allah made me that way."

"Your defence is ingenious and sound," said the Cadi, "and I must acquit
you of criminality.  Unfortunately, Allah has made me so that I must also
take off your head--unless," he added, thoughtfully, "you offer me half
of the gold; for He made me weak under temptation."

Thereupon the Robber put five hundred pieces of gold into the Cadi's
hand.

"Good," said the Cadi.  "I shall now remove but one half your head.  To
show my trust in your discretion I shall leave intact the half you talk
with."




The Kangaroo and the Zebra


A Kangaroo hopping awkwardly along with some bulky object concealed in
her pouch met a Zebra, and desirous of keeping his attention upon
himself, said:

"Your costume looks as if you might have come out of the penitentiary."

"Appearances are deceitful," replied the Zebra, smiling in the
consciousness of a more insupportable wit, "or I should have to think
that you had come out of the Legislature."




A Matter of Method


A Philosopher seeing a Fool beating his Donkey, said:

"Abstain, my son, abstain, I implore.  Those who resort to violence shall
suffer from violence."

"That," said the Fool, diligently belabouring the animal, "is what I'm
trying to teach this beast--which has kicked me."

"Doubtless," said the Philosopher to himself, as he walked away, "the
wisdom of fools is no deeper nor truer than ours, but they really do seem
to have a more impressive way of imparting it."




The Man of Principle


During a shower of rain the Keeper of a Zoological garden observed a Man
of Principle crouching beneath the belly of the ostrich, which had drawn
itself up to its full height to sleep.

"Why, my dear sir," said the Keeper, "if you fear to get wet, you'd
better creep into the pouch of yonder female kangaroo--the _Saltarix
mackintosha_--for if that ostrich wakes he will kick you to death in a
minute."

"I can't help that," the Man of Principle replied, with that lofty scorn
of practical considerations distinguishing his species.  "He may kick me
to death if he wish, but until he does he shall give me shelter from the
storm.  He has swallowed my umbrella."




The Returned Californian


A Man was hanged by the neck until he was dead.

"Whence do you come?" Saint Peter asked when the Man presented himself at
the gate of Heaven.

"From California," replied the applicant.

"Enter, my son, enter; you bring joyous tidings."

When the Man had vanished inside, Saint Peter took his memorandum-tablet
and made the following entry:

"February 16, 1893.  California occupied by the Christians."




The Compassionate Physician


A Kind-Hearted Physician sitting at the bedside of a patient afflicted
with an incurable and painful disease, heard a noise behind him, and
turning saw a cat laughing at the feeble efforts of a wounded mouse to
drag itself out of the room.

"You cruel beast!" cried he.  "Why don't you kill it at once, like a
lady?"

Rising, he kicked the cat out of the door, and picking up the mouse
compassionately put it out of its misery by pulling off its head.
Recalled to the bedside by the moans of his patient, the Kind-hearted
Physician administered a stimulant, a tonic, and a nutrient, and went
away.




Two of the Damned


Two Blighted Beings, haggard, lachrymose, and detested, met on a blasted
heath in the light of a struggling moon.

"I wish you a merry Christmas," said the First Blighted Being, in a voice
like that of a singing tomb.

"And I you a happy New Year," responded the Second Blighted Being, with
the accent of a penitent accordeon.

They then fell upon each other's neck and wept scalding rills down each
other's spine in token of their banishment to the Realm of Ineffable
Bosh.  For one of these accursed creatures was the First of January, and
the other the Twenty-fifth of December.




The Austere Governor


A Governor visiting a State prison was implored by a Convict to pardon
him.

"What are you in for?" asked the Governor.

"I held a high office," the Convict humbly replied, "and sold subordinate
appointments."

"Then I decline to interfere," said the Governor, with asperity; "a man
who abuses his office by making it serve a private end and purvey a
personal advantage is unfit to be free.  By the way, Mr. Warden," he
added to that official, as the Convict slunk away, "in appointing you to
this position, I was given to understand that your friends could make the
Shikane county delegation to the next State convention solid for--for the
present Administration.  Was I rightly informed?"

"You were, sir."

"Very well, then, I will bid you good-day.  Please be so good as to
appoint my nephew Night Chaplain and Reminder of Mothers and Sisters."




Religions of Error


Hearing a sound of strife, a Christian in the Orient asked his Dragoman
the cause of it.

"The Buddhists are cutting Mohammedan throats," the Dragoman replied,
with oriental composure.

"I did not know," remarked the Christian, with scientific interest, "that
that would make so much noise."

"The Mohammedans are cutting Buddhist throats, too," added the Dragoman.

"It is astonishing," mused the Christian, "how violent and how general
are religious animosities.  Everywhere in the world the devotees of each
local faith abhor the devotees of every other, and abstain from murder
only so long as they dare not commit it.  And the strangest thing about
it is that all religions are erroneous and mischievous excepting mine.
Mine, thank God, is true and benign."

So saying he visibly smugged and went off to telegraph for a brigade of
cutthroats to protect Christian interests.




The Penitent Elector


A Person belonging to the Society for Passing Resolutions of Respect for
the Memory of Deceased Members having died received the customary
attention.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed a Sovereign Elector, on hearing the resolutions
read, "what a loss to the nation!  And to think that I once voted against
that angel for Inspector of Gate-latches in Public Squares!"

In remorse the Sovereign Elector deprived himself of political influence
by learning to read.




The Tail of the Sphinx


A Dog of a taciturn disposition said to his Tail:

"Whenever I am angry, you rise and bristle; when I am pleased, you wag;
when I am alarmed, you tuck yourself in out of danger.  You are too
mercurial--you disclose all my emotions.  My notion is that tails are
given to conceal thought.  It is my dearest ambition to be as impassive
as the Sphinx."

"My friend, you must recognise the laws and limitations of your being,"
replied the Tail, with flexions appropriate to the sentiments uttered,
"and try to be great some other way.  The Sphinx has one hundred and
fifty qualifications for impassiveness which you lack."

"What are they?" the Dog asked.

"One hundred and forty-nine tons of sand on her tail."

"And--?"

"A stone tail."




A Prophet of Evil


An Undertaker Who Was a Member of a Trust saw a Man Leaning on a Spade,
and asked him why he was not at work.

"Because," said the Man Leaning on a Spade, "I belong to the
Gravediggers' National Extortion Society, and we have decided to limit
the production of graves and get more money for the reduced output.  We
have a corner in graves and propose to work it to the best advantage."

"My friend," said the Undertaker Who Was a Member of a Trust, "this is a
most hateful and injurious scheme.  If people cannot be assured of
graves, I fear they will no longer die, and the best interests of
civilisation will wither like a frosted leaf."

And blowing his eyes upon his handkerchief, he walked away lamenting.




The Crew of the Life-boat


The Gallant Crew at a life-saving station were about to launch their life-
boat for a spin along the coast when they discovered, but a little
distance away, a capsized vessel with a dozen men clinging to her keel.

"We are fortunate," said the Gallant Crew, "to have seen that in time.
Our fate might have been the same as theirs."

So they hauled the life-boat back into its house, and were spared to the
service of their country.




A Treaty of Peace


Through massacres of each other's citizens China and the United States
had been four times plunged into devastating wars, when, in the year
1994, arose a Philosopher in Madagascar, who laid before the Governments
of the two distracted countries the following _modus vivendi_:

"Massacres are to be sternly forbidden as heretofore; but any citizen or
subject of either country disobeying the injunction is to detach the
scalps of all persons massacred and deposit them with a local officer
designated to receive and preserve them and sworn to keep and render a
true account thereof.  At the conclusion of each massacre in either
country, or as soon thereafter as practicable, or at stated regular
periods, as may be provided by treaty, there shall be an exchange of
scalps between the two Governments, scalp for scalp, without regard to
sex or age; the Government having the greatest number is to be taxed on
the excess at the rate of $1000 a scalp, and the other Government
credited with the amount.  Once in every decade there shall be a general
settlement, when the balance due shall be paid to the creditor nation in
Mexican dollars."

The plan was adopted, the necessary treaty made, with legislation to
carry out its provisions; the Madagascarene Philosopher took his seat in
the Temple of Immortality, and Peace spread her white wings over the two
nations, to the unspeakable defiling of her plumage.




The Nightside of Character


A Gifted and Honourable Editor, who by practice of his profession had
acquired wealth and distinction, applied to an Old Friend for the hand of
his daughter in marriage.

"With all my heart, and God bless you!" said the Old Friend, grasping him
by both hands.  "It is a greater honour than I had dared to hope for."

"I knew what your answer would be," replied the Gifted and Honourable
Editor.  "And yet," he added, with a sly smile, "I feel that I ought to
give you as much knowledge of my character as I possess.  In this scrap-
book is such testimony relating to my shady side, as I have within the
past ten years been able to cut from the columns of my competitors in the
business of elevating humanity to a higher plane of mind and morals--my
'loathsome contemporaries.'"

Laying the book on a table, he withdrew in high spirits to make
arrangements for the wedding.  Three days later he received the scrap-
book from a messenger, with a note warning him never again to darken his
Old Friend's door.

"See!" the Gifted and Honourable Editor exclaimed, pointing to that
injunction--"I am a painter and grainer!"

And he was led away to the Asylum for the Indiscreet.




The Faithful Cashier


The Cashier of a bank having defaulted was asked by the Directors what he
had done with the money taken.

"I am greatly surprised by such a question," said the Cashier; "it sounds
as if you suspected me of selfishness.  Gentlemen, I applied that money
to the purpose for which I took it; I paid it as an initiation fee and
one year's dues in advance to the Treasurer of the Cashiers' Mutual
Defence Association."

"What is the object of that organisation?" the Directors inquired.

"When any one of its members is under suspicion," replied the Cashier,
"the Association undertakes to clear his character by submitting evidence
that he was never a prominent member of any church, nor foremost in
Sunday-school work."

Recognising the value to the bank of a spotless reputation for its
officers, the President drew his check for the amount of the shortage and
the Cashier was restored to favour.




The Circular Clew


A Detective searching for the murderer of a dead man was accosted by a
Clew.

"Follow me," said the Clew, "and there's no knowing what you may
discover."

So the Detective followed the Clew a whole year through a thousand
sinuosities, and at last found himself in the office of the Morgue.

"There!" said the Clew, pointing to the open register.

The Detective eagerly scanned the page, and found an official statement
that the deceased was dead.  Thereupon he hastened to Police Headquarters
to report progress.  The Clew, meanwhile, sauntered among the busy haunts
of men, arm in arm with an Ingenious Theory.




The Devoted Widow


A Widow weeping on her husband's grave was approached by an Engaging
Gentleman who, in a respectful manner, assured her that he had long
entertained for her the most tender feelings.

"Wretch!" cried the Widow.  "Leave me this instant!  Is this a time to
talk to me of love?"

"I assure you, madam, that I had not intended to disclose my affection,"
the Engaging Gentleman humbly explained, "but the power of your beauty
has overcome my discretion."

"You should see me when I have not been crying," said the Widow.




The Hardy Patriots


A Dispenser-Elect of Patronage gave notice through the newspapers that
applicants for places would be given none until he should assume the
duties of his office.

"You are exposing yourself to a grave danger," said a Lawyer.

"How so?" the Dispenser-Elect inquired.

"It will be nearly two months," the Lawyer answered, "before the day that
you mention.  Few patriots can live so long without eating, and some of
the applicants will be compelled to go to work in the meantime.  If that
kills them, you will be liable to prosecution for murder."

"You underrate their powers of endurance," the official replied.

"What!" said the Lawyer, "you think they can stand work?"

"No," said the other--"hunger."




The Humble Peasant


An Office Seeker whom the President had ordered out of Washington was
watering the homeward highway with his tears.

"Ah," he said, "how disastrous is ambition! how unsatisfying its rewards!
how terrible its disappointments!  Behold yonder peasant tilling his
field in peace and contentment!  He rises with the lark, passes the day
in wholesome toil, and lies down at night to pleasant dreams.  In the mad
struggle for place and power he has no part; the roar of the strife
reaches his ear like the distant murmur of the ocean.  Happy, thrice
happy man!  I will approach him and bask in the sunshine of his humble
felicity.  Peasant, all hail!"

Leaning upon his rake, the Peasant returned the salutation with a nod,
but said nothing.

"My friend," said the Office Seeker, "you see before you the wreck of an
ambitious man--ruined by the pursuit of place and power.  This morning
when I set out from the national capital--"

"Stranger," the Peasant interrupted, "if you're going back there soon
maybe you wouldn't mind using your influence to make me Postmaster at
Smith's Corners."

The traveller passed on.




The Various Delegation


The King of Wideout having been offered the sovereignty of Wayoff, sent
for the Three Persons who had made the offer, and said to them:

"I am extremely obliged to you, but before accepting so great a
responsibility I must ascertain the sentiments of the people of Wayoff."

"Sire," said the Spokesman of the Three Persons, "they stand before you."

"Indeed!" said the King; "are you, then, the people of Wayoff?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"There are not many of you," the King said, attentively regarding them
with the royal eye, "and you are not so very large; I hardly think you
are a quorum.  Moreover, I never heard of you until you came here;
whereas Wayoff is noted for the quality of its pork and contains hogs of
distinction.  I shall send a Commissioner to ascertain the sentiments of
the hogs."

The Three Persons, bowing profoundly, backed out of the presence; but
soon afterward they desired another audience, and, on being readmitted,
said, through their Spokesman:

"May it please your Majesty, we are the hogs."




The No Case


A Statesman who had been indicted by an unfeeling Grand Jury was arrested
by a Sheriff and thrown into jail.  As this was abhorrent to his fine
spiritual nature, he sent for the District Attorney and asked that the
case against him be dismissed.

"Upon what grounds?" asked the District Attorney.

"Lack of evidence to convict," replied the accused.

"Do you happen to have the lack with you?" the official asked.  "I should
like to see it."

"With pleasure," said the other; "here it is."

So saying he handed the other a check, which the District Attorney
carefully examined, and then pronounced it the most complete absence of
both proof and presumption that he had ever seen.  He said it would
acquit the oldest man in the world.




A Harmless Visitor


At a meeting of the Golden League of Mystery a Woman was discovered,
writing in a note-book.  A member directed the attention of the Superb
High Chairman to her, and she was asked to explain her presence there,
and what she was doing.

"I came in for my own pleasure and instruction," she said, "and was so
struck by the wisdom of the speakers that I could not help making a few
notes."

"Madam," said the Superb High Chairman, "we have no objection to visitors
if they will pledge themselves not to publish anything they hear.  Are
you--on your honour as a lady, now, madam--are you not connected with
some newspaper?"

"Good gracious, no!" cried the Woman, earnestly.  "Why, sir, I am an
officer of the Women's Press Association!"

She was permitted to remain, and presented with resolutions of apology.




The Judge and the Rash Act


A Judge who had for years looked in vain for an opportunity for infamous
distinction, but whom no litigant thought worth bribing, sat one day upon
the Bench, lamenting his hard lot, and threatening to put an end to his
life if business did not improve.  Suddenly he found himself confronted
by a dreadful figure clad in a shroud, whose pallor and stony eyes smote
him with a horrible apprehension.

"Who are you," he faltered, "and why do you come here?"

"I am the Rash Act," was the sepulchral reply; "you may commit me."

"No," the judge said, thoughtfully, "no, that would be quite irregular.  I
do not sit to-day as a committing magistrate."




The Prerogative of Might


A Slander travelling rapidly through the land upon its joyous mission was
accosted by a Retraction and commanded to halt and be killed.

"Your career of mischief is at an end," said the Retraction, drawing his
club, rolling up his sleeves, and spitting on his hands.

"Why should you slay me?" protested the Slander.  "Whatever my intentions
were, I have been innocuous, for you have dogged my strides and
counteracted my influence."

"Dogged your grandmother!" said the Retraction, with contemptuous
vulgarity of speech.  "In the order of nature it is appointed that we two
shall never travel the same road."

"How then," the Slander asked, triumphantly, "have you overtaken me?"

"I have not," replied the Retraction; "we have accidentally met.  I came
round the world the other way."

But when he tried to execute his fell purpose he found that in the order
of nature it was appointed that he himself perish miserably in the
encounter.




An Inflated Ambition


The President of a great Corporation went into a dry-goods shop and saw a
placard which read:

"If You Don't See What You Want, Ask For It."

Approaching the shopkeeper, who had been narrowly observing him as he
read the placard, he was about to speak, when the shopkeeper called to a
salesman:

"John, show this gentleman the world."




Rejected Services


A Heavy Operator overtaken by a Reverse of Fortune was bewailing his
sudden fall from affluence to indigence.

"Do not weep," said the Reverse of Fortune.  "You need not suffer alone.
Name any one of the men who have opposed your schemes, and I will
overtake _him_."

"It is hardly worth while," said the victim, earnestly.  "Not a soul of
them has a cent!"




The Power of the Scalawag


A Forestry Commissioner had just felled a giant tree when, seeing an
honest man approaching, he dropped his axe and fled.  The next day when
he cautiously returned to get his axe, he found the following lines
pencilled on the stump:

   "What nature reared by centuries of toil,
   A scalawag in half a day can spoil;
   An equal fate for him may Heaven provide--
   Damned in the moment of his tallest pride."




At Large--One Temper


A Turbulent Person was brought before a Judge to be tried for an assault
with intent to commit murder, and it was proved that he had been
variously obstreperous without apparent provocation, had affected the
peripheries of several luckless fellow-citizens with the trunk of a small
tree, and subsequently cleaned out the town.  While trying to palliate
these misdeeds, the defendant's Attorney turned suddenly to the Judge,
saying:

"Did your Honour ever lose your temper?"

"I fine you twenty-five dollars for contempt of court!" roared the Judge,
in wrath.  "How dare you mention the loss of my temper in connection with
this case?"

After a moment's silence the Attorney said, meekly:

"I thought my client might perhaps have found it."




The Seeker and the Sought


A Politician seeing a fat Turkey which he wanted for dinner, baited a
hook with a grain of corn and dragged it before the fowl at the end of a
long and almost invisible line.  When the Turkey had swallowed the hook,
the Politician ran, drawing the creature after him.

"Fellow-citizens," he cried, addressing some turkey-breeders whom he met,
"you observe that the man does not seek the bird, but the bird seeks the
man.  For this unsolicited and unexpected dinner I thank you with all my
heart."




His Fly-Speck Majesty


A Distinguished Advocate of Republican Institutions was seen pickling his
shins in the ocean.

"Why don't you come out on dry land?" said the Spectator.  "What are you
in there for?"

"Sir," replied the Distinguished Advocate of Republican Institutions, "a
ship is expected, bearing His Majesty the King of the Fly-Speck Islands,
and I wish to be the first to grasp the crowned hand."

"But," said the Spectator, "you said in your famous speech before the
Society for the Prevention of the Protrusion of Nail Heads from Plank
Sidewalks that Kings were blood-smeared oppressors and hell-bound
loafers."

"My dear sir," said the Distinguished Advocate of Republican
Institutions, without removing his eyes from the horizon, "you wander
away into the strangest irrelevancies!  I spoke of Kings in the
abstract."




The Pugilist's Diet


The Trainer of a Pugilist consulted a Physician regarding the champion's
diet.

"Beef-steaks are too tender," said the Physician; "have his meat cut from
the neck of a bull."

"I thought the steaks more digestible," the Trainer explained.

"That is very true," said the Physician; "but they do not sufficiently
exercise the chin."




The Old Man and the Pupil


A Beautiful Old Man, meeting a Sunday-school Pupil, laid his hand
tenderly upon the lad's head, saying: "Listen, my son, to the words of
the wise and heed the advice of the righteous."

"All right," said the Sunday-school Pupil; "go ahead."

"Oh, I haven't anything to do with it myself," said the Beautiful Old
Man.  "I am only observing one of the customs of the age.  I am a
pirate."

And when he had taken his hand from the lad's head, the latter observed
that his hair was full of clotted blood.  Then the Beautiful Old Man went
his way, instructing other youth.




The Deceased and his Heirs


A Man died leaving a large estate and many sorrowful relations who
claimed it.  After some years, when all but one had had judgment given
against them, that one was awarded the estate, which he asked his
Attorney to have appraised.

"There is nothing to appraise," said the Attorney, pocketing his last
fee.

"Then," said the Successful Claimant, "what good has all this litigation
done me?"

"You have been a good client to me," the Attorney replied, gathering up
his books and papers, "but I must say you betray a surprising ignorance
of the purpose of litigation."




The Politicians and the Plunder


Several Political Entities were dividing the spoils.

"I will take the management of the prisons," said a Decent Respect for
Public Opinion, "and make a radical change."

"And I," said the Blotted Escutcheon, "will retain my present general
connection with affairs, while my friend here, the Soiled Ermine, will
remain in the Judiciary."

The Political Pot said it would not boil any more unless replenished from
the Filthy Pool.

The Cohesive Power of Public Plunder quietly remarked that the two bosses
would, he supposed, naturally be his share.

"No," said the Depth of Degradation, "they have already fallen to me."




The Man and the Wart


A Person with a Wart on His Nose met a Person Similarly Afflicted, and
said:

"Let me propose your name for membership in the Imperial Order of
Abnormal Proboscidians, of which I am the High Noble Toby and
Surreptitious Treasurer.  Two months ago I was the only member.  One
month ago there were two.  To-day we number four Emperors of the Abnormal
Proboscis in good standing--doubles every four weeks, see?  That's
geometrical progression--you know how that piles up.  In a year and a
half every man in California will have a wart on his Nose.  Powerful
Order!  Initiation, five dollars."

"My friend," said the Person Similarly Afflicted, "here are five dollars.
Keep my name off your books."

"Thank you kindly," the Man with a Wart on His Nose replied, pocketing
the money; "it is just the same to us as if you joined.  Good-by."

He went away, but in a little while he was back.

"I quite forgot to mention the monthly dues," he said.




The Divided Delegation


A Delegation at Washington went to a New President, and said:

"Your Excellency, we are unable to agree upon a Favourite Son to
represent us in your Cabinet."

"Then," said the New President, "I shall have to lock you up until you do
agree."

So the Delegation was cast into the deepest dungeon beneath the moat,
where it maintained a divided mind for many weeks, but finally reconciled
its differences and asked to be taken before the New President.

"My child," said he, "nothing is so beautiful as harmony.  My Cabinet
Selections were all made before our former interview, but you have
supplied a noble instance of patriotism in subordinating your personal
preferences to the general good.  Go now to your beautiful homes and be
happy."

It is not recorded that the Delegation was happy.




A Forfeited Right


The Chief of the Weather Bureau having predicted a fine day, a Thrifty
Person hastened to lay in a large stock of umbrellas, which he exposed
for sale on the sidewalk; but the weather remained clear, and nobody
would buy.  Thereupon the Thrifty Person brought an action against the
Chief of the Weather Bureau for the cost of the umbrellas.

"Your Honour," said the defendant's attorney, when the case was called,
"I move that this astonishing action be dismissed.  Not only is my client
in no way responsible for the loss, but he distinctly foreshadowed the
very thing that caused it."

"That is just it, your Honour," replied the counsel for the plaintiff;
"the defendant by making a correct forecast fooled my client in the only
way that he could do so.  He has lied so much and so notoriously that he
has neither the legal nor moral right to tell the truth."

Judgment for the plaintiff.




Revenge


An Insurance Agent was trying to induce a Hard Man to Deal With to take
out a policy on his house.  After listening to him for an hour, while he
painted in vivid colours the extreme danger of fire consuming the house,
the Hard Man to Deal With said:

"Do you really think it likely that my house will burn down inside the
time that policy will run?"

"Certainly," replied the Insurance Agent; "have I not been trying all
this time to convince you that I do?"

"Then," said the Hard Man to Deal With, "why are you so anxious to have
your Company bet me money that it will not?"

The Agent was silent and thoughtful for a moment; then he drew the other
apart into an unfrequented place and whispered in his ear:

"My friend, I will impart to you a dark secret.  Years ago the Company
betrayed my sweetheart by promise of marriage.  Under an assumed name I
have wormed myself into its service for revenge; and as there is a heaven
above us, I will have its heart's blood!"




An Optimist


Two Frogs in the belly of a snake were considering their altered
circumstances.

"This is pretty hard luck," said one.

"Don't jump to conclusions," the other said; "we are out of the wet and
provided with board and lodging."

"With lodging, certainly," said the First Frog; "but I don't see the
board."

"You are a croaker," the other explained.  "We are ourselves the board."




A Valuable Suggestion


A Big Nation having a quarrel with a Little Nation, resolved to terrify
its antagonist by a grand naval demonstration in the latter's principal
port.  So the Big Nation assembled all its ships of war from all over the
world, and was about to send them three hundred and fifty thousand miles
to the place of rendezvous, when the President of the Big Nation received
the following note from the President of the Little Nation:

"My great and good friend, I hear that you are going to show us your
navy, in order to impress us with a sense of your power.  How needless
the expense!  To prove to you that we already know all about it, I
inclose herewith a list and description of all the ships you have."

The great and good friend was so struck by the hard sense of the letter
that he kept his navy at home, and saved one thousand million dollars.
This economy enabled him to buy a satisfactory decision when the cause of
the quarrel was submitted to arbitration.




Two Footpads


Two Footpads sat at their grog in a roadside resort, comparing the
evening's adventures.

"I stood up the Chief of Police," said the First Footpad, "and I got away
with what he had."

"And I," said the Second Footpad, "stood up the United States District
Attorney, and got away with--"

"Good Lord!" interrupted the other in astonishment and admiration--"you
got away with what that fellow had?"

"No," the unfortunate narrator explained--"with a small part of what _I_
had."




Equipped for Service


During the Civil War a Patriot was passing through the State of Maryland
with a pass from the President to join Grant's army and see the fighting.
Stopping a day at Annapolis, he visited the shop of a well-known optician
and ordered seven powerful telescopes, one for every day in the week.  In
recognition of this munificent patronage of the State's languishing
industries, the Governor commissioned him a colonel.




The Basking Cyclone


A Negro in a boat, gathering driftwood, saw a sleeping Alligator, and,
thinking it was a log, fell to estimating the number of shingles it would
make for his new cabin.  Having satisfied his mind on that point, he
stuck his boat-hook into the beast's back to harvest his good fortune.
Thereupon the saurian emerged from his dream and took to the water,
greatly to the surprise of the man-and-brother.

"I never befo' seen such a cyclone as dat," he exclaimed as soon as he
had recovered his breath.  "It done carry away de ruf of my house!"




At the Pole


After a great expenditure of life and treasure a Daring Explorer had
succeeded in reaching the North Pole, when he was approached by a Native
Galeut who lived there.

"Good morning," said the Native Galeut.  "I'm very glad to see you, but
why did you come here?"

"Glory," said the Daring Explorer, curtly.

"Yes, yes, I know," the other persisted; "but of what benefit to man is
your discovery?  To what truths does it give access which were
inaccessible before?--facts, I mean, having a scientific value?"

"I'll be Tom scatted if I know," the great man replied, frankly; "you
will have to ask the Scientist of the Expedition."

But the Scientist of the Expedition explained that he had been so
engrossed with the care of his instruments and the study of his tables
that he had found no time to think of it.




The Optimist and the Cynic


A Man who had experienced the favours of fortune and was an Optimist, met
a man who had experienced an optimist and was a Cynic.  So the Cynic
turned out of the road to let the Optimist roll by in his gold carriage.

"My son," said the Optimist, stopping the gold carriage, "you look as if
you had not a friend in the world."

"I don't know if I have or not," replied the Cynic, "for you have the
world."




The Poet and the Editor


"My dear sir," said the editor to the man, who had called to see about
his poem, "I regret to say that owing to an unfortunate altercation in
this office the greater part of your manuscript is illegible; a bottle of
ink was upset upon it, blotting out all but the first line--that is to
say--"

"'The autumn leaves were falling, falling.'

"Unluckily, not having read the poem, I was unable to supply the
incidents that followed; otherwise we could have given them in our own
words.  If the news is not stale, and has not already appeared in the
other papers, perhaps you will kindly relate what occurred, while I make
notes of it.

"'The autumn leaves were falling, falling,'

"Go on."

"What!" said the poet, "do you expect me to reproduce the entire poem
from memory?"

"Only the substance of it--just the leading facts.  We will add whatever
is necessary in the way of amplification and embellishment.  It will
detain you but a moment.

"'The autumn leaves were falling, falling--'

"Now, then."

There was a sound of a slow getting up and going away.  The chronicler of
passing events sat through it, motionless, with suspended pen; and when
the movement was complete Poesy was represented in that place by nothing
but a warm spot on the wooden chair.




The Taken Hand


A Successful Man of Business, having occasion to write to a Thief,
expressed a wish to see him and shake hands.

"No," replied the Thief, "there are some things which I will not
take--among them your hand."

"You must use a little strategy," said a Philosopher to whom the
Successful Man of Business had reported the Thief's haughty reply.  "Leave
your hand out some night, and he will take it."

So one night the Successful Man of Business left his hand out of his
neighbour's pocket, and the Thief took it with avidity.




An Unspeakable Imbecile


A Judge said to a Convicted Assassin:

"Prisoner at the bar, have you anything to say why the death-sentence
should not be passed upon you?"

"Will what I say make any difference?" asked the Convicted Assassin.

"I do not see how it can," the Judge answered, reflectively.  "No, it
will not."

"Then," said the doomed one, "I should just like to remark that you are
the most unspeakable old imbecile in seven States and the District of
Columbia."




A Needful War


The people of Madagonia had an antipathy to the people of Novakatka and
set upon some sailors of a Novakatkan vessel, killing two and wounding
twelve.  The King of Madagonia having refused either to apologise or pay,
the King of Novakatka made war upon him, saying that it was necessary to
show that Novakatkans must not be slaughtered.  In the battles which
ensued the people of Madagonia slaughtered two thousand Novakatkans and
wounded twelve thousand.  But the Madagonians were unsuccessful, which so
chagrined them that never thereafter in all their land was a Novakatkan
secure in property or life.




The Mine Owner and the Jackass


While the Owner of a Silver Mine was on his way to attend a convention of
his species he was accosted by a Jackass, who said:

"By an unjust discrimination against quadrupeds I am made ineligible to a
seat in your convention; so I am compelled to seek representation through
you."

"It will give me great pleasure, sir," said the Owner of a Silver Mine,
"to serve one so closely allied to me in--in--well, you know," he added,
with a significant gesture of his two hands upward from the sides of his
head.  "What do you want?"

"Oh, nothing--nothing at all for myself individually," replied the
Donkey; "but his country's welfare should be a patriot's supreme care.  If
Americans are to retain the sacred liberties for which their fathers
strove, Congress must declare our independence of European dictation by
maintaining the price of mules."




The Dog and the Physician


A Dog that had seen a Physician attending the burial of a wealthy
patient, said: "When do you expect to dig it up?"

"Why should I dig it up?" the Physician asked.

"When I bury a bone," said the Dog, "it is with an intention to uncover
it later and pick it."

"The bones that I bury," said the Physician, "are those that I can no
longer pick."




The Party Manager and the Gentleman


A Party Manager said to a Gentleman whom he saw minding his own business:

"How much will you pay for a nomination to office?"

"Nothing," the Gentleman replied.

"But you will contribute something to the campaign fund to assist in your
election, will you not?" asked the Party Manager, winking.

"Oh, no," said the Gentleman, gravely.  "If the people wish me to work
for them, they must hire me without solicitation.  I am very comfortable
without office."

"But," urged the Party Manager, "an election is a thing to be desired.  It
is a high honour to be a servant of the people."

"If servitude is a high honour," the Gentleman said, "it would be
indecent for me to seek it; and if obtained by my own exertion it would
be no honour."

"Well," persisted the Party Manager, "you will at least, I hope, indorse
the party platform."

The Gentleman replied: "It is improbable that its authors have accurately
expressed my views without consulting me; and if I indorsed their work
without approving it I should be a liar."

"You are a detestable hypocrite and an idiot!" shouted the Party Manager.

"Even your good opinion of my fitness," replied the Gentleman, "shall not
persuade me."




The Legislator and the Citizen


An ex-Legislator asked a Most Respectable Citizen for a letter to the
Governor recommending him for appointment as Commissioner of Shrimps and
Crabs.

"Sir," said the Most Respectable Citizen, austerely, "were you not once
in the State Senate?"

"Not so bad as that, sir, I assure you," was the reply.  "I was a member
of the Slower House.  I was expelled for selling my influence for money."

"And you dare to ask for mine!" shouted the Most Respectable Citizen.
"You have the impudence?  A man who will accept bribes will probably
offer them.   Do you mean to--"

"I should not think of making a corrupt proposal to you, sir; but if I
were Commissioner of Shrimps and Crabs, I might have some influence with
the water-front population, and be able to help you make your fight for
Coroner."

"In that case I do not feel justified in denying you the letter."

So he took his pen, and, some demon guiding his hand, he wrote, greatly
to his astonishment:

   "Who sells his influence should stop it,
   An honest man will only swap it."




The Rainmaker


An Officer of the Government, with a great outfit of mule-waggons loaded
with balloons, kites, dynamite bombs, and electrical apparatus, halted in
the midst of a desert, where there had been no rain for ten years, and
set up a camp.  After several months of preparation and an expenditure of
a million dollars all was in readiness, and a series of tremendous
explosions occurred on the earth and in the sky.  This was followed by a
great down-pour of rain, which washed the unfortunate Officer of the
Government and the outfit off the face of creation and affected the
agricultural heart with joy too deep for utterance.  A Newspaper Reporter
who had just arrived escaped by climbing a hill near by, and there he
found the Sole Survivor of the expedition--a mule-driver--down on his
knees behind a mesquite bush, praying with extreme fervour.

"Oh, you can't stop it that way," said the Reporter.

"My fellow-traveller to the bar of God," replied the Sole Survivor,
looking up over his shoulder, "your understanding is in darkness.  I am
not stopping this great blessing; under Providence, I am bringing it."

"That is a pretty good joke," said the Reporter, laughing as well as he
could in the strangling rain--"a mule driver's prayer answered!"

"Child of levity and scoffing," replied the other; "you err again, misled
by these humble habiliments.  I am the Rev. Ezekiel Thrifft, a minister
of the gospel, now in the service of the great manufacturing firm of
Skinn & Sheer.  They make balloons, kites, dynamite bombs, and electrical
apparatus."




The Citizen and the Snakes


A Public-Spirited Citizen who had failed miserably in trying to secure a
National political convention for his city suffered acutely from
dejection.  While in that frame of mind he leaned thoughtlessly against a
druggist's show-window, wherein were one hundred and fifty kinds of
assorted snakes.  The glass breaking, the reptiles all escaped into the
street.

"When you can't do what you wish," said the Public-spirited Citizen, "it
is worth while to do what you can."




Fortune and the Fabulist


A Writer of Fables was passing through a lonely forest when he met a
Fortune.  Greatly alarmed, he tried to climb a tree, but the Fortune
pulled him down and bestowed itself upon him with cruel persistence.

"Why did you try to run away?" said the Fortune, when his struggles had
ceased and his screams were stilled.  "Why do you glare at me so
inhospitably?"

"I don't know what you are," replied the Writer of Fables, deeply
disturbed.

"I am wealth; I am respectability," the Fortune explained; "I am elegant
houses, a yacht, and a clean shirt every day.  I am leisure, I am travel,
wine, a shiny hat, and an unshiny coat.  I am enough to eat."

"All right," said the Writer of Fables, in a whisper; "but for goodness'
sake speak lower."

"Why so?" the Fortune asked, in surprise.

"So as not to wake me," replied the Writer of Fables, a holy calm
brooding upon his beautiful face.




A Smiling Idol


An Idol said to a Missionary, "My friend, why do you seek to bring me
into contempt?  If it had not been for me, what would you have been?
Remember thy creator that thy days be long in the land."

"I confess," replied the Missionary, fingering a number of ten-cent
pieces which a Sunday-school in his own country had forwarded to him,
"that I am a product of you, but I protest that you cannot quote
Scripture with accuracy and point.  Therefore will I continue to go up
against you with the Sword of the Spirit."

Shortly afterwards the Idol's worshippers held a great religious ceremony
at the base of his pedestal, and as a part of the rites the Missionary
was roasted whole.  As the tongue was removed for the high priest's
table, "Ah," said the Idol to himself, "that is the Sword of the
Spirit--the only Sword that is less dangerous when unsheathed."

And he smiled so pleasantly at his own wit that the provinces of
Ghargaroo, M'gwana, and Scowow were affected with a blight.




Philosophers Three


A Bear, a Fox, and an Opossum were attacked by an inundation.

"Death loves a coward," said the Bear, and went forward to fight the
flood.

"What a fool!" said the Fox.  "I know a trick worth two of that."  And he
slipped into a hollow stump.

"There are malevolent forces," said the Opossum, "which the wise will
neither confront nor avoid.  The thing is to know the nature of your
antagonist."

So saying the Opossum lay down and pretended to be dead.




The Boneless King


Some Apes who had deposed their king fell at once into dissension and
anarchy.  In this strait they sent a Deputation to a neighbouring tribe
to consult the Oldest and Wisest Ape in All the World.

"My children," said the Oldest and Wisest Ape in All the World, when he
had heard the Deputation, "you did right in ridding yourselves of
tyranny, but your tribe is not sufficiently advanced to dispense with the
forms of monarchy.  Entice the tyrant back with fair promises, kill him
and enthrone.  The skeleton of even the most lawless despot makes a good
constitutional sovereign."

At this the Deputation was greatly abashed.  "It is impossible," they
said, moving away; "our king has no skeleton; he was stuffed."




Uncalculating Zeal


A Man-Eating tiger was ravaging the Kingdom of Damnasia, and the King,
greatly concerned for the lives and limbs of his Royal subjects, promised
his daughter Zodroulra to any man who would kill the animal.  After some
days Camaraladdin appeared before the King and claimed the reward.

"But where is the tiger?" the King asked.

"May jackasses sing above my uncle's grave," replied Camaraladdin, "if I
dared go within a league of him!"

"Wretch!" cried the King, unsheathing his consoler-under-disappointment;
"how dare you claim my daughter when you have done nothing to earn her?"

"Thou art wiser, O King, than Solyman the Great, and thy servant is as
dust in the tomb of thy dog, yet thou errest.  I did not, it is true,
kill the tiger, but behold!  I have brought thee the scalp of the man who
had accumulated five million pieces of gold and was after more."

The King drew his consoler-under-disappointment, and, flicking off
Camaraladdin's head, said:

"Learn, caitiff, the expediency of uncalculating zeal.  If the
millionaire had been let alone he would have devoured the tiger."




A Transposition


Travelling through the sage-brush country a Jackass met a rabbit, who
exclaimed in great astonishment:

"Good heavens! how did you grow so big?  You are doubtless the largest
rabbit living."

"No," said the Jackass, "you are the smallest donkey."

After a good deal of fruitless argument the question was referred for
decision to a passing Coyote, who was a bit of a demagogue and desirous
to stand well with both.

"Gentlemen," said he, "you are both right, as was to have been expected
by persons so gifted with appliances for receiving instruction from the
wise.  You, sir,"--turning to the superior animal--"are, as he has
accurately observed, a rabbit.  And you"--to the other--"are correctly
described as a jackass.  In transposing your names man has acted with
incredible folly."

They were so pleased with the decision that they declared the Coyote
their candidate for the Grizzly Bearship; but whether he ever obtained
the office history does not relate.




The Honest Citizen


A Political Preferment, labelled with its price, was canvassing the State
to find a purchaser.  One day it offered itself to a Truly Good Man, who,
after examining the label and finding the price was exactly twice as
great as he was willing to pay, spurned the Political Preferment from his
door.  Then the People said: "Behold, this is an honest citizen!"  And
the Truly Good Man humbly confessed that it was so.




A Creaking Tail


An American Statesman who had twisted the tail of the British Lion until
his arms ached was at last rewarded by a sharp, rasping sound.

"I knew your fortitude would give out after a while," said the American
Statesman, delighted; "your agony attests my political power."

"Agony I know not!" said the British Lion, yawning; "the swivel in my
tail needs a few drops of oil, that is all."




Wasted Sweets


A Candidate canvassing his district met a Nurse wheeling a Baby in a
carriage, and, stooping, imprinted a kiss upon the Baby's clammy muzzle.
Rising, he saw a Man, who laughed.

"Why do you laugh?" asked the Candidate.

"Because," replied the Man, "the Baby belongs to the Orphan Asylum."

"But the Nurse," said the Candidate--"the Nurse will surely relate the
touching incident wherever she goes, and perhaps write to her former
master."

"The Nurse," said the Man who had laughed, "is an inmate of the
Institution for the Illiterate-Deaf-and-Dumb."




Six and One


The Committee on Gerrymander worked late, drawing intricate lines on a
map of the State, and being weary sought repose in a game of poker.  At
the close of the game the six Republican members were bankrupt and the
single Democrat had all the money.  On the next day, when the Committee
was called to order for business, one of the luckless six mounted his
legs, and said:

"Mr. Chairman, before we bend to our noble task of purifying politics, in
the interest of good government I wish to say a word of the untoward
events of last evening.  If my memory serves me the disasters which
overtook the Majority of this honourable body always befell when it was
the Minority's deal.  It is my solemn conviction, Mr. Chairman, and to
its affirmation I pledge my life, my fortune, and my sacred honour, that
that wicked and unscrupulous Minority redistricted the cards!"




The Sportsman and the Squirrel


A Sportsman who had wounded a Squirrel, which was making desperate
efforts to drag itself away, ran after it with a stick, exclaiming:

"Poor thing!  I will put it out of its misery."

At that moment the Squirrels stopped from exhaustion, and looking up at
its enemy, said:

"I don't venture to doubt the sincerity of your compassion, though it
comes rather late, but you seem to lack the faculty of observation.  Do
you not perceive by my actions that the dearest wish of my heart is to
continue in my misery?"

At this exposure of his hypocrisy, the Sportsman was so overcome with
shame and remorse that he would not strike the Squirrel, but pointing it
out to his dog, walked thoughtfully away.




The Fogy and the Sheik


A Fogy who lived in a cave near a great caravan route returned to his
home one day and saw, near by, a great concourse of men and animals, and
in their midst a tower, at the foot of which something with wheels smoked
and panted like an exhausted horse.  He sought the Sheik of the Outfit.

"What sin art thou committing now, O son of a Christian dog?" said the
Fogy, with a truly Oriental politeness.

"Boring for water, you black-and-tan galoot!" replied the Sheik of the
Outfit, with that ready repartee which distinguishes the Unbeliever.

"Knowest thou not, thou whelp of darkness and father of disordered
livers," cried the Fogy, "that water will cause grass to spring up here,
and trees, and possibly even flowers?  Knowest thou not, that thou art,
in truth, producing an oasis?"

"And don't you know," said the Sheik of the Outfit, "that caravans will
then stop here for rest and refreshments, giving you a chance to steal
the camels, the horses, and the goods?"

"May the wild hog defile my grave, but thou speakest wisdom!" the Fogy
replied, with the dignity of his race, extending his hand.  "Sheik."

They shook.




At Heaven's Gate


Having arisen from the tomb, a Woman presented herself at the gate of
Heaven, and knocked with a trembling hand.

"Madam," said Saint Peter, rising and approaching the wicket, "whence do
you come?"

"From San Francisco," replied the Woman, with embarrassment, as great
beads of perspiration spangled her spiritual brow.

"Never mind, my good girl," the Saint said, compassionately.  "Eternity
is a long time; you can live that down."

"But that, if you please, is not all."  The Woman was growing more and
more confused.  "I poisoned my husband.  I chopped up my babies.  I--"

"Ah," said the Saint, with sudden austerity, "your confession suggests a
very grave possibility.  Were you a member of the Women's Press
Association?"

The lady drew herself up and replied with warmth:

"I was not."

The gates of pearl and jasper swung back upon their golden hinges, making
the most ravishing music, and the Saint, stepping aside, bowed low,
saying:

"Enter, then, into thine eternal rest."

But the Woman hesitated.

"The poisoning--the chopping--the--the--" she stammered.

"Of no consequence, I assure you.  We are not going to be hard on a lady
who did not belong to the Women's Press Association.  Take a harp."

"But I applied for membership--I was blackballed."

"Take two harps."




The Catted Anarchist


An Anarchist Orator who had been struck in the face with a Dead Cat by
some Respector of Law to him unknown, had the Dead Cat arrested and taken
before a Magistrate.

"Why do you appeal to the law?" said the Magistrate--"You who go in for
the abolition of law."

"That," replied the Anarchist, who was not without a certain hardness of
head, "that is none of your business; I am not bound to be consistent.
You sit here to do justice between me and this Dead Cat."

"Very well," said the Magistrate, putting on the black cap and a solemn
look; "as the accused makes no defence, and is undoubtedly guilty, I
sentence her to be eaten by the public executioner; and as that position
happens to be vacant, I appoint you to it, without bonds."

One of the most delighted spectators at the execution was the anonymous
Respector of Law who had flung the condemned.




The Honourable Member


A Member of a Legislature, who had pledged himself to his Constituents
not to steal, brought home at the end of the session a large part of the
dome of the Capitol.  Thereupon the Constituents held an indignation
meeting and passed a resolution of tar and feathers.

"You are most unjust," said the Member of the Legislature.  "It is true I
promised you I would not steal; but had I ever promised you that I would
not lie?"

The Constituents said he was an honourable man and elected him to the
United States Congress, unpledged and unfledged.




The Expatriated Boss


A Boss who had gone to Canada was taunted by a Citizen of Montreal with
having fled to avoid prosecution.

"You do me a grave injustice," said the Boss, parting with a pair of
tears.  "I came to Canada solely because of its political attractions;
its Government is the most corrupt in the world."

"Pray forgive me," said the Citizen of Montreal.

They fell upon each other's neck, and at the conclusion of that touching
rite the Boss had two watches.




An Inadequate Fee


An Ox, unable to extricate himself from the mire into which he sank, was
advised to make use of a Political Pull.  When the Political Pull had
arrived, the Ox said: "My good friend, please make fast to me, and let
nature take her course."

So the Political Pull made fast to the Ox's head and nature took her
course.  The Ox was drawn, first, from the mire, and, next, from his
skin.  Then the Political Pull looked back upon the good fat carcase of
beef that he was dragging to his lair and said, with a discontented
spirit:

"That is hardly my customary fee; I'll take home this first instalment,
then return and bring an action for salvage against the skin."




The Judge and the Plaintiff


A Man of Experience in Business was awaiting the judgment of the Court in
an action for damages which he had brought against a railway company.  The
door opened and the Judge of the Court entered.

"Well," said he, "I am going to decide your case to-day.  If I should
decide in your favour, I wonder how you would express your satisfaction?"

"Sir," said the Man of Experience in Business, "I should risk your anger
by offering you one half the sum awarded."

"Did I say I was going to decide that case?" said the Judge, abruptly, as
if awakening from a dream.  "Dear me, how absent-minded I am.  I mean I
have already decided it, and judgment has been entered for the full
amount that you sued for."

"Did I say I would give you one half?" said the Man of Experience in
Business, coldly.  "Dear me, how near I came to being a rascal.  I mean,
that I am greatly obliged to you."




The Return of the Representative


Hearing that the Legislature had adjourned, the people of an Assembly
District held a mass-meeting to devise a suitable punishment for their
representative.  By one speaker it was proposed that he be disembowelled,
by another that he be made to run the gauntlet.  Some favoured hanging,
some thought that it would do him good to appear in a suit of tar and
feathers.  An old man, famous for his wisdom and his habit of drooling on
his shirt-front, suggested that they first catch their hare.  So the
Chairman appointed a committee to watch for the victim at midnight, and
take him as he should attempt to sneak into town across-lots from the
tamarack swamp.  At this point in the proceedings they were interrupted
by the sound of a brass band.  Their dishonoured representative was
driving up from the railway station in a coach-and-four, with music and a
banner.  A few moments later he entered the hall, went upon the platform,
and said it was the proudest moment of his life. (Cheers.)




A Statesman


A Statesman who attended a meeting of a Chamber of Commerce rose to
speak, but was objected to on the ground that he had nothing to do with
commerce.

"Mr. Chairman," said an Aged Member, rising, "I conceive that the
objection is not well taken; the gentleman's connection with commerce is
close and intimate.  He is a Commodity."




Two Dogs


The Dog, as created, had a rigid tail, but after some centuries of a
cheerless existence, unappreciated by Man, who made him work for his
living, he implored the Creator to endow him with a wag.  This being done
he was able to dissemble his resentment with a sign of affection, and the
earth was his and the fulness thereof.  Observing this, the Politician
(an animal created later) petitioned that a wag might be given him too.
As he was incaudate it was conferred upon his chin, which he now wags
with great profit and gratification except when he is at his meals.




Three Recruits


A Farmer, an Artisan, and a Labourer went to the King of their country
and complained that they were compelled to support a large standing army
of mere consumers, who did nothing for their keep.

"Very well," said the King, "my subjects' wishes are the highest law."

So he disbanded his army and the consumers became producers also.  The
sale of their products so brought down prices that farming was ruined,
and their skilled and unskilled labour drove the artisans and labourers
into the almshouses and highways.  In a few years the national distress
was so great that the Farmer, the Artisan, and the Labourer petitioned
the King to reorganize the standing army.

"What!" said the King; "you wish to support those idle consumers again?"

"No, your Majesty," they replied--"we wish to enlist."




The Mirror


A Silken-Eared Spaniel, who traced his descent from King Charles the
Second of England, chanced to look into a mirror which was leaning
against the wainscoting of a room on the ground floor of his mistress's
house.  Seeing his reflection, he supposed it to be another dog, outside,
and said:

"I can chew up any such milksoppy pup as that, and I will."

So he ran out-of-doors and around to the side of the house where he
fancied the enemy was.  It so happened that at that moment a Bulldog sat
there sunning his teeth.  The Spaniel stopped short in dire
consternation, and, after regarding the Bulldog a moment from a safe
distance, said:

"I don't know whether you cultivate the arts of peace or your flag is
flung to the battle and the breeze and your voice is for war.  If you are
a civilian, the windows of this house flatter you worse than a newspaper,
but if you're a soldier, they do you a grave injustice."

This speech being unintelligible to the Bulldog he only civilly smiled,
which so terrified the Spaniel that he dropped dead in his tracks.




Saint and Sinner


"My friend," said a distinguished officer of the Salvation Army, to a
Most Wicked Sinner, "I was once a drunkard, a thief, an assassin.  The
Divine Grace has made me what I am."

The Most Wicked Sinner looked at him from head to foot.  "Henceforth," he
said, "the Divine Grace, I fancy, will let well enough alone."




An Antidote


A Young Ostrich came to its Mother, groaning with pain and with its wings
tightly crossed upon its stomach.

"What have you been eating?" the Mother asked, with solicitude.

"Nothing but a keg of Nails," was the reply.

"What!" exclaimed the Mother; "a whole keg of Nails, at your age!  Why,
you will kill yourself that way.  Go quickly, my child, and swallow a
claw-hammer."




A Weary Echo


A Convention of female writers, which for two days had been stuffing
Woman's couch with goose-quills and hailing the down of a new era,
adjourned with unabated enthusiasm, shouting, "Place aux dames!"  And
Echo wearily replied, "Oh, damn."




The Ingenious Blackmailer


An Inventor went to a King and was granted an audience, when the
following conversation ensued:

_Inventor_.--"May it please your Majesty, I have invented a rifle that
discharges lightning."

_King_.--"Ah, you wish to sell me the secret."

_Inventor_.--"Yes; it will enable your army to overrun any nation that is
accessible."

_King_.--"In order to get any good of my outlay for your invention, I
must make a war, and do so as soon as I can arm my troops--before your
secret is discovered by foreign nations.  How much do you want?"

_Inventor_.--"One million dollars."

_King_.--"And how much will it cost to make the change of arms?"

_Inventor_.--"Fifty millions."

_King_.--"And the war will Cost--?"

_Inventor_.--"But consider the glory and the spoils!"

_King_.--"Exactly.  But if I am not seeking these advantages?  What if I
decline to purchase?"

_Inventor_.--"There is no economy in that.  Though a patriot, I am poor;
if my own country will not patronise me, I must seek a market elsewhere."

_King_ (to Prime Minister).--"Take this blackmailer and cut off his
head."




A Talisman


Having been summoned to serve as a juror, a Prominent Citizen sent a
physician's certificate stating that he was afflicted with softening of
the brain.

"The gentleman is excused," said the Judge, handing back the certificate
to the person who had brought it, "he has a brain."




The Ancient Order


Hardly had that ancient order, the Sultans of Exceeding Splendour, been
completely founded by the Grand Flashing Inaccessible, when a question
arose as to what should be the title of address among the members.  Some
wanted it to be simply "my Lord," others held out for "your Dukeness,"
and still others preferred "my Sovereign Liege."  Finally the gorgeous
jewel of the order, gleaming upon the breast of every member, suggested
"your Badgesty," which was adopted, and the order became popularly known
as the Kings of Catarrh.




A Fatal Disorder


A Dying Man who had been shot was requested by officers of the law to
make a statement, and be quick about it.

"You were assaulted without provocation, of course," said the District
Attorney, preparing to set down the answer.

"No," replied the Dying Man, "I was the aggressor."

"Yes, I understand," said the District Attorney; "you committed the
aggression--you were compelled to, as it were.  You did it in
self-defence."

"I don't think he would have hurt me if I had let him alone," said the
other.  "No, I fancy he was a man of peace, and would not have hurt a
fly.  I brought such a pressure to bear on him that he naturally had to
yield--he couldn't hold out.  If he had refused to shoot me I don't see
how I could decently have continued his acquaintance."

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed the District Attorney, throwing down his note-
book and pencil; "this is all quite irregular.  I can't make use of such
an ante-mortem statement as that."

"I never before knew a man to tell the truth," said the Chief of Police,
"when dying of violence."

"Violence nothing!" the Police Surgeon said, pulling out and inspecting
the man's tongue--"it is the truth that is killing him."




The Massacre


Some Holy Missionaries in China having been deprived of life by the
Bigoted Heathens, the Christian Press made a note of it, and was greatly
pained to point out the contrast between the Bigoted Heathens and the law-
abiding countrymen of the Holy Missionaries who had wickedly been sent to
eternal bliss.

"Yes," assented a Miserable Sinner, as he finished reading the articles,
"the Heathens of Ying Shing are deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked.  By the way," he added, turning over the paper to
read the entertaining and instructive Fables, "I know the Heathenese
lingo.  Ying Shing means Rock Creek; it is in the Province of Wyo Ming."




A Ship and a Man


Seeing a ship sailing by upon the sea of politics, an Ambitious Person
started in hot pursuit along the strand; but the people's eyes being
fixed upon the Presidency no one observed the pursuer.  This greatly
annoyed him, and recollecting that he was not aquatic, he stopped and
shouted across the waves' tumultous roar:

"Take my name off the passenger list."

Back to him over the waters, hollow and heartless, like laughter in a
tomb, rang the voice of the Skipper:

"'T ain't on!"

And there, in the focus of a million pairs of convergent eyes, the
Ambitious Person sat him down between the sun and moon and murmured sadly
to his own soul:

"Marooned, by thunder!"




Congress and the People


Successive Congresses having greatly impoverished the People, they were
discouraged and wept copiously.

"Why do you weep?" inquired an Angel who had perched upon a fence near
by.

"They have taken all we have," replied the People--"excepting," they
added, noting the suggestive visitant--"excepting our hope in heaven.
Thank God, they cannot deprive us of that!"

But at last came the Congress of 1889.




The Justice and His Accuser


An eminent Justice of the Supreme Court of Patagascar was accused of
having obtained his appointment by fraud.

"You wander," he said to the Accuser; "it is of little importance how I
obtained my power; it is only important how I have used it."

"I confess," said the Accuser, "that in comparison with the rascally way
in which you have conducted yourself on the Bench, the rascally way in
which you got there does seem rather a trifle."




The Highwayman and the Traveller


A Highwayman confronted a Traveller, and covering him with a firearm,
shouted: "Your money or your life!"

"My good friend," said the Traveller, "according to the terms of your
demand my money will save my life, my life my money; you imply you will
take one or the other, but not both.  If that is what you mean, please be
good enough to take my life."

"That is not what I mean," said the Highwayman; "you cannot save your
money by giving up your life."

"Then take it, anyhow," the Traveller said.  "If it will not save my
money, it is good for nothing."

The Highwayman was so pleased with the Traveller's philosophy and wit
that he took him into partnership, and this splendid combination of
talent started a newspaper.




The Policeman and the Citizen


A Policeman, finding a man that had fallen in a fit, said, "This man is
drunk," and began beating him on the head with his club.  A passing
Citizen said:

"Why do you murder a man that is already harmless?"

Thereupon the Policeman left the man in a fit and attacked the Citizen,
who, after receiving several severe contusions, ran away.

"Alas," said the Policeman, "why did I not attack the sober one before
exhausting myself upon the other?"

Thenceforward he pursued that plan, and by zeal and diligence rose to be
Chief, and sobriety is unknown in the region subject to his sway.




The Writer and the Tramps


An Ambitious Writer, distinguished for the condition of his linen, was
travelling the high road to fame, when he met a Tramp.

"What is the matter with your shirt?" inquired the Tramp.

"It bears the marks of that superb unconcern which is the characteristic
of genius," replied the Ambitious Writer, contemptuously passing him by.

Resting by the wayside a little later, the Tramp carved upon the smooth
bark of a birch-tree the words, "John Gump, Champion Genius."




Two Politicians


Two Politicians were exchanging ideas regarding the rewards for public
service.

"The reward which I most desire," said the First Politician, "is the
gratitude of my fellow-citizens."

"That would be very gratifying, no doubt," said the Second Politician,
"but, alas! in order to obtain it one has to retire from politics."

For an instant they gazed upon each other with inexpressible tenderness;
then the First Politician murmured, "God's will be done!  Since we cannot
hope for reward, let us be content with what we have."

And lifting their right hands from the public treasury they swore to be
content.




The Fugitive Office


A Traveller arriving at the capitol of the nation saw a vast plain
outside the wall, filled with struggling and shouting men.  While he
looked upon the alarming spectacle an Office broke away from the Throng
and took shelter in a tomb close to where he stood, the crowd being too
intent upon hammering one another to observe that the cause of their
contention had departed.

"Poor bruised and bleeding creature," said the compassionate Traveller,
"what misfortune caused you to be so far away from the source of power?"

"I 'sought the man,'" said the Office.




The Tyrant Frog


A Snake swallowing a frog head-first was approached by a Naturalist with
a stick.

"Ah, my deliverer," said the Snake as well as he could, "you have arrived
just in time; this reptile, you see, is pitching into me without
provocation."

"Sir," replied the Naturalist, "I need a snakeskin for my collection, but
if you had not explained I should not have interrupted you, for I thought
you were at dinner."




The Eligible Son-in-Law


A Truly Pious Person who conducted a savings bank and lent money to his
sisters and his cousins and his aunts of both sexes, was approached by a
Tatterdemalion, who applied for a loan of one hundred thousand dollars.

"What security have you to offer?" asked the Truly Pious Person.

"The best in the world," the applicant replied, confidentially; "I am
about to become your son-in-law."

"That would indeed be gilt-edged," said the banker, gravely; "but what
claim have you to the hand of my daughter?"

"One that cannot be lightly denied," said the Tatterdemalion.  "I am
about to become worth one hundred thousand dollars."

Unable to detect a weak point in this scheme of mutual advantage, the
financier gave the promoter in disguise an order for the money, and wrote
a note to his wife directing her to count out the girl.




The Statesman and the Horse


A Statesman who had saved his country was returning from Washington on
foot, when he met a Race Horse going at full speed, and stopped it.

"Turn about and travel the other way," said the Statesman, "and I will
keep you company as far as my home.  The advantages of travelling
together are obvious."

"I cannot do that," said the Race Horse; "I am following my master to
Washington.  I did not go fast enough to suit him, and he has gone on
ahead."

"Who is your master?" inquired the Statesman.

"He is the Statesman who saved his country," answered the Race Horse.

"There appears to be some mistake," the other said.  "Why did he wish to
travel so fast?"

"So as to be there in time to get the country that he saved."

"I guess he got it," said the other, and limped along, sighing.




An AErophobe


A Celebrated Divine having affirmed the fallibility of the Bible, was
asked why, then, he preached the religion founded upon it.

"If it is fallible," he replied, "there is the greater reason that I
explain it, lest it mislead."

"Then am I to infer," said his Questioner, "that _you_ are not fallible?"

"You are to infer that I am not pneumophagous."




The Thrift of Strength


A Weak Man going down-hill met a Strong Man going up, and said:

"I take this direction because it requires less exertion, not from
choice.  I pray you, sir, assist me to regain the summit."

"Gladly," said the Strong Man, his face illuminated with the glory of his
thought.  "I have always considered my strength a sacred gift in trust
for my fellow-men.  I will take you along with me.  Just get behind me
and push."




The Good Government


"What a happy land you are!" said a Republican Form of Government to a
Sovereign State.  "Be good enough to lie still while I walk upon you,
singing the praises of universal suffrage and descanting upon the
blessings of civil and religious liberty.  In the meantime you can
relieve your feelings by cursing the one-man power and the effete
monarchies of Europe."

"My public servants have been fools and rogues from the date of your
accession to power," replied the State; "my legislative bodies, both
State and municipal, are bands of thieves; my taxes are insupportable; my
courts are corrupt; my cities are a disgrace to civilisation; my
corporations have their hands at the throats of every private
interest--all my affairs are in disorder and criminal confusion."

"That is all very true," said the Republican Form of Government, putting
on its hobnail shoes; "but consider how I thrill you every Fourth of
July."




The Life Saver


An Ancient Maiden, standing on the edge of a wharf near a Modern Swain,
was overheard rehearsing the words:

"Noble preserver!  The life that you have saved is yours!"

Having repeated them several times with various intonations, she sprang
into the water, where she was suffered to drown.

"I am a noble preserver," said the Modern Swain, thoughtfully moving
away; "the life that I have saved is indeed mine."




The Man and the Bird


A Man with a Shotgun said to a Bird:

"It is all nonsense, you know, about shooting being a cruel sport.  I put
my skill against your cunning-that is all there is of it.  It is a fair
game."

"True," said the Bird, "but I don't wish to play."

"Why not?" inquired the Man with a Shotgun.

"The game," the Bird replied, "is fair as you say; the chances are about
even; but consider the stake.  I am in it for you, but what is there in
it for me?"

Not being prepared with an answer to the question, the Man with a Shotgun
sagaciously removed the propounder.




From the Minutes


An Orator afflicted with atrophy of the organ of common-sense rose in his
place in the halls of legislation and pointed with pride to his Unblotted
Escutcheon.  Seeing what it supposed to be the finger of scorn pointed at
it, the Unblotted Escutcheon turned black with rage.  Seeing the
Unblotted Escutcheon turning black with what he supposed to be the record
of his own misdeeds showing through the whitewash, the Orator fell dead
of mortification.  Seeing the Orator fall dead of what they supposed to
be atrophy of the organ of common-sense, his colleagues resolved that
whenever they should adjourn because they were tired, it should be out of
respect to the memory of him who had so frequently made them so.




Three of a Kind


A Lawyer in whom an instinct of justice had survived the wreck of his
ignorance of law was retained for the defence of a burglar whom the
police had taken after a desperate struggle with someone not in custody.
In consultation with his client the Lawyer asked, "Have you accomplices?"

"Yes, sir," replied the Burglar.  "I have two, but neither has been
taken.  I hired one to defend me against capture, you to defend me
against conviction."

This answer deeply impressed the Lawyer, and having ascertained that the
Burglar had accumulated no money in his profession he threw up the case.




The Fabulist and the Animals


A Wise and illustrious Writer of Fables was visiting a travelling
menagerie with a view to collecting literary materials.  As he was
passing near the Elephant, that animal said:

"How sad that so justly famous a satirist should mar his work by ridicule
of people with long noses--who are the salt of the earth!"

The Kangaroo said:

"I do so enjoy that great man's censure of the ridiculous--particularly
his attacks on the Proboscidae; but, alas! he has no reverence for the
Marsupials, and laughs at our way of carrying our young in a pouch."

The Camel said:

"If he would only respect the sacred Hump, he would be faultless.  As it
is, I cannot permit his fables to be read in the presence of my family."

The Ostrich, seeing his approach, thrust her head in the straw, saying:

"If I do not conceal myself, he may be reminded to write something
disagreeable about my lack of a crest or my appetite for scrap-iron; and
although he is inexpressibly brilliant when he devotes himself to censure
of folly and greed, his dulness is matchless when he transcends the
limits of legitimate comment."

"That," said the Buzzard to his mate, "is the distinguished author of
that glorious fable, 'The Ostrich and the Keg of Raw Nails.'  I regret to
add, that he wrote, also, 'The Buzzard's Feast,' in which a carrion diet
is contumeliously disparaged.  A carrion diet is the foundation of sound
health.  If nothing else but corpses were eaten, death would be unknown."

Seeing an attendant approaching, the wise and illustrious Writer of
Fables passed out of the tent and mingled with the crowd.  It was
afterward discovered that he had crept in under the canvas without
paying.




A Revivalist Revived


A Revivalist who had fallen dead in the pulpit from too violent religious
exercise was astonished to wake up in Hades.  He promptly sent for the
Adversary of Souls and demanded his freedom, explaining that he was
entirely orthodox, and had always led a pious and holy life.

"That is all very true," said the Adversary, "but you taught by example
that a verb should not agree with its subject in person and number,
whereas the Good Book says that contention is worse than a dinner of
herbs.  You also tried to release the objective case from its thraldom to
the preposition, and it is written that servants should obey their
masters.  You stay right here."




The Debaters


A Hurled-Back Allegation, which, after a brief rest, had again started
forth upon its mission of mischief, met an Ink-stand in mid-air.

"How did the Honourable Member whom you represent know that I was coming
again?" inquired the Hurled-back Allegation.

"He did not," the Inkstand replied; "he isn't at all forehanded at
repartee."

"Why, then, do you come, things being even when he had hurled me back?"

"He wanted to be a little ahead."




Two of the Pious


A Christian and a Heathen in His Blindness were disputing, when the
Christian, with that charming consideration which serves to distinguish
the truly pious from the wolves that perish, exclaimed:

"If I could have my way, I'd blow up all your gods with dynamite."

"And if I could have mine," retorted the Heathen in His Blindness,
bitterly malevolent but oleaginuously suave, "I'd fan all yours out of
the universe."




The Desperate Object


A Dishonest Gain was driving in its luxurious carriage through its
private park, when it saw something which frantically and repeatedly ran
against a stone wall, endeavouring to butt out its brains.

"Hold!  Hold! thou desperate Object," cried the Dishonest Gain; "these
beautiful private grounds are no place for such work as thine."

"True," said the Object, pausing; "I have other and better grounds for
it."

"Then thou art a happy man," said the Dishonest Gain, "and thy bleeding
head is but mere dissembling.  Who art thou, great actor?"

"I am known," said the Object, dashing itself again at the wall, "as the
Consciousness of Duty Well Performed."




The Appropriate Memorial


A High Public Functionary having died, the citizens of his town held a
meeting to consider how to honour his memory, and an Other High Public
Functionary rose and addressed the meeting.

"Mr. Chairman and Gintlemen," said the Other, "it sames to me, and I'm
hopin' yez wull approve the suggistion, that an appropriet way to honour
the mimory of the decaised would be to erect an emolument sootably
inscribed wid his vartues."

The soul of the great man looked down from Heaven and wept.




A Needless Labour


After waiting many a weary day to revenge himself upon a Lion for some
unconsidered manifestation of contempt, a Skunk finally saw him coming,
and posting himself in the path ahead uttered the inaudible discord of
his race.  Observing that the Lion gave no attention to the matter, the
Skunk, keeping carefully out of reach, said:

"Sir, I beg leave to point out that I have set on foot an implacable
odour."

"My dear fellow," the Lion replied, "you have taken a needless trouble; I
already knew that you were a Skunk."




A Flourishing Industry


"Are the industries of this country in a flourishing condition?" asked a
Traveller from a Foreign Land of the first man he met in America.

"Splendid!" said the Man.  "I have more orders than I can fill."

"What is your business?" the Traveller from a Foreign Land inquired.

The Man replied, "I make boxing-gloves for the tongues of pugilists."




The Self-Made Monkey


A Man of humble birth and no breading, who held a high political office,
was passing through a forest, when he met a Monkey.

"I take it you are one of my constituents," the Man said.

"No," replied the Monkey; "but I will support you if you can urge a valid
claim to my approval."

"I am a self-made man," said the other, proudly.

"That is nothing," the Monkey said.  And going to a bigger pine, he rose
by his own unaided exertions to the top branch, where he sat, all
bedaubed with the pitch which that vegetable exudes.  "Now," he added, "I
am a self-made Monkey."




The Patriot and the Banker


A Patriot who had taken office poor and retired rich was introduced at a
bank where he desired to open an account.

"With pleasure," said the Honest Banker; "we shall be glad to do business
with you; but first you must make yourself an honest man by restoring
what you stole from the Government."

"Good heavens!" cried the Patriot; "if I do that, I shall have nothing to
deposit with you."

"I don't see that," the Honest Banker replied.  "We are not the whole
American people."

"Ah, I understand," said the Patriot, musing.  "At what sum do you
estimate this bank's proportion of the country's loss by me?"

"About a dollar," answered the Honest Banker.

And with a proud consciousness of serving his country wisely and well he
charged that sum to the account.




The Mourning Brothers


Observing that he was about to die, an Old Man called his two Sons to his
bedside and expounded the situation.

"My children," said he, "you have not shown me many marks of respect
during my life, but you will attest your sorrow for my death.  To him who
the longer wears a weed upon his hat in memory of me shall go my entire
fortune.  I have made a will to that effect."

So when the Old Man was dead each of the youths put a weed upon his hat
and wore it until he was himself old, when, seeing that neither would
give in, they agreed that the younger should leave off his weeds and the
elder give him half of the estate.  But when the elder applied for the
property he found that there had been an Executor!

Thus were hypocrisy and obstinacy fitly punished.




The Disinterested Arbiter


Two Dogs who had been fighting for a bone, without advantage to either,
referred their dispute to a Sheep.  The Sheep patiently heard their
statements, then flung the bone into a pond.

"Why did you do that?" said the Dogs.

"Because," replied the Sheep, "I am a vegetarian."




The Thief and the Honest Man


A Thief who had brought a suit against his accomplices to recover his
share of the plunder taken from an Honest Man, demanded the Honest Man's
attendance at the trial to testify to his loss.  But the Honest Man
explained that as he was merely the agent of a company of other honest
men it was none of his affair; and when the officers came to serve him
with a subpoena he hid himself behind his back and wiled away the
dragging hours of retirement and inaction by picking his own pockets.




The Dutiful Son


A Millionaire who had gone to an almshouse to visit his father met a
Neighbour there, who was greatly surprised.

"What!" said the Neighbour, "you do sometimes visit your father?"

"If our situations were reversed," said the Millionaire, "I am sure he
would visit me.  The old man has always been rather proud of me.
Besides," he added, softly, "I had to have his signature; I am insuring
his life."




AESOPUS EMENDATUS


The Cat and the Youth


A Cat fell in love with a handsome Young Man, and entreated Venus to
change her into a woman.

"I should think," said Venus, "you might make so trifling a change
without bothering me.  However, be a woman."

Afterward, wishing to see if the change were complete, Venus caused a
mouse to approach, whereupon the woman shrieked and made such a show of
herself that the Young Man would not marry her.



The Farmer and His Sons


A Farmer being about to die, and knowing that during his illness his Sons
had permitted the vineyard to become overgrown with weeds while they
improved the shining hour by gambling with the doctor, said to them:

"My boys, there is a great treasure buried in the vineyard.  You dig in
the ground until you find it."

So the Sons dug up all the weeds, and all the vines too, and even
neglected to bury the old man.



Jupiter and the Baby Show


Jupiter held a baby show, open to all animals, and a Monkey entered her
hideous cub for a prize, but Jupiter only laughed at her.

"It is all very well," said the Monkey, "to laugh at my offspring, but
you go into any gallery of antique sculpture and look at the statues and
busts of the fellows that you begot yourself."

"'Sh! don't expose me," said Jupiter, and awarded her the first prize.



The Man and the Dog


A Man who had been bitten by a Dog was told that the wound would heal if
he would dip a piece of bread in the blood and give it to the Dog.  He
did so.

"No," said the Dog; "if I were to accept that, it might be thought that
in biting you I was actuated by improper motives."

"And by what motives were you actuated?" asked the Man.

"I desired," replied the Dog, "merely to harmonise myself with the Divine
Scheme of Things.  I'm a child of Nature."



The Cat and the Birds


Hearing that the Birds in an aviary were ill, a Cat went to them and said
that he was a physician, and would cure them if they would let him in.

"To what school of medicine do you belong?" asked the Birds.

"I am a Miaulopathist," said the Cat.

"Did you ever practise Gohomoeopathy?" the Birds inquired, winking
faintly.

The Cat took the hint and his leave.



Mercury and the Woodchopper


A Woodchopper, who had dropped his axe into a deep pool, besought Mercury
to recover it for him.  That thoughtless deity immediately plunged into
the pool, which became so salivated that the trees about its margin all
came loose and dropped out.



The Fox and the Grapes


A Fox, seeing some sour grapes hanging within an inch of his nose, and
being unwilling to admit that there was anything he would not eat,
solemnly declared that they were out of his reach.



The Penitent Thief


A Boy who had been taught by his Mother to steal grew to be a man and was
a professional public official.  One day he was taken in the act and
condemned to die.  While going to the place of execution he passed his
Mother and said to her:

"Behold your work!  If you had not taught me to steal, I should not have
come to this."

"Indeed!" said the Mother.  "And who, pray, taught you to be detected?"



The Archer and the Eagle


An Eagle mortally wounded by an Archer was greatly comforted to observe
that the arrow was feathered with one of his own quills.

"I should have felt bad, indeed," he said, "to think that any other eagle
had a hand in this."



Truth and the Traveller


A Man travelling in a desert met a Woman.

"Who art thou?" asked the Man, "and why dost thou dwell in this dreadful
place?"

"My name," replied the Woman, "is Truth; and I live in the desert in
order to be near my worshippers when they are driven from among their
fellows.  They all come, sooner or later."

"Well," said the Man, looking about, "the country doesn't seem to be very
thickly settled here."



The Wolf and the Lamb


A Lamb, pursued by a Wolf, fled into the temple.

"The priest will catch you and sacrifice you," said the Wolf, "if you
remain there."

"It is just as well to be sacrificed by the priest as to be eaten by
you," said the Lamb.

"My friend," said the Wolf, "it pains me to see you considering so great
a question from a purely selfish point of view.  It is not just as well
for me."



The Lion and the Boar


A Lion and a Boar, who were fighting for water at a pool, saw some
vultures hovering significantly above them.  "Let us make up our
quarrel," said the Boar, "or these fellows will get one of us, sure."

"I should not so much mind that," replied the Lion, "if they would get
the right one.  However, I am willing to stop fighting, and then perhaps
I can grab a vulture.  I like chicken better than pork, anyhow."



The Grasshopper and the Ant


One day in winter a hungry Grasshopper applied to an Ant for some of the
food which they had stored.

"Why," said the Ant, "did you not store up some food for yourself,
instead of singing all the time?"

"So I did," said the Grasshopper; "so I did; but you fellows broke in and
carried it all away."



The Fisher and the Fished


A Fisherman who had caught a very small Fish was putting it in his basket
when it said:

"I pray you put me back into the stream, for I can be of no use to you;
the gods do not eat fish."

"But I am no god," said the Fisherman.

"True," said the Fish, "but as soon as Jupiter has heard of your exploit,
he will elevate you to the deitage.  You are the only man that ever
caught a small fish."



The Farmer and the Fox


A Farmer who had a deadly and implacable hatred against a certain Fox,
caught him and tied some tow to his tail; then carrying him to the centre
of his own grain-field, set the tow on fire and let the animal go.

"Alas!" said the Farmer, seeing the result; "if that grain had not been
heavily insured, I might have had to dissemble my hatred of the Fox."



Dame Fortune and the Traveller


A Weary Traveller who had lain down and fallen asleep on the brink of a
deep well was discovered by Dame Fortune.

"If this fool," she said, "should have an uneasy dream and roll into the
well men would say that I did it.  It is painful to me to be unjustly
accused, and I shall see that I am not."

So saying she rolled the man into the well.



The Victor and the Victim


Two Game Cocks, having fought a battle, the defeated one skulked away and
hid, but the victor mounted a wall and crowed lustily.  This attracted
the attention of a hawk, who said:

"Behold! how pride goeth before a fall."

So he swooped down upon the boasting bird and was about to destroy him,
when the vanquished Cock came out of his hiding-place, and between the
two the Hawk was calamitously defeated.



The Wolf and the Shepherds


A Wolf passing a Shepherd's hut looked in and saw the shepherds dining.

"Come in," said one of them, ironically, "and partake of your favourite
dish, a haunch of mutton."

"Thank you," said the Wolf, moving away, "but you must excuse me; I have
just had a saddle of shepherd."



The Goose and the Swan


A Certain rich man reared a Goose and a Swan, the one for his table, the
other because she was reputed a good singer.  One night when the Cook
went to kill the Goose he got hold of the Swan instead.  Thereupon the
Swan, to induce him to spare her life, began to sing; but she saved him
nothing but the trouble of killing her, for she died of the song.



The Lion, the Cock, and the Ass


A Lion was about to attack a braying Ass, when a Cock near by crowed
shrilly, and the Lion ran away.  "What frightened him?" the Ass asked.

"Lions have a superstitious terror of my voice," answered the Cock,
proudly.

"Well, well, well," said the Ass, shaking his head; "I should think that
any animal that is afraid of your voice and doesn't mind mine must have
an uncommon kind of ear."



The Snake and the Swallow


A Swallow who had built her nest in a court of justice reared a fine
family of young birds.  One day a Snake came out of a chink in the wall
and was about to eat them.  The Just Judge at once issued an injunction,
and making an order for their removal to his own house, ate them himself.



The Wolves and the Dogs


"Why should there be strife between us?" said the Wolves to the Sheep.
"It is all owing to those quarrelsome dogs.  Dismiss them, and we shall
have peace."

"You seem to think," replied the Sheep, "that it is an easy thing to
dismiss dogs.  Have you always found it so?"



The Hen and the Vipers


A Hen who had patiently hatched out a brood of vipers, was accosted by a
Swallow, who said: "What a fool you are to give life to creatures who
will reward you by destroying you."

"I am a little bit on the destroy myself," said the Hen, tranquilly
swallowing one of the little reptiles; "and it is not an act of folly to
provide oneself with the delicacies of the season."



A Seasonable Joke


A Spendthrift, seeing a single swallow, pawned his cloak, thinking that
Summer was at hand.  It was.



The Lion and the Thorn


A Lion roaming through the forest, got a thorn in his foot, and, meeting
a Shepherd, asked him to remove it.  The Shepherd did so, and the Lion,
having just surfeited himself on another shepherd, went away without
harming him.  Some time afterward the Shepherd was condemned on a false
accusation to be cast to the lions in the amphitheatre.  When they were
about to devour him, one of them said:

"This is the man who removed the thorn from my foot."

Hearing this, the others honourably abstained, and the claimant ate the
Shepherd all himself.



The Fawn and the Buck


A Fawn said to its father: "You are larger, stronger, and more active
than a dog, and you have sharp horns.  Why do you run away when you hear
one barking?"

"Because, my child," replied the Buck, "my temper is so uncertain that if
I permit one of those noisy creatures to come into my presence I am
likely to forget myself and do him an injury."



The Kite, the Pigeons, and the Hawk


Some Pigeons exposed to the attacks of a Kite asked a Hawk to defend
them.  He consented, and being admitted into the cote waited for the
Kite, whom he fell upon and devoured.  When he was so surfeited that he
could scarcely move, the grateful Pigeons scratched out his eyes.



The Wolf and the Babe


A Famishing Wolf, passing the door of a cottage in the forest, heard a
Mother say to her babe:

"Be quiet, or I will throw you out of the window, and the wolves will get
you."

So he waited all day below the window, growing more hungry all the time.
But at night the Old Man, having returned from the village club, threw
out both Mother and Child.



The Wolf and the Ostrich


A Wolf, who in devouring a man had choked himself with a bunch of keys,
asked an ostrich to put her head down his throat and pull them out, which
she did.

"I suppose," said the Wolf, "you expect payment for that service."

"A kind act," replied the Ostrich, "is its own reward; I have eaten the
keys."



The Herdsman and the Lion


A Herdsman who had lost a bullock entreated the gods to bring him the
thief, and vowed he would sacrifice a goat to them.  Just then a Lion,
his jaws dripping with bullock's blood, approached the Herdsman.

"I thank you, good deities," said the Herdsman, continuing his prayer,
"for showing me the thief.  And now if you will take him away, I will
stand another goat."



The Man and the Viper


A Man finding a frozen Viper put it into his bosom.

"The coldness of the human heart," he said, with a grin, "will keep the
creature in his present condition until I can reach home and revive him
on the coals."

But the pleasures of hope so fired his heart that the Viper thawed, and
sliding to the ground thanked the Man civilly for his hospitality and
glided away.



The Man and the Eagle


An Eagle was once captured by a Man, who clipped his wings and put him in
the poultry yard, along with the chickens.  The Eagle was much depressed
in spirits by the change.

"Why should you not rather rejoice?" said the Man.  "You were only an
ordinary fellow as an eagle; but as an old rooster you are a fowl of
incomparable distinction."



The War-horse and the Miller


Having heard that the State was about to be invaded by a hostile army, a
War-horse belonging to a Colonel of the Militia offered his services to a
passing Miller.

"No," said the patriotic Miller, "I will employ no one who deserts his
position in the hour of danger.  It is sweet to die for one's country."

Something in the sentiment sounded familiar, and, looking at the Miller
more closely the War-horse recognised his master in disguise.



The Dog and the Reflection


A Dog passing over a stream on a plank saw his reflection in the water.

"You ugly brute!" he cried; "how dare you look at me in that insolent
way."

He made a grab in the water, and, getting hold of what he supposed was
the other dog's lip, lifted out a fine piece of meat which a butcher's
boy had dropped into the stream.



The Man and the Fish-horn


A Truthful Man, finding a musical instrument in the road, asked the name
of it, and was told that it was a fish-horn.  The next time he went
fishing he set his nets and blew the fish-horn all day to charm the fish
into them; but at nightfall there were not only no fish in his nets, but
none along that part of the coast.  Meeting a friend while on his way
home he was asked what luck he had had.

"Well," said the Truthful Man, "the weather is not right for fishing, but
it's a red-letter day for music."



The Hare and the Tortoise


A Hare having ridiculed the slow movements of a Tortoise, was challenged
by the latter to run a race, a Fox to go to the goal and be the judge.
They got off well together, the hare at the top of her speed, the
Tortoise, who had no other intention than making his antagonist exert
herself, going very leisurely.  After sauntering along for some time he
discovered the Hare by the wayside, apparently asleep, and seeing a
chance to win pushed on as fast as he could, arriving at the goal hours
afterward, suffering from extreme fatigue and claiming the victory.

"Not so," said the Fox; "the Hare was here long ago, and went back to
cheer you on your way."



Hercules and the Carter


A Carter was driving a waggon loaded with a merchant's goods, when the
wheels stuck in a rut.  Thereupon he began to pray to Hercules, without
other exertion.

"Indolent fellow!" said Hercules; "you ask me to help you, but will not
help yourself."

So the Carter helped himself to so many of the most valuable goods that
the horses easily ran away with the remainder.



The Lion and the Bull


A Lion wishing to lure a Bull to a place where it would be safe to attack
him, said: "My friend, I have killed a fine sheep; will you come with me
and partake of the mutton?"

"With pleasure," said the Bull, "as soon as you have refreshed yourself a
little for the journey.  Pray have some grass."



The Man and his Goose


"See these valuable golden eggs," said a Man that owned a Goose.  "Surely
a Goose which can lay such eggs as those must have a gold mine inside
her."

So he killed the Goose and cut her open, but found that she was just like
any other goose.  Moreover, on examining the eggs that she had laid he
found they were just like any other eggs.



The Wolf and the Feeding Goat


A Wolf saw a Goat feeding at the summit of a rock, where he could not get
at her.

"Why do you stay up there in that sterile place and go hungry?" said the
Wolf.  "Down here where I am the broken-bottle vine cometh up as a
flower, the celluloid collar blossoms as the rose, and the tin-can tree
brings forth after its kind."

"That is true, no doubt," said the Goat, "but how about the circus-poster
crop?  I hear that it failed this year down there."

The Wolf, perceiving that he was being chaffed, went away and resumed his
duties at the doors of the poor.



Jupiter and the Birds


Jupiter commanded all the birds to appear before him, so that he might
choose the most beautiful to be their king.  The ugly jackdaw, collecting
all the fine feathers which had fallen from the other birds, attached
them to his own body and appeared at the examination, looking very gay.
The other birds, recognising their own borrowed plumage, indignantly
protested, and began to strip him.

"Hold!" said Jupiter; "this self-made bird has more sense than any of
you.  He is your king."



The Lion and the Mouse


A Lion who had caught a Mouse was about to kill him, when the Mouse said:

"If you will spare my life, I will do as much for you some day."

The Lion, good-naturedly let him go.  It happened shortly afterwards that
the Lion was caught by some hunters and bound with cords.  The Mouse,
passing that way, and seeing that his benefactor was helpless, gnawed off
his tail.



The Old Man and His Sons


An Old Man, afflicted with a family of contentious Sons, brought in a
bundle of sticks and asked the young men to break it.  After repeated
efforts they confessed that it could not be done.  "Behold," said the Old
Man, "the advantage of unity; as long as these sticks are in alliance
they are invincible, but observe how feeble they are individually."

Pulling a single stick from the bundle, he broke it easily upon the head
of the eldest Son, and this he repeated until all had been served.



The Crab and His Son


A Logical Crab said to his Son, "Why do you not walk straight forward?
Your sidelong gait is singularly ungraceful."

"Why don't you walk straight forward yourself," said the Son.

"Erring youth," replied the Logical Crab, "you are introducing new and
irrelevant matter."



The North Wind and the Sun


The Sun and the North Wind disputed which was the more powerful, and
agreed that he should be declared victor who could the sooner strip a
traveller of his clothes.  So they waited until a traveller came by.  But
the traveller had been indiscreet enough to stay over night at a summer
hotel, and had no clothes.



The Mountain and the Mouse


A Mountain was in labour, and the people of seven cities had assembled to
watch its movements and hear its groans.  While they waited in breathless
expectancy out came a Mouse.

"Oh, what a baby!" they cried in derision.

"I may be a baby," said the Mouse, gravely, as he passed outward through
the forest of shins, "but I know tolerably well how to diagnose a
volcano."



The Bellamy and the Members


The Members of a body of Socialists rose in insurrection against their
Bellamy.

"Why," said they, "should we be all the time tucking you out with food
when you do nothing to tuck us out?"

So, resolving to take no further action, they went away, and looking
backward had the satisfaction to see the Bellamy compelled to sell his
own book.




OLD SAWS WITH NEW TEETH
CERTAIN ANCIENT FABLES APPLIED TO
THE LIFE OF OUR TIMES


The Wolf and the Crane


A Rich Man wanted to tell a certain lie, but the lie was of such
monstrous size that it stuck in his throat; so he employed an Editor to
write it out and publish it in his paper as an editorial.  But when the
Editor presented his bill, the Rich Man said:

"Be content--is it nothing that I refrained from advising you about
investments?"



The Lion and the Mouse


A Judge was awakened by the noise of a lawyer prosecuting a Thief.  Rising
in wrath he was about to sentence the Thief to life imprisonment when the
latter said:

"I beg that you will set me free, and I will some day requite your
kindness."

Pleased and flattered to be bribed, although by nothing but an empty
promise, the Judge let him go.  Soon afterward he found that it was more
than an empty promise, for, having become a Thief, he was himself set
free by the other, who had become a Judge.



The Hares and the Frogs


The Members of a Legislature, being told that they were the meanest
thieves in the world, resolved to commit suicide.  So they bought
shrouds, and laying them in a convenient place prepared to cut their
throats.  While they were grinding their razors some Tramps passing that
way stole the shrouds.

"Let us live, my friends," said one of the Legislators to the others;
"the world is better than we thought.  It contains meaner thieves than
we."



The Belly and the Members


Some Workingmen employed in a shoe factory went on a strike, saying: "Why
should we continue to work to feed and clothe our employer when we have
none too much to eat and wear ourselves?"

The Manufacturer, seeing that he could get no labour for a long time and
finding the times pretty hard anyhow, burned down his shoe factory for
the insurance, and when the strikers wanted to resume work there was no
work to resume.  So they boycotted a tanner.



The Piping Fisherman


An Editor who was always vaunting the purity, enterprise, and
fearlessness of his paper was pained to observe that he got no
subscribers.  One day it occurred to him to stop saying that his paper
was pure and enterprising and fearless, and make it so.  "If these are
not good qualities," he reasoned, "it is folly to claim them."

Under the new policy he got so many subscribers that his rivals
endeavoured to discover the secret of his prosperity, but he kept it, and
when he died it died with him.



The Ants and the Grasshopper


Some Members of a Legislature were making schedules of their wealth at
the end of the session, when an Honest Miner came along and asked them to
divide with him.  The members of the Legislature inquired:

"Why did you not acquire property of your own?"

"Because," replied the Honest Miner, "I was so busy digging out gold that
I had no leisure to lay up something worth while."

Then the Members of the Legislature derided him, saying:

"If you waste your time in profitless amusement, you cannot, of course,
expect to share the rewards of industry."



The Dog and His Reflection


A State Official carrying off the Dome of the Capitol met the Ghost of
his predecessor, who had come out of his political grave to warn him that
God saw him.  As the place of meeting was lonely and the time midnight,
the State Official set down the Dome of the Capitol, and commanded the
supposed traveller to throw up his hands.  The Ghost replied that he had
not eaten them, and while he was explaining the situation another State
Official silently added the dome to his own collection.



The Lion, the Bear, and the Fox


Two Thieves having stolen a Piano and being unable to divide it fairly
without a remainder went to law about it and continued the contest as
long as either one could steal a dollar to bribe the judge.  When they
could give no more an Honest Man came along and by a single small payment
obtained a judgment and took the Piano home, where his daughter used it
to develop her biceps muscles, becoming a famous pugiliste.



The Ass and the Lion's Skin


A Member of the State Militia stood at a street corner, scowling
stormily, and the people passing that way went a long way around him,
thinking of the horrors of war.  But presently, in order to terrify them
still more, he strode toward them, when, his sword entangling his legs,
he fell upon the field of glory, and the people passed over him singing
their sweetest songs.



The Ass and the Grasshoppers


A Statesman heard some Labourers singing at their work, and wishing to be
happy too, asked them what made them so.

"Honesty," replied the Labourers.

So the Statesman resolved that he too would be honest, and the result was
that he died of want.



The Wolf and the Lion


An Indian who had been driven out of a fertile valley by a White Settler,
said:

"Now that you have robbed me of my land, there is nothing for me to do
but issue invitations to a war-dance."

"I don't so much mind your dancing," said the White Settler, putting a
fresh cartridge into his rifle, "but if you attempt to make me dance you
will become a good Indian lamented by all who didn't know you.  How did
_you_ get this land, anyhow?"

The Indian's claim was compromised for a plug hat and a tin horn.



The Hare and the Tortoise


Of two Writers one was brilliant but indolent; the other though dull,
industrious.  They set out for the goal of fame with equal opportunities.
Before they died the brilliant one was detected in seventy languages as
the author of but two or three books of fiction and poetry, while the
other was honoured in the Bureau of Statistics of his native land as the
compiler of sixteen volumes of tabulated information relating to the
domestic hog.



The Milkmaid and Her Bucket


A Senator fell to musing as follows: "With the money which I shall get
for my vote in favour of the bill to subsidise cat-ranches, I can buy a
kit of burglar's tools and open a bank.  The profit of that enterprise
will enable me to obtain a long, low, black schooner, raise a death's-
head flag and engage in commerce on the high seas.  From my gains in that
business I can pay for the Presidency, which at $50,000 a year will give
me in four years--" but it took him so long to make the calculation that
the bill to subsidise cat-ranches passed without his vote, and he was
compelled to return to his constituents an honest man, tormented with a
clean conscience.



King Log and King Stork


The People being dissatisfied with a Democratic Legislature, which stole
no more than they had, elected a Republican one, which not only stole all
they had but exacted a promissory note for the balance due, secured by a
mortgage upon their hope of death.



The Wolf Who Would Be a Lion


A Foolish Fellow who had been told that he was a great man believed it,
and got himself appointed a Commissioner to the Interasylum Exposition of
Preserved Idiots.  At the first meeting of the Board he was mistaken for
one of the exhibits, and the janitor was ordered to remove him to his
appropriate glass case.

"Alas!" he exclaimed as he was carried out, "why was I not content to
remain where the cut of my forehead is so common as to be known as the
Pacific Slope?"



The Monkey and the Nuts


A Certain City desiring to purchase a site for a public Deformatory
procured an appropriation from the Government of the country.  Deeming
this insufficient for purchase of the site and payment of reasonable
commissions to themselves, the men in charge of the matter asked for a
larger sum, which was readily given.  Believing that the fountain could
not be dipped dry, they applied for still more and more yet.  Wearied at
last by their importunities, the Government said it would be damned if it
gave anything.  So it gave nothing and was damned all the harder.



The Boys and the Frogs


Some editors of newspapers were engaged in diffusing general intelligence
and elevating the moral sentiment of the public.  They had been doing
this for some time, when an Eminent Statesman stuck his head out of the
pool of politics, and, speaking for the members of his profession, said:

"My friends, I beg you will desist.  I know you make a great deal of
money by this kind of thing, but consider the damage you inflict upon the
business of others!"





THE WAYS OF GHOSTS




My peculiar relation to the writer of the following narratives is
such that I must ask the reader to overlook the absence of
explanation as to how they came into my possession.  Withal, my
knowledge of him is so meager that I should rather not undertake to
say if he were himself persuaded of the truth of what he relates;
certainly such inquiries as I have thought it worth while to set
about have not in every instance tended to confirmation of the
statements made.  Yet his style, for the most part devoid alike of
artifice and art, almost baldly simple and direct, seems hardly
compatible with the disingenuousness of a merely literary intention;
one would call it the manner of one more concerned for the fruits of
research than for the flowers of expression.  In transcribing his
notes and fortifying their claim to attention by giving them
something of an orderly arrangement, I have conscientiously
refrained from embellishing them with such small ornaments of
diction as I may have felt myself able to bestow, which would not
only have been impertinent, even if pleasing, but would have given
me a somewhat closer relation to the work than I should care to have
and to avow.--A. B.



PRESENT AT A HANGING



An old man named Daniel Baker, living near Lebanon, Iowa, was
suspected by his neighbors of having murdered a peddler who had
obtained permission to pass the night at his house.  This was in
1853, when peddling was more common in the Western country than it
is now, and was attended with considerable danger.  The peddler with
his pack traversed the country by all manner of lonely roads, and
was compelled to rely upon the country people for hospitality.  This
brought him into relation with queer characters, some of whom were
not altogether scrupulous in their methods of making a living,
murder being an acceptable means to that end.  It occasionally
occurred that a peddler with diminished pack and swollen purse would
be traced to the lonely dwelling of some rough character and never
could be traced beyond.  This was so in the case of "old man Baker,"
as he was always called.  (Such names are given in the western
"settlements" only to elderly persons who are not esteemed; to the
general disrepute of social unworth is affixed the special reproach
of age.)  A peddler came to his house and none went away--that is
all that anybody knew.

Seven years later the Rev. Mr. Cummings, a Baptist minister well
known in that part of the country, was driving by Baker's farm one
night.  It was not very dark:  there was a bit of moon somewhere
above the light veil of mist that lay along the earth.  Mr.
Cummings, who was at all times a cheerful person, was whistling a
tune, which he would occasionally interrupt to speak a word of
friendly encouragement to his horse.  As he came to a little bridge
across a dry ravine he saw the figure of a man standing upon it,
clearly outlined against the gray background of a misty forest.  The
man had something strapped on his back and carried a heavy stick--
obviously an itinerant peddler.  His attitude had in it a suggestion
of abstraction, like that of a sleepwalker.  Mr. Cummings reined in
his horse when he arrived in front of him, gave him a pleasant
salutation and invited him to a seat in the vehicle--"if you are
going my way," he added.  The man raised his head, looked him full
in the face, but neither answered nor made any further movement.
The minister, with good-natured persistence, repeated his
invitation.  At this the man threw his right hand forward from his
side and pointed downward as he stood on the extreme edge of the
bridge.  Mr. Cummings looked past him, over into the ravine, saw
nothing unusual and withdrew his eyes to address the man again.  He
had disappeared.  The horse, which all this time had been uncommonly
restless, gave at the same moment a snort of terror and started to
run away.  Before he had regained control of the animal the minister
was at the crest of the hill a hundred yards along.  He looked back
and saw the figure again, at the same place and in the same attitude
as when he had first observed it.  Then for the first time he was
conscious of a sense of the supernatural and drove home as rapidly
as his willing horse would go.

On arriving at home he related his adventure to his family, and
early the next morning, accompanied by two neighbors, John White
Corwell and Abner Raiser, returned to the spot.  They found the body
of old man Baker hanging by the neck from one of the beams of the
bridge, immediately beneath the spot where the apparition had stood.
A thick coating of dust, slightly dampened by the mist, covered the
floor of the bridge, but the only footprints were those of Mr.
Cummings' horse.

In taking down the body the men disturbed the loose, friable earth
of the slope below it, disclosing human bones already nearly
uncovered by the action of water and frost.  They were identified as
those of the lost peddler.  At the double inquest the coroner's jury
found that Daniel Baker died by his own hand while suffering from
temporary insanity, and that Samuel Morritz was murdered by some
person or persons to the jury unknown.



A COLD GREETING



This is a story told by the late Benson Foley of San Francisco:

"In the summer of 1881 I met a man named James H. Conway, a resident
of Franklin, Tennessee.  He was visiting San Francisco for his
health, deluded man, and brought me a note of introduction from Mr.
Lawrence Barting.  I had known Barting as a captain in the Federal
army during the civil war.  At its close he had settled in Franklin,
and in time became, I had reason to think, somewhat prominent as a
lawyer.  Barting had always seemed to me an honorable and truthful
man, and the warm friendship which he expressed in his note for Mr.
Conway was to me sufficient evidence that the latter was in every
way worthy of my confidence and esteem.  At dinner one day Conway
told me that it had been solemnly agreed between him and Barting
that the one who died first should, if possible, communicate with
the other from beyond the grave, in some unmistakable way--just how,
they had left (wisely, it seemed to me) to be decided by the
deceased, according to the opportunities that his altered
circumstances might present.

"A few weeks after the conversation in which Mr. Conway spoke of
this agreement, I met him one day, walking slowly down Montgomery
street, apparently, from his abstracted air, in deep thought.  He
greeted me coldly with merely a movement of the head and passed on,
leaving me standing on the walk, with half-proffered hand, surprised
and naturally somewhat piqued.  The next day I met him again in the
office of the Palace Hotel, and seeing him about to repeat the
disagreeable performance of the day before, intercepted him in a
doorway, with a friendly salutation, and bluntly requested an
explanation of his altered manner.  He hesitated a moment; then,
looking me frankly in the eyes, said:

"'I do not think, Mr. Foley, that I have any longer a claim to your
friendship, since Mr. Barting appears to have withdrawn his own from
me--for what reason, I protest I do not know.  If he has not already
informed you he probably will do so.'

"'But,' I replied, 'I have not heard from Mr. Barting.'

"'Heard from him!' he repeated, with apparent surprise.  'Why, he is
here.  I met him yesterday ten minutes before meeting you.  I gave
you exactly the same greeting that he gave me.  I met him again not
a quarter of an hour ago, and his manner was precisely the same:  he
merely bowed and passed on.  I shall not soon forget your civility
to me.  Good morning, or--as it may please you--farewell.'

"All this seemed to me singularly considerate and delicate behavior
on the part of Mr. Conway.

"As dramatic situations and literary effects are foreign to my
purpose I will explain at once that Mr. Barting was dead.  He had
died in Nashville four days before this conversation.  Calling on
Mr. Conway, I apprised him of our friend's death, showing him the
letters announcing it.  He was visibly affected in a way that
forbade me to entertain a doubt of his sincerity.

"'It seems incredible,' he said, after a period of reflection.  'I
suppose I must have mistaken another man for Barting, and that man's
cold greeting was merely a stranger's civil acknowledgment of my
own.  I remember, indeed, that he lacked Barting's mustache.'

"'Doubtless it was another man,' I assented; and the subject was
never afterward mentioned between us.  But I had in my pocket a
photograph of Barting, which had been inclosed in the letter from
his widow.  It had been taken a week before his death, and was
without a mustache."



A WIRELESS MESSAGE



In the summer of 1896 Mr. William Holt, a wealthy manufacturer of
Chicago, was living temporarily in a little town of central New
York, the name of which the writer's memory has not retained.  Mr.
Holt had had "trouble with his wife," from whom he had parted a year
before.  Whether the trouble was anything more serious than
"incompatibility of temper," he is probably the only living person
that knows:  he is not addicted to the vice of confidences.  Yet he
has related the incident herein set down to at least one person
without exacting a pledge of secrecy.  He is now living in Europe.

One evening he had left the house of a brother whom he was visiting,
for a stroll in the country.  It may be assumed--whatever the value
of the assumption in connection with what is said to have occurred--
that his mind was occupied with reflections on his domestic
infelicities and the distressing changes that they had wrought in
his life.

Whatever may have been his thoughts, they so possessed him that he
observed neither the lapse of time nor whither his feet were
carrying him; he knew only that he had passed far beyond the town
limits and was traversing a lonely region by a road that bore no
resemblance to the one by which he had left the village.  In brief,
he was "lost."

Realizing his mischance, he smiled; central New York is not a region
of perils, nor does one long remain lost in it.  He turned about and
went back the way that he had come.  Before he had gone far he
observed that the landscape was growing more distinct--was
brightening.  Everything was suffused with a soft, red glow in which
he saw his shadow projected in the road before him.  "The moon is
rising," he said to himself.  Then he remembered that it was about
the time of the new moon, and if that tricksy orb was in one of its
stages of visibility it had set long before.  He stopped and faced
about, seeking the source of the rapidly broadening light.  As he
did so, his shadow turned and lay along the road in front of him as
before.  The light still came from behind him.  That was surprising;
he could not understand.  Again he turned, and again, facing
successively to every point of the horizon.  Always the shadow was
before--always the light behind, "a still and awful red."

Holt was astonished--"dumfounded" is the word that he used in
telling it--yet seems to have retained a certain intelligent
curiosity.  To test the intensity of the light whose nature and
cause he could not determine, he took out his watch to see if he
could make out the figures on the dial.  They were plainly visible,
and the hands indicated the hour of eleven o'clock and twenty-five
minutes.  At that moment the mysterious illumination suddenly flared
to an intense, an almost blinding splendor, flushing the entire sky,
extinguishing the stars and throwing the monstrous shadow of himself
athwart the landscape.  In that unearthly illumination he saw near
him, but apparently in the air at a considerable elevation, the
figure of his wife, clad in her night-clothing and holding to her
breast the figure of his child.  Her eyes were fixed upon his with
an expression which he afterward professed himself unable to name or
describe, further than that it was "not of this life."

The flare was momentary, followed by black darkness, in which,
however, the apparition still showed white and motionless; then by
insensible degrees it faded and vanished, like a bright image on the
retina after the closing of the eyes.  A peculiarity of the
apparition, hardly noted at the time, but afterward recalled, was
that it showed only the upper half of the woman's figure:  nothing
was seen below the waist.

The sudden darkness was comparative, not absolute, for gradually all
objects of his environment became again visible.

In the dawn of the morning Holt found himself entering the village
at a point opposite to that at which he had left it.  He soon
arrived at the house of his brother, who hardly knew him.  He was
wild-eyed, haggard, and gray as a rat.  Almost incoherently, he
related his night's experience.

"Go to bed, my poor fellow," said his brother, "and--wait.  We shall
hear more of this."

An hour later came the predestined telegram.  Holt's dwelling in one
of the suburbs of Chicago had been destroyed by fire.  Her escape
cut off by the flames, his wife had appeared at an upper window, her
child in her arms.  There she had stood, motionless, apparently
dazed.  Just as the firemen had arrived with a ladder, the floor had
given way, and she was seen no more.

The moment of this culminating horror was eleven o'clock and twenty-
five minutes, standard time.



AN ARREST



Having murdered his brother-in-law, Orrin Brower of Kentucky was a
fugitive from justice.  From the county jail where he had been
confined to await his trial he had escaped by knocking down his
jailer with an iron bar, robbing him of his keys and, opening the
outer door, walking out into the night.  The jailer being unarmed,
Brower got no weapon with which to defend his recovered liberty.  As
soon as he was out of the town he had the folly to enter a forest;
this was many years ago, when that region was wilder than it is now.

The night was pretty dark, with neither moon nor stars visible, and
as Brower had never dwelt thereabout, and knew nothing of the lay of
the land, he was, naturally, not long in losing himself.  He could
not have said if he were getting farther away from the town or going
back to it--a most important matter to Orrin Brower.  He knew that
in either case a posse of citizens with a pack of bloodhounds would
soon be on his track and his chance of escape was very slender; but
he did not wish to assist in his own pursuit.  Even an added hour of
freedom was worth having.

Suddenly he emerged from the forest into an old road, and there
before him saw, indistinctly, the figure of a man, motionless in the
gloom.  It was too late to retreat:  the fugitive felt that at the
first movement back toward the wood he would be, as he afterward
explained, "filled with buckshot."  So the two stood there like
trees, Brower nearly suffocated by the activity of his own heart;
the other--the emotions of the other are not recorded.

A moment later--it may have been an hour--the moon sailed into a
patch of unclouded sky and the hunted man saw that visible
embodiment of Law lift an arm and point significantly toward and
beyond him.  He understood.  Turning his back to his captor, he
walked submissively away in the direction indicated, looking to
neither the right nor the left; hardly daring to breathe, his head
and back actually aching with a prophecy of buckshot.

Brower was as courageous a criminal as ever lived to be hanged; that
was shown by the conditions of awful personal peril in which he had
coolly killed his brother-in-law.  It is needless to relate them
here; they came out at his trial, and the revelation of his calmness
in confronting them came near to saving his neck.  But what would
you have?--when a brave man is beaten, he submits.

So they pursued their journey jailward along the old road through
the woods.  Only once did Brower venture a turn of the head:  just
once, when he was in deep shadow and he knew that the other was in
moonlight, he looked backward.  His captor was Burton Duff, the
jailer, as white as death and bearing upon his brow the livid mark
of the iron bar.  Orrin Brower had no further curiosity.

Eventually they entered the town, which was all alight, but
deserted; only the women and children remained, and they were off
the streets.  Straight toward the jail the criminal held his way.
Straight up to the main entrance he walked, laid his hand upon the
knob of the heavy iron door, pushed it open without command, entered
and found himself in the presence of a half-dozen armed men.  Then
he turned.  Nobody else entered.

On a table in the corridor lay the dead body of Burton Duff.




SOLDIER-FOLK




A MAN WITH TWO LIVES



Here is the queer story of David William Duck, related by himself.
Duck is an old man living in Aurora, Illinois, where he is
universally respected.  He is commonly known, however, as "Dead
Duck."

"In the autumn of 1866 I was a private soldier of the Eighteenth
Infantry.  My company was one of those stationed at Fort Phil
Kearney, commanded by Colonel Carrington.  The country is more or
less familiar with the history of that garrison, particularly with
the slaughter by the Sioux of a detachment of eighty-one men and
officers--not one escaping--through disobedience of orders by its
commander, the brave but reckless Captain Fetterman.  When that
occurred, I was trying to make my way with important dispatches to
Fort C. F. Smith, on the Big Horn.  As the country swarmed with
hostile Indians, I traveled by night and concealed myself as best I
could before daybreak.  The better to do so, I went afoot, armed
with a Henry rifle and carrying three days' rations in my haversack.

"For my second place of concealment I chose what seemed in the
darkness a narrow canon leading through a range of rocky hills.  It
contained many large bowlders, detached from the slopes of the
hills.  Behind one of these, in a clump of sage-brush, I made my bed
for the day, and soon fell asleep.  It seemed as if I had hardly
closed my eyes, though in fact it was near midday, when I was
awakened by the report of a rifle, the bullet striking the bowlder
just above my body.  A band of Indians had trailed me and had me
nearly surrounded; the shot had been fired with an execrable aim by
a fellow who had caught sight of me from the hillside above.  The
smoke of his rifle betrayed him, and I was no sooner on my feet than
he was off his and rolling down the declivity.  Then I ran in a
stooping posture, dodging among the clumps of sage-brush in a storm
of bullets from invisible enemies.  The rascals did not rise and
pursue, which I thought rather queer, for they must have known by my
trail that they had to deal with only one man.  The reason for their
inaction was soon made clear.  I had not gone a hundred yards before
I reached the limit of my run--the head of the gulch which I had
mistaken for a canon.  It terminated in a concave breast of rock,
nearly vertical and destitute of vegetation.  In that cul-de-sac I
was caught like a bear in a pen.  Pursuit was needless; they had
only to wait.

"They waited.  For two days and nights, crouching behind a rock
topped with a growth of mesquite, and with the cliff at my back,
suffering agonies of thirst and absolutely hopeless of deliverance,
I fought the fellows at long range, firing occasionally at the smoke
of their rifles, as they did at that of mine.  Of course, I did not
dare to close my eyes at night, and lack of sleep was a keen
torture.

"I remember the morning of the third day, which I knew was to be my
last.  I remember, rather indistinctly, that in my desperation and
delirium I sprang out into the open and began firing my repeating
rifle without seeing anybody to fire at.  And I remember no more of
that fight.

"The next thing that I recollect was my pulling myself out of a
river just at nightfall.  I had not a rag of clothing and knew
nothing of my whereabouts, but all that night I traveled, cold and
footsore, toward the north.  At daybreak I found myself at Fort C.
F. Smith, my destination, but without my dispatches.  The first man
that I met was a sergeant named William Briscoe, whom I knew very
well.  You can fancy his astonishment at seeing me in that
condition, and my own at his asking who the devil I was.

"'Dave Duck,' I answered; 'who should I be?'

"He stared like an owl.

"'You do look it,' he said, and I observed that he drew a little
away from me.  'What's up?' he added.

"I told him what had happened to me the day before.  He heard me
through, still staring; then he said:

"'My dear fellow, if you are Dave Duck I ought to inform you that I
buried you two months ago.  I was out with a small scouting party
and found your body, full of bullet-holes and newly scalped--
somewhat mutilated otherwise, too, I am sorry to say--right where
you say you made your fight.  Come to my tent and I'll show you your
clothing and some letters that I took from your person; the
commandant has your dispatches.'

"He performed that promise.  He showed me the clothing, which I
resolutely put on; the letters, which I put into my pocket.  He made
no objection, then took me to the commandant, who heard my story and
coldly ordered Briscoe to take me to the guardhouse.  On the way I
said:

"'Bill Briscoe, did you really and truly bury the dead body that you
found in these togs?'

"'Sure,' he answered--'just as I told you.  It was Dave Duck, all
right; most of us knew him.  And now, you damned impostor, you'd
better tell me who you are.'

"'I'd give something to know,' I said.

"A week later, I escaped from the guardhouse and got out of the
country as fast as I could.  Twice I have been back, seeking for
that fateful spot in the hills, but unable to find it."



THREE AND ONE ARE ONE



In the year 1861 Barr Lassiter, a young man of twenty-two, lived
with his parents and an elder sister near Carthage, Tennessee.  The
family were in somewhat humble circumstances, subsisting by
cultivation of a small and not very fertile plantation.  Owning no
slaves, they were not rated among "the best people" of their
neighborhood; but they were honest persons of good education, fairly
well mannered and as respectable as any family could be if
uncredentialed by personal dominion over the sons and daughters of
Ham.  The elder Lassiter had that severity of manner that so
frequently affirms an uncompromising devotion to duty, and conceals
a warm and affectionate disposition.  He was of the iron of which
martyrs are made, but in the heart of the matrix had lurked a nobler
metal, fusible at a milder heat, yet never coloring nor softening
the hard exterior.  By both heredity and environment something of
the man's inflexible character had touched the other members of the
family; the Lassiter home, though not devoid of domestic affection,
was a veritable citadel of duty, and duty--ah, duty is as cruel as
death!

When the war came on it found in the family, as in so many others in
that State, a divided sentiment; the young man was loyal to the
Union, the others savagely hostile.  This unhappy division begot an
insupportable domestic bitterness, and when the offending son and
brother left home with the avowed purpose of joining the Federal
army not a hand was laid in his, not a word of farewell was spoken,
not a good wish followed him out into the world whither he went to
meet with such spirit as he might whatever fate awaited him.

Making his way to Nashville, already occupied by the Army of General
Buell, he enlisted in the first organization that he found, a
Kentucky regiment of cavalry, and in due time passed through all the
stages of military evolution from raw recruit to experienced
trooper.  A right good trooper he was, too, although in his oral
narrative from which this tale is made there was no mention of that;
the fact was learned from his surviving comrades.  For Barr Lassiter
has answered "Here" to the sergeant whose name is Death.

Two years after he had joined it his regiment passed through the
region whence he had come.  The country thereabout had suffered
severely from the ravages of war, having been occupied alternately
(and simultaneously) by the belligerent forces, and a sanguinary
struggle had occurred in the immediate vicinity of the Lassiter
homestead.  But of this the young trooper was not aware.

Finding himself in camp near his home, he felt a natural longing to
see his parents and sister, hoping that in them, as in him, the
unnatural animosities of the period had been softened by time and
separation.  Obtaining a leave of absence, he set foot in the late
summer afternoon, and soon after the rising of the full moon was
walking up the gravel path leading to the dwelling in which he had
been born.

Soldiers in war age rapidly, and in youth two years are a long time.
Barr Lassiter felt himself an old man, and had almost expected to
find the place a ruin and a desolation.  Nothing, apparently, was
changed.  At the sight of each dear and familiar object he was
profoundly affected.  His heart beat audibly, his emotion nearly
suffocated him; an ache was in his throat.  Unconsciously he
quickened his pace until he almost ran, his long shadow making
grotesque efforts to keep its place beside him.

The house was unlighted, the door open.  As he approached and paused
to recover control of himself his father came out and stood bare-
headed in the moonlight.

"Father!" cried the young man, springing forward with outstretched
hand--"Father!"

The elder man looked him sternly in the face, stood a moment
motionless and without a word withdrew into the house.  Bitterly
disappointed, humiliated, inexpressibly hurt and altogether
unnerved, the soldier dropped upon a rustic seat in deep dejection,
supporting his head upon his trembling hand.  But he would not have
it so:  he was too good a soldier to accept repulse as defeat.  He
rose and entered the house, passing directly to the "sitting-room."

It was dimly lighted by an uncurtained east window.  On a low stool
by the hearthside, the only article of furniture in the place, sat
his mother, staring into a fireplace strewn with blackened embers
and cold ashes.  He spoke to her--tenderly, interrogatively, and
with hesitation, but she neither answered, nor moved, nor seemed in
any way surprised.  True, there had been time for her husband to
apprise her of their guilty son's return.  He moved nearer and was
about to lay his hand upon her arm, when his sister entered from an
adjoining room, looked him full in the face, passed him without a
sign of recognition and left the room by a door that was partly
behind him.  He had turned his head to watch her, but when she was
gone his eyes again sought his mother.  She too had left the place.

Barr Lassiter strode to the door by which he had entered.  The
moonlight on the lawn was tremulous, as if the sward were a rippling
sea.  The trees and their black shadows shook as in a breeze.
Blended with its borders, the gravel walk seemed unsteady and
insecure to step on.  This young soldier knew the optical illusions
produced by tears.  He felt them on his cheek, and saw them sparkle
on the breast of his trooper's jacket.  He left the house and made
his way back to camp.

The next day, with no very definite intention, with no dominant
feeling that he could rightly have named, he again sought the spot.
Within a half-mile of it he met Bushrod Albro, a former playfellow
and schoolmate, who greeted him warmly.

"I am going to visit my home," said the soldier.

The other looked at him rather sharply, but said nothing.

"I know," continued Lassiter, "that my folks have not changed, but--
"

"There have been changes," Albro interrupted--"everything changes.
I'll go with you if you don't mind.  We can talk as we go."

But Albro did not talk.

Instead of a house they found only fire-blackened foundations of
stone, enclosing an area of compact ashes pitted by rains.

Lassiter's astonishment was extreme.

"I could not find the right way to tell you," said Albro.  "In the
fight a year ago your house was burned by a Federal shell."

"And my family--where are they?"

"In Heaven, I hope.  All were killed by the shell."



A BAFFLED AMBUSCADE



Connecting Readyville and Woodbury was a good, hard turnpike nine or
ten miles long.  Readyville was an outpost of the Federal army at
Murfreesboro; Woodbury had the same relation to the Confederate army
at Tullahoma.  For months after the big battle at Stone River these
outposts were in constant quarrel, most of the trouble occurring,
naturally, on the turnpike mentioned, between detachments of
cavalry.  Sometimes the infantry and artillery took a hand in the
game by way of showing their good-will.

One night a squadron of Federal horse commanded by Major Seidel, a
gallant and skillful officer, moved out from Readyville on an
uncommonly hazardous enterprise requiring secrecy, caution and
silence.

Passing the infantry pickets, the detachment soon afterward
approached two cavalry videttes staring hard into the darkness
ahead.  There should have been three.

"Where is your other man?" said the major.  "I ordered Dunning to be
here to-night."

"He rode forward, sir," the man replied.  "There was a little firing
afterward, but it was a long way to the front."

"It was against orders and against sense for Dunning to do that,"
said the officer, obviously vexed.  "Why did he ride forward?"

"Don't know, sir; he seemed mighty restless.  Guess he was skeered."

When this remarkable reasoner and his companion had been absorbed
into the expeditionary force, it resumed its advance.  Conversation
was forbidden; arms and accouterments were denied the right to
rattle.  The horses' tramping was all that could be heard and the
movement was slow in order to have as little as possible of that.
It was after midnight and pretty dark, although there was a bit of
moon somewhere behind the masses of cloud.

Two or three miles along, the head of the column approached a dense
forest of cedars bordering the road on both sides.  The major
commanded a halt by merely halting, and, evidently himself a bit
"skeered," rode on alone to reconnoiter.  He was followed, however,
by his adjutant and three troopers, who remained a little distance
behind and, unseen by him, saw all that occurred.

After riding about a hundred yards toward the forest, the major
suddenly and sharply reined in his horse and sat motionless in the
saddle.  Near the side of the road, in a little open space and
hardly ten paces away, stood the figure of a man, dimly visible and
as motionless as he.  The major's first feeling was that of
satisfaction in having left his cavalcade behind; if this were an
enemy and should escape he would have little to report.  The
expedition was as yet undetected.

Some dark object was dimly discernible at the man's feet; the
officer could not make it out.  With the instinct of the true
cavalryman and a particular indisposition to the discharge of
firearms, he drew his saber.  The man on foot made no movement in
answer to the challenge.  The situation was tense and a bit
dramatic.  Suddenly the moon burst through a rift in the clouds and,
himself in the shadow of a group of great oaks, the horseman saw the
footman clearly, in a patch of white light.  It was Trooper Dunning,
unarmed and bareheaded.  The object at his feet resolved itself into
a dead horse, and at a right angle across the animal's neck lay a
dead man, face upward in the moonlight.

"Dunning has had the fight of his life," thought the major, and was
about to ride forward.  Dunning raised his hand, motioning him back
with a gesture of warning; then, lowering the arm, he pointed to the
place where the road lost itself in the blackness of the cedar
forest.

The major understood, and turning his horse rode back to the little
group that had followed him and was already moving to the rear in
fear of his displeasure, and so returned to the head of his command.

"Dunning is just ahead there," he said to the captain of his leading
company.  "He has killed his man and will have something to report."

Right patiently they waited, sabers drawn, but Dunning did not come.
In an hour the day broke and the whole force moved cautiously
forward, its commander not altogether satisfied with his faith in
Private Dunning.  The expedition had failed, but something remained
to be done.

In the little open space off the road they found the fallen horse.
At a right angle across the animal's neck face upward, a bullet in
the brain, lay the body of Trooper Dunning, stiff as a statue, hours
dead.

Examination disclosed abundant evidence that within a half-hour the
cedar forest had been occupied by a strong force of Confederate
infantry--an ambuscade.



TWO MILITARY EXECUTIONS



In the spring of the year 1862 General Buell's big army lay in camp,
licking itself into shape for the campaign which resulted in the
victory at Shiloh.  It was a raw, untrained army, although some of
its fractions had seen hard enough service, with a good deal of
fighting, in the mountains of Western Virginia, and in Kentucky.
The war was young and soldiering a new industry, imperfectly
understood by the young American of the period, who found some
features of it not altogether to his liking.  Chief among these was
that essential part of discipline, subordination.  To one imbued
from infancy with the fascinating fallacy that all men are born
equal, unquestioning submission to authority is not easily mastered,
and the American volunteer soldier in his "green and salad days" is
among the worst known.  That is how it happened that one of Buell's
men, Private Bennett Story Greene, committed the indiscretion of
striking his officer.  Later in the war he would not have done that;
like Sir Andrew Aguecheek, he would have "seen him damned" first.
But time for reformation of his military manners was denied him:  he
was promptly arrested on complaint of the officer, tried by court-
martial and sentenced to be shot.

"You might have thrashed me and let it go at that," said the
condemned man to the complaining witness; "that is what you used to
do at school, when you were plain Will Dudley and I was as good as
you.  Nobody saw me strike you; discipline would not have suffered
much."

"Ben Greene, I guess you are right about that," said the lieutenant.
"Will you forgive me?  That is what I came to see you about."

There was no reply, and an officer putting his head in at the door
of the guard-tent where the conversation had occurred, explained
that the time allowed for the interview had expired.  The next
morning, when in the presence of the whole brigade Private Greene
was shot to death by a squad of his comrades, Lieutenant Dudley
turned his back upon the sorry performance and muttered a prayer for
mercy, in which himself was included.

A few weeks afterward, as Buell's leading division was being ferried
over the Tennessee River to assist in succoring Grant's beaten army,
night was coming on, black and stormy.  Through the wreck of battle
the division moved, inch by inch, in the direction of the enemy, who
had withdrawn a little to reform his lines.  But for the lightning
the darkness was absolute.  Never for a moment did it cease, and
ever when the thunder did not crack and roar were heard the moans of
the wounded among whom the men felt their way with their feet, and
upon whom they stumbled in the gloom.  The dead were there, too--
there were dead a-plenty.

In the first faint gray of the morning, when the swarming advance
had paused to resume something of definition as a line of battle,
and skirmishers had been thrown forward, word was passed along to
call the roll.  The first sergeant of Lieutenant Dudley's company
stepped to the front and began to name the men in alphabetical
order.  He had no written roll, but a good memory.  The men answered
to their names as he ran down the alphabet to G.

"Gorham."

"Here!"

"Grayrock."

"Here!"

The sergeant's good memory was affected by habit:

"Greene."

"Here!"

The response was clear, distinct, unmistakable!

A sudden movement, an agitation of the entire company front, as from
an electric shock, attested the startling character of the incident.
The sergeant paled and paused.  The captain strode quickly to his
side and said sharply:

"Call that name again."

Apparently the Society for Psychical Research is not first in the
field of curiosity concerning the Unknown.

"Bennett Greene."

"Here!"

All faces turned in the direction of the familiar voice; the two men
between whom in the order of stature Greene had commonly stood in
line turned and squarely confronted each other.

"Once more," commanded the inexorable investigator, and once more
came--a trifle tremulously--the name of the dead man:

"Bennett Story Greene."

"Here!"

At that instant a single rifle-shot was heard, away to the front,
beyond the skirmish-line, followed, almost attended, by the savage
hiss of an approaching bullet which passing through the line, struck
audibly, punctuating as with a full stop the captain's exclamation,
"What the devil does it mean?"

Lieutenant Dudley pushed through the ranks from his place in the
rear.

"It means this," he said, throwing open his coat and displaying a
visibly broadening stain of crimson on his breast.  His knees gave
way; he fell awkwardly and lay dead.

A little later the regiment was ordered out of line to relieve the
congested front, and through some misplay in the game of battle was
not again under fire.  Nor did Bennett Greene, expert in military
executions, ever again signify his presence at one.




SOME HAUNTED HOUSES




THE ISLE OF PINES



For many years there lived near the town of Gallipolis, Ohio, an old
man named Herman Deluse.  Very little was known of his history, for
he would neither speak of it himself nor suffer others.  It was a
common belief among his neighbors that he had been a pirate--if upon
any better evidence than his collection of boarding pikes,
cutlasses, and ancient flintlock pistols, no one knew.  He lived
entirely alone in a small house of four rooms, falling rapidly into
decay and never repaired further than was required by the weather.
It stood on a slight elevation in the midst of a large, stony field
overgrown with brambles, and cultivated in patches and only in the
most primitive way.  It was his only visible property, but could
hardly have yielded him a living, simple and few as were his wants.
He seemed always to have ready money, and paid cash for all his
purchases at the village stores roundabout, seldom buying more than
two or three times at the same place until after the lapse of a
considerable time.  He got no commendation, however, for this
equitable distribution of his patronage; people were disposed to
regard it as an ineffectual attempt to conceal his possession of so
much money.  That he had great hoards of ill-gotten gold buried
somewhere about his tumble-down dwelling was not reasonably to be
doubted by any honest soul conversant with the facts of local
tradition and gifted with a sense of the fitness of things.

On the 9th of November, 1867, the old man died; at least his dead
body was discovered on the 10th, and physicians testified that death
had occurred about twenty-four hours previously--precisely how, they
were unable to say; for the post-mortem examination showed every
organ to be absolutely healthy, with no indication of disorder or
violence.  According to them, death must have taken place about
noonday, yet the body was found in bed.  The verdict of the
coroner's jury was that he "came to his death by a visitation of
God."  The body was buried and the public administrator took charge
of the estate.

A rigorous search disclosed nothing more than was already known
about the dead man, and much patient excavation here and there about
the premises by thoughtful and thrifty neighbors went unrewarded.
The administrator locked up the house against the time when the
property, real and personal, should be sold by law with a view to
defraying, partly, the expenses of the sale.

The night of November 20 was boisterous.  A furious gale stormed
across the country, scourging it with desolating drifts of sleet.
Great trees were torn from the earth and hurled across the roads.
So wild a night had never been known in all that region, but toward
morning the storm had blown itself out of breath and day dawned
bright and clear.  At about eight o'clock that morning the Rev.
Henry Galbraith, a well-known and highly esteemed Lutheran minister,
arrived on foot at his house, a mile and a half from the Deluse
place.  Mr. Galbraith had been for a month in Cincinnati.  He had
come up the river in a steamboat, and landing at Gallipolis the
previous evening had immediately obtained a horse and buggy and set
out for home.  The violence of the storm had delayed him over night,
and in the morning the fallen trees had compelled him to abandon his
conveyance and continue his journey afoot.

"But where did you pass the night?" inquired his wife, after he had
briefly related his adventure.

"With old Deluse at the 'Isle of Pines,'" {1} was the laughing
reply; "and a glum enough time I had of it.  He made no objection to
my remaining, but not a word could I get out of him."

Fortunately for the interests of truth there was present at this
conversation Mr. Robert Mosely Maren, a lawyer and litterateur of
Columbus, the same who wrote the delightful "Mellowcraft Papers."
Noting, but apparently not sharing, the astonishment caused by Mr.
Galbraith's answer this ready-witted person checked by a gesture the
exclamations that would naturally have followed, and tranquilly
inquired:  "How came you to go in there?"

This is Mr. Maren's version of Mr. Galbraith's reply:

"I saw a light moving about the house, and being nearly blinded by
the sleet, and half frozen besides, drove in at the gate and put up
my horse in the old rail stable, where it is now.  I then rapped at
the door, and getting no invitation went in without one.  The room
was dark, but having matches I found a candle and lit it.  I tried
to enter the adjoining room, but the door was fast, and although I
heard the old man's heavy footsteps in there he made no response to
my calls.  There was no fire on the hearth, so I made one and laying
[sic] down before it with my overcoat under my head, prepared myself
for sleep.  Pretty soon the door that I had tried silently opened
and the old man came in, carrying a candle.  I spoke to him
pleasantly, apologizing for my intrusion, but he took no notice of
me.  He seemed to be searching for something, though his eyes were
unmoved in their sockets.  I wonder if he ever walks in his sleep.
He took a circuit a part of the way round the room, and went out the
same way he had come in.  Twice more before I slept he came back
into the room, acting precisely the same way, and departing as at
first.  In the intervals I heard him tramping all over the house,
his footsteps distinctly audible in the pauses of the storm.  When I
woke in the morning he had already gone out."

Mr. Maren attempted some further questioning, but was unable longer
to restrain the family's tongues; the story of Deluse's death and
burial came out, greatly to the good minister's astonishment.

"The explanation of your adventure is very simple," said Mr. Maren.
"I don't believe old Deluse walks in his sleep--not in his present
one; but you evidently dream in yours."

And to this view of the matter Mr. Galbraith was compelled
reluctantly to assent.

Nevertheless, a late hour of the next night found these two
gentlemen, accompanied by a son of the minister, in the road in
front of the old Deluse house.  There was a light inside; it
appeared now at one window and now at another.  The three men
advanced to the door.  Just as they reached it there came from the
interior a confusion of the most appalling sounds--the clash of
weapons, steel against steel, sharp explosions as of firearms,
shrieks of women, groans and the curses of men in combat!  The
investigators stood a moment, irresolute, frightened.  Then Mr.
Galbraith tried the door.  It was fast.  But the minister was a man
of courage, a man, moreover, of Herculean strength.  He retired a
pace or two and rushed against the door, striking it with his right
shoulder and bursting it from the frame with a loud crash.  In a
moment the three were inside.  Darkness and silence!  The only sound
was the beating of their hearts.

Mr. Maren had provided himself with matches and a candle.  With some
difficulty, begotten of his excitement, he made a light, and they
proceeded to explore the place, passing from room to room.
Everything was in orderly arrangement, as it had been left by the
sheriff; nothing had been disturbed.  A light coating of dust was
everywhere.  A back door was partly open, as if by neglect, and
their first thought was that the authors of the awful revelry might
have escaped.  The door was opened, and the light of the candle
shone through upon the ground.  The expiring effort of the previous
night's storm had been a light fall of snow; there were no
footprints; the white surface was unbroken.  They closed the door
and entered the last room of the four that the house contained--that
farthest from the road, in an angle of the building.  Here the
candle in Mr. Maren's hand was suddenly extinguished as by a draught
of air.  Almost immediately followed the sound of a heavy fall.
When the candle had been hastily relighted young Mr. Galbraith was
seen prostrate on the floor at a little distance from the others.
He was dead.  In one hand the body grasped a heavy sack of coins,
which later examination showed to be all of old Spanish mintage.
Directly over the body as it lay, a board had been torn from its
fastenings in the wall, and from the cavity so disclosed it was
evident that the bag had been taken.

Another inquest was held:  another post-mortem examination failed to
reveal a probable cause of death.  Another verdict of "the
visitation of God" left all at liberty to form their own
conclusions.  Mr. Maren contended that the young man died of
excitement.



A FRUITLESS ASSIGNMENT



Henry Saylor, who was killed in Covington, in a quarrel with Antonio
Finch, was a reporter on the Cincinnati Commercial.  In the year
1859 a vacant dwelling in Vine street, in Cincinnati, became the
center of a local excitement because of the strange sights and
sounds said to be observed in it nightly.  According to the
testimony of many reputable residents of the vicinity these were
inconsistent with any other hypothesis than that the house was
haunted.  Figures with something singularly unfamiliar about them
were seen by crowds on the sidewalk to pass in and out.  No one
could say just where they appeared upon the open lawn on their way
to the front door by which they entered, nor at exactly what point
they vanished as they came out; or, rather, while each spectator was
positive enough about these matters, no two agreed.  They were all
similarly at variance in their descriptions of the figures
themselves.  Some of the bolder of the curious throng ventured on
several evenings to stand upon the doorsteps to intercept them, or
failing in this, get a nearer look at them.  These courageous men,
it was said, were unable to force the door by their united strength,
and always were hurled from the steps by some invisible agency and
severely injured; the door immediately afterward opening, apparently
of its own volition, to admit or free some ghostly guest.  The
dwelling was known as the Roscoe house, a family of that name having
lived there for some years, and then, one by one, disappeared, the
last to leave being an old woman.  Stories of foul play and
successive murders had always been rife, but never were
authenticated.

One day during the prevalence of the excitement Saylor presented
himself at the office of the Commercial for orders.  He received a
note from the city editor which read as follows:  "Go and pass the
night alone in the haunted house in Vine street and if anything
occurs worth while make two columns."  Saylor obeyed his superior;
he could not afford to lose his position on the paper.

Apprising the police of his intention, he effected an entrance
through a rear window before dark, walked through the deserted
rooms, bare of furniture, dusty and desolate, and seating himself at
last in the parlor on an old sofa which he had dragged in from
another room watched the deepening of the gloom as night came on.
Before it was altogether dark the curious crowd had collected in the
street, silent, as a rule, and expectant, with here and there a
scoffer uttering his incredulity and courage with scornful remarks
or ribald cries.  None knew of the anxious watcher inside.  He
feared to make a light; the uncurtained windows would have betrayed
his presence, subjecting him to insult, possibly to injury.
Moreover, he was too conscientious to do anything to enfeeble his
impressions and unwilling to alter any of the customary conditions
under which the manifestations were said to occur.

It was now dark outside, but light from the street faintly
illuminated the part of the room that he was in.  He had set open
every door in the whole interior, above and below, but all the outer
ones were locked and bolted.  Sudden exclamations from the crowd
caused him to spring to the window and look out.  He saw the figure
of a man moving rapidly across the lawn toward the building--saw it
ascend the steps; then a projection of the wall concealed it.  There
was a noise as of the opening and closing of the hall door; he heard
quick, heavy footsteps along the passage--heard them ascend the
stairs--heard them on the uncarpeted floor of the chamber
immediately overhead.

Saylor promptly drew his pistol, and groping his way up the stairs
entered the chamber, dimly lighted from the street.  No one was
there.  He heard footsteps in an adjoining room and entered that.
It was dark and silent.  He struck his foot against some object on
the floor, knelt by it, passed his hand over it.  It was a human
head--that of a woman.  Lifting it by the hair this iron-nerved man
returned to the half-lighted room below, carried it near the window
and attentively examined it.  While so engaged he was half conscious
of the rapid opening and closing of the outer door, of footfalls
sounding all about him.  He raised his eyes from the ghastly object
of his attention and saw himself the center of a crowd of men and
women dimly seen; the room was thronged with them.  He thought the
people had broken in.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, coolly, "you see me under
suspicious circumstances, but"--his voice was drowned in peals of
laughter--such laughter as is heard in asylums for the insane.  The
persons about him pointed at the object in his hand and their
merriment increased as he dropped it and it went rolling among their
feet.  They danced about it with gestures grotesque and attitudes
obscene and indescribable.  They struck it with their feet, urging
it about the room from wall to wall; pushed and overthrew one
another in their struggles to kick it; cursed and screamed and sang
snatches of ribald songs as the battered head bounded about the room
as if in terror and trying to escape.  At last it shot out of the
door into the hall, followed by all, with tumultuous haste.  That
moment the door closed with a sharp concussion.  Saylor was alone,
in dead silence.

Carefully putting away his pistol, which all the time he had held in
his hand, he went to a window and looked out.  The street was
deserted and silent; the lamps were extinguished; the roofs and
chimneys of the houses were sharply outlined against the dawn-light
in the east.  He left the house, the door yielding easily to his
hand, and walked to the Commercial office.  The city editor was
still in his office--asleep.  Saylor waked him and said:  "I have
been at the haunted house."

The editor stared blankly as if not wholly awake.  "Good God!" he
cried, "are you Saylor?"

"Yes--why not?"  The editor made no answer, but continued staring.

"I passed the night there--it seems," said Saylor.

"They say that things were uncommonly quiet out there," the editor
said, trifling with a paper-weight upon which he had dropped his
eyes, "did anything occur?"

"Nothing whatever."



A VINE ON A HOUSE



About three miles from the little town of Norton, in Missouri, on
the road leading to Maysville, stands an old house that was last
occupied by a family named Harding.  Since 1886 no one has lived in
it, nor is anyone likely to live in it again.  Time and the disfavor
of persons dwelling thereabout are converting it into a rather
picturesque ruin.  An observer unacquainted with its history would
hardly put it into the category of "haunted houses," yet in all the
region round such is its evil reputation.  Its windows are without
glass, its doorways without doors; there are wide breaches in the
shingle roof, and for lack of paint the weatherboarding is a dun
gray.  But these unfailing signs of the supernatural are partly
concealed and greatly softened by the abundant foliage of a large
vine overrunning the entire structure.  This vine--of a species
which no botanist has ever been able to name--has an important part
in the story of the house.

The Harding family consisted of Robert Harding, his wife Matilda,
Miss Julia Went, who was her sister, and two young children.  Robert
Harding was a silent, cold-mannered man who made no friends in the
neighborhood and apparently cared to make none.  He was about forty
years old, frugal and industrious, and made a living from the little
farm which is now overgrown with brush and brambles.  He and his
sister-in-law were rather tabooed by their neighbors, who seemed to
think that they were seen too frequently together--not entirely
their fault, for at these times they evidently did not challenge
observation.  The moral code of rural Missouri is stern and
exacting.

Mrs. Harding was a gentle, sad-eyed woman, lacking a left foot.

At some time in 1884 it became known that she had gone to visit her
mother in Iowa.  That was what her husband said in reply to
inquiries, and his manner of saying it did not encourage further
questioning.  She never came back, and two years later, without
selling his farm or anything that was his, or appointing an agent to
look after his interests, or removing his household goods, Harding,
with the rest of the family, left the country.  Nobody knew whither
he went; nobody at that time cared.  Naturally, whatever was movable
about the place soon disappeared and the deserted house became
"haunted" in the manner of its kind.

One summer evening, four or five years later, the Rev. J. Gruber, of
Norton, and a Maysville attorney named Hyatt met on horseback in
front of the Harding place.  Having business matters to discuss,
they hitched their animals and going to the house sat on the porch
to talk.  Some humorous reference to the somber reputation of the
place was made and forgotten as soon as uttered, and they talked of
their business affairs until it grew almost dark.  The evening was
oppressively warm, the air stagnant.

Presently both men started from their seats in surprise:  a long
vine that covered half the front of the house and dangled its
branches from the edge of the porch above them was visibly and
audibly agitated, shaking violently in every stem and leaf.

"We shall have a storm," Hyatt exclaimed.

Gruber said nothing, but silently directed the other's attention to
the foliage of adjacent trees, which showed no movement; even the
delicate tips of the boughs silhouetted against the clear sky were
motionless.  They hastily passed down the steps to what had been a
lawn and looked upward at the vine, whose entire length was now
visible.  It continued in violent agitation, yet they could discern
no disturbing cause.

"Let us leave," said the minister.

And leave they did.  Forgetting that they had been traveling in
opposite directions, they rode away together.  They went to Norton,
where they related their strange experience to several discreet
friends.  The next evening, at about the same hour, accompanied by
two others whose names are not recalled, they were again on the
porch of the Harding house, and again the mysterious phenomenon
occurred:  the vine was violently agitated while under the closest
scrutiny from root to tip, nor did their combined strength applied
to the trunk serve to still it.  After an hour's observation they
retreated, no less wise, it is thought, than when they had come.

No great time was required for these singular facts to rouse the
curiosity of the entire neighborhood.  By day and by night crowds of
persons assembled at the Harding house "seeking a sign."  It does
not appear that any found it, yet so credible were the witnesses
mentioned that none doubted the reality of the "manifestations" to
which they testified.

By either a happy inspiration or some destructive design, it was one
day proposed--nobody appeared to know from whom the suggestion came-
-to dig up the vine, and after a good deal of debate this was done.
Nothing was found but the root, yet nothing could have been more
strange!

For five or six feet from the trunk, which had at the surface of the
ground a diameter of several inches, it ran downward, single and
straight, into a loose, friable earth; then it divided and
subdivided into rootlets, fibers and filaments, most curiously
interwoven.  When carefully freed from soil they showed a singular
formation.  In their ramifications and doublings back upon
themselves they made a compact network, having in size and shape an
amazing resemblance to the human figure.  Head, trunk and limbs were
there; even the fingers and toes were distinctly defined; and many
professed to see in the distribution and arrangement of the fibers
in the globular mass representing the head a grotesque suggestion of
a face.  The figure was horizontal; the smaller roots had begun to
unite at the breast.

In point of resemblance to the human form this image was imperfect.
At about ten inches from one of the knees, the cilia forming that
leg had abruptly doubled backward and inward upon their course of
growth.  The figure lacked the left foot.

There was but one inference--the obvious one; but in the ensuing
excitement as many courses of action were proposed as there were
incapable counselors.  The matter was settled by the sheriff of the
county, who as the lawful custodian of the abandoned estate ordered
the root replaced and the excavation filled with the earth that had
been removed.

Later inquiry brought out only one fact of relevancy and
significance:  Mrs. Harding had never visited her relatives in Iowa,
nor did they know that she was supposed to have done so.

Of Robert Harding and the rest of his family nothing is known.  The
house retains its evil reputation, but the replanted vine is as
orderly and well-behaved a vegetable as a nervous person could wish
to sit under of a pleasant night, when the katydids grate out their
immemorial revelation and the distant whippoorwill signifies his
notion of what ought to be done about it.



AT OLD MAN ECKERT'S



Philip Eckert lived for many years in an old, weather-stained wooden
house about three miles from the little town of Marion, in Vermont.
There must be quite a number of persons living who remember him, not
unkindly, I trust, and know something of the story that I am about
to tell.

"Old Man Eckert," as he was always called, was not of a sociable
disposition and lived alone.  As he was never known to speak of his
own affairs nobody thereabout knew anything of his past, nor of his
relatives if he had any.  Without being particularly ungracious or
repellent in manner or speech, he managed somehow to be immune to
impertinent curiosity, yet exempt from the evil repute with which it
commonly revenges itself when baffled; so far as I know, Mr.
Eckert's renown as a reformed assassin or a retired pirate of the
Spanish Main had not reached any ear in Marion.  He got his living
cultivating a small and not very fertile farm.

One day he disappeared and a prolonged search by his neighbors
failed to turn him up or throw any light upon his whereabouts or
whyabouts.  Nothing indicated preparation to leave:  all was as he
might have left it to go to the spring for a bucket of water.  For a
few weeks little else was talked of in that region; then "old man
Eckert" became a village tale for the ear of the stranger.  I do not
know what was done regarding his property--the correct legal thing,
doubtless.  The house was standing, still vacant and conspicuously
unfit, when I last heard of it, some twenty years afterward.

Of course it came to be considered "haunted," and the customary
tales were told of moving lights, dolorous sounds and startling
apparitions.  At one time, about five years after the disappearance,
these stories of the supernatural became so rife, or through some
attesting circumstances seemed so important, that some of Marion's
most serious citizens deemed it well to investigate, and to that end
arranged for a night session on the premises.  The parties to this
undertaking were John Holcomb, an apothecary; Wilson Merle, a
lawyer, and Andrus C. Palmer, the teacher of the public school, all
men of consequence and repute.  They were to meet at Holcomb's house
at eight o'clock in the evening of the appointed day and go together
to the scene of their vigil, where certain arrangements for their
comfort, a provision of fuel and the like, for the season was
winter, had been already made.

Palmer did not keep the engagement, and after waiting a half-hour
for him the others went to the Eckert house without him.  They
established themselves in the principal room, before a glowing fire,
and without other light than it gave, awaited events.  It had been
agreed to speak as little as possible:  they did not even renew the
exchange of views regarding the defection of Palmer, which had
occupied their minds on the way.

Probably an hour had passed without incident when they heard (not
without emotion, doubtless) the sound of an opening door in the rear
of the house, followed by footfalls in the room adjoining that in
which they sat.  The watchers rose to their feet, but stood firm,
prepared for whatever might ensue.  A long silence followed--how
long neither would afterward undertake to say.  Then the door
between the two rooms opened and a man entered.

It was Palmer.  He was pale, as if from excitement--as pale as the
others felt themselves to be.  His manner, too, was singularly
distrait:  he neither responded to their salutations nor so much as
looked at them, but walked slowly across the room in the light of
the failing fire and opening the front door passed out into the
darkness.

It seems to have been the first thought of both men that Palmer was
suffering from fright--that something seen, heard or imagined in the
back room had deprived him of his senses.  Acting on the same
friendly impulse both ran after him through the open door.  But
neither they nor anyone ever again saw or heard of Andrus Palmer!

This much was ascertained the next morning.  During the session of
Messrs. Holcomb and Merle at the "haunted house" a new snow had
fallen to a depth of several inches upon the old.  In this snow
Palmer's trail from his lodging in the village to the back door of
the Eckert house was conspicuous.  But there it ended:  from the
front door nothing led away but the tracks of the two men who swore
that he preceded them.  Palmer's disappearance was as complete as
that of "old man Eckert" himself--whom, indeed, the editor of the
local paper somewhat graphically accused of having "reached out and
pulled him in."



THE SPOOK HOUSE



On the road leading north from Manchester, in eastern Kentucky, to
Booneville, twenty miles away, stood, in 1862, a wooden plantation
house of a somewhat better quality than most of the dwellings in
that region.  The house was destroyed by fire in the year following-
-probably by some stragglers from the retreating column of General
George W. Morgan, when he was driven from Cumberland Gap to the Ohio
river by General Kirby Smith.  At the time of its destruction, it
had for four or five years been vacant.  The fields about it were
overgrown with brambles, the fences gone, even the few negro
quarters, and out-houses generally, fallen partly into ruin by
neglect and pillage; for the negroes and poor whites of the vicinity
found in the building and fences an abundant supply of fuel, of
which they availed themselves without hesitation, openly and by
daylight.  By daylight alone; after nightfall no human being except
passing strangers ever went near the place.

It was known as the "Spook House."  That it was tenanted by evil
spirits, visible, audible and active, no one in all that region
doubted any more than he doubted what he was told of Sundays by the
traveling preacher.  Its owner's opinion of the matter was unknown;
he and his family had disappeared one night and no trace of them had
ever been found.  They left everything--household goods, clothing,
provisions, the horses in the stable, the cows in the field, the
negroes in the quarters--all as it stood; nothing was missing--
except a man, a woman, three girls, a boy and a babe!  It was not
altogether surprising that a plantation where seven human beings
could be simultaneously effaced and nobody the wiser should be under
some suspicion.

One night in June, 1859, two citizens of Frankfort, Col. J. C.
McArdle, a lawyer, and Judge Myron Veigh, of the State Militia, were
driving from Booneville to Manchester.  Their business was so
important that they decided to push on, despite the darkness and the
mutterings of an approaching storm, which eventually broke upon them
just as they arrived opposite the "Spook House."  The lightning was
so incessant that they easily found their way through the gateway
and into a shed, where they hitched and unharnessed their team.
They then went to the house, through the rain, and knocked at all
the doors without getting any response.  Attributing this to the
continuous uproar of the thunder they pushed at one of the doors,
which yielded.  They entered without further ceremony and closed the
door.  That instant they were in darkness and silence.  Not a gleam
of the lightning's unceasing blaze penetrated the windows or
crevices; not a whisper of the awful tumult without reached them
there.  It was as if they had suddenly been stricken blind and deaf,
and McArdle afterward said that for a moment he believed himself to
have been killed by a stroke of lightning as he crossed the
threshold.  The rest of this adventure can as well be related in his
own words, from the Frankfort Advocate of August 6, 1876:

"When I had somewhat recovered from the dazing effect of the
transition from uproar to silence, my first impulse was to reopen
the door which I had closed, and from the knob of which I was not
conscious of having removed my hand; I felt it distinctly, still in
the clasp of my fingers.  My notion was to ascertain by stepping
again into the storm whether I had been deprived of sight and
hearing.  I turned the doorknob and pulled open the door.  It led
into another room!

"This apartment was suffused with a faint greenish light, the source
of which I could not determine, making everything distinctly
visible, though nothing was sharply defined.  Everything, I say, but
in truth the only objects within the blank stone walls of that room
were human corpses.  In number they were perhaps eight or ten--it
may well be understood that I did not truly count them.  They were
of different ages, or rather sizes, from infancy up, and of both
sexes.  All were prostrate on the floor, excepting one, apparently a
young woman, who sat up, her back supported by an angle of the wall.
A babe was clasped in the arms of another and older woman.  A half-
grown lad lay face downward across the legs of a full-bearded man.
One or two were nearly naked, and the hand of a young girl held the
fragment of a gown which she had torn open at the breast.  The
bodies were in various stages of decay, all greatly shrunken in face
and figure.  Some were but little more than skeletons.

"While I stood stupefied with horror by this ghastly spectacle and
still holding open the door, by some unaccountable perversity my
attention was diverted from the shocking scene and concerned itself
with trifles and details.  Perhaps my mind, with an instinct of
self-preservation, sought relief in matters which would relax its
dangerous tension.  Among other things, I observed that the door
that I was holding open was of heavy iron plates, riveted.
Equidistant from one another and from the top and bottom, three
strong bolts protruded from the beveled edge.  I turned the knob and
they were retracted flush with the edge; released it, and they shot
out.  It was a spring lock.  On the inside there was no knob, nor
any kind of projection--a smooth surface of iron.

"While noting these things with an interest and attention which it
now astonishes me to recall I felt myself thrust aside, and Judge
Veigh, whom in the intensity and vicissitudes of my feelings I had
altogether forgotten, pushed by me into the room.  'For God's sake,'
I cried, 'do not go in there!  Let us get out of this dreadful
place!'

"He gave no heed to my entreaties, but (as fearless a gentleman as
lived in all the South) walked quickly to the center of the room,
knelt beside one of the bodies for a closer examination and tenderly
raised its blackened and shriveled head in his hands.  A strong
disagreeable odor came through the doorway, completely overpowering
me.  My senses reeled; I felt myself falling, and in clutching at
the edge of the door for support pushed it shut with a sharp click!

"I remember no more:  six weeks later I recovered my reason in a
hotel at Manchester, whither I had been taken by strangers the next
day.  For all these weeks I had suffered from a nervous fever,
attended with constant delirium.  I had been found lying in the road
several miles away from the house; but how I had escaped from it to
get there I never knew.  On recovery, or as soon as my physicians
permitted me to talk, I inquired the fate of Judge Veigh, whom (to
quiet me, as I now know) they represented as well and at home.

"No one believed a word of my story, and who can wonder?  And who
can imagine my grief when, arriving at my home in Frankfort two
months later, I learned that Judge Veigh had never been heard of
since that night?  I then regretted bitterly the pride which since
the first few days after the recovery of my reason had forbidden me
to repeat my discredited story and insist upon its truth.

"With all that afterward occurred--the examination of the house; the
failure to find any room corresponding to that which I have
described; the attempt to have me adjudged insane, and my triumph
over my accusers--the readers of the Advocate are familiar.  After
all these years I am still confident that excavations which I have
neither the legal right to undertake nor the wealth to make would
disclose the secret of the disappearance of my unhappy friend, and
possibly of the former occupants and owners of the deserted and now
destroyed house.  I do not despair of yet bringing about such a
search, and it is a source of deep grief to me that it has been
delayed by the undeserved hostility and unwise incredulity of the
family and friends of the late Judge Veigh."

Colonel McArdle died in Frankfort on the thirteenth day of December,
in the year 1879.



THE OTHER LODGERS



"In order to take that train," said Colonel Levering, sitting in the
Waldorf-Astoria hotel, "you will have to remain nearly all night in
Atlanta.  That is a fine city, but I advise you not to put up at the
Breathitt House, one of the principal hotels.  It is an old wooden
building in urgent need of repairs.  There are breaches in the walls
that you could throw a cat through.  The bedrooms have no locks on
the doors, no furniture but a single chair in each, and a bedstead
without bedding--just a mattress.  Even these meager accommodations
you cannot be sure that you will have in monopoly; you must take
your chance of being stowed in with a lot of others.  Sir, it is a
most abominable hotel.

"The night that I passed in it was an uncomfortable night.  I got in
late and was shown to my room on the ground floor by an apologetic
night-clerk with a tallow candle, which he considerately left with
me.  I was worn out by two days and a night of hard railway travel
and had not entirely recovered from a gunshot wound in the head,
received in an altercation.  Rather than look for better quarters I
lay down on the mattress without removing my clothing and fell
asleep.

"Along toward morning I awoke.  The moon had risen and was shining
in at the uncurtained window, illuminating the room with a soft,
bluish light which seemed, somehow, a bit spooky, though I dare say
it had no uncommon quality; all moonlight is that way if you will
observe it.  Imagine my surprise and indignation when I saw the
floor occupied by at least a dozen other lodgers!  I sat up,
earnestly damning the management of that unthinkable hotel, and was
about to spring from the bed to go and make trouble for the night-
clerk--him of the apologetic manner and the tallow candle--when
something in the situation affected me with a strange indisposition
to move.  I suppose I was what a story-writer might call 'frozen
with terror.'  For those men were obviously all dead!

"They lay on their backs, disposed orderly along three sides of the
room, their feet to the walls--against the other wall, farthest from
the door, stood my bed and the chair.  All the faces were covered,
but under their white cloths the features of the two bodies that lay
in the square patch of moonlight near the window showed in sharp
profile as to nose and chin.

"I thought this a bad dream and tried to cry out, as one does in a
nightmare, but could make no sound.  At last, with a desperate
effort I threw my feet to the floor and passing between the two rows
of clouted faces and the two bodies that lay nearest the door, I
escaped from the infernal place and ran to the office.  The night-
clerk was there, behind the desk, sitting in the dim light of
another tallow candle--just sitting and staring.  He did not rise:
my abrupt entrance produced no effect upon him, though I must have
looked a veritable corpse myself.  It occurred to me then that I had
not before really observed the fellow.  He was a little chap, with a
colorless face and the whitest, blankest eyes I ever saw.  He had no
more expression than the back of my hand.  His clothing was a dirty
gray.

"'Damn you!' I said; 'what do you mean?'

"Just the same, I was shaking like a leaf in the wind and did not
recognize my own voice.

"The night-clerk rose, bowed (apologetically) and--well, he was no
longer there, and at that moment I felt a hand laid upon my shoulder
from behind.  Just fancy that if you can!  Unspeakably frightened, I
turned and saw a portly, kind-faced gentleman, who asked:

"'What is the matter, my friend?'

"I was not long in telling him, but before I made an end of it he
went pale himself.  'See here,' he said, 'are you telling the
truth?'

"I had now got myself in hand and terror had given place to
indignation.  'If you dare to doubt it,' I said, 'I'll hammer the
life out of you!'

"'No,' he replied, 'don't do that; just sit down till I tell you.
This is not a hotel.  It used to be; afterward it was a hospital.
Now it is unoccupied, awaiting a tenant.  The room that you mention
was the dead-room--there were always plenty of dead.  The fellow
that you call the night-clerk used to be that, but later he booked
the patients as they were brought in.  I don't understand his being
here.  He has been dead a few weeks.'

"'And who are you?' I blurted out.

"'Oh, I look after the premises.  I happened to be passing just now,
and seeing a light in here came in to investigate.  Let us have a
look into that room,' he added, lifting the sputtering candle from
the desk.

"'I'll see you at the devil first!' said I, bolting out of the door
into the street.

"Sir, that Breathitt House, in Atlanta, is a beastly place!  Don't
you stop there."

"God forbid!  Your account of it certainly does not suggest comfort.
By the way, Colonel, when did all that occur?"

"In September, 1864--shortly after the siege."



THE THING AT NOLAN



To the south of where the road between Leesville and Hardy, in the
State of Missouri, crosses the east fork of May Creek stands an
abandoned house.  Nobody has lived in it since the summer of 1879,
and it is fast going to pieces.  For some three years before the
date mentioned above, it was occupied by the family of Charles May,
from one of whose ancestors the creek near which it stands took its
name.

Mr. May's family consisted of a wife, an adult son and two young
girls.  The son's name was John--the names of the daughters are
unknown to the writer of this sketch.

John May was of a morose and surly disposition, not easily moved to
anger, but having an uncommon gift of sullen, implacable hate.  His
father was quite otherwise; of a sunny, jovial disposition, but with
a quick temper like a sudden flame kindled in a wisp of straw, which
consumes it in a flash and is no more.  He cherished no resentments,
and his anger gone, was quick to make overtures for reconciliation.
He had a brother living near by who was unlike him in respect of all
this, and it was a current witticism in the neighborhood that John
had inherited his disposition from his uncle.

One day a misunderstanding arose between father and son, harsh words
ensued, and the father struck the son full in the face with his
fist.  John quietly wiped away the blood that followed the blow,
fixed his eyes upon the already penitent offender and said with cold
composure, "You will die for that."

The words were overheard by two brothers named Jackson, who were
approaching the men at the moment; but seeing them engaged in a
quarrel they retired, apparently unobserved.  Charles May afterward
related the unfortunate occurrence to his wife and explained that he
had apologized to the son for the hasty blow, but without avail; the
young man not only rejected his overtures, but refused to withdraw
his terrible threat.  Nevertheless, there was no open rupture of
relations:  John continued living with the family, and things went
on very much as before.

One Sunday morning in June, 1879, about two weeks after what has
been related, May senior left the house immediately after breakfast,
taking a spade.  He said he was going to make an excavation at a
certain spring in a wood about a mile away, so that the cattle could
obtain water.  John remained in the house for some hours, variously
occupied in shaving himself, writing letters and reading a
newspaper.  His manner was very nearly what it usually was; perhaps
he was a trifle more sullen and surly.

At two o'clock he left the house.  At five, he returned.  For some
reason not connected with any interest in his movements, and which
is not now recalled, the time of his departure and that of his
return were noted by his mother and sisters, as was attested at his
trial for murder.  It was observed that his clothing was wet in
spots, as if (so the prosecution afterward pointed out) he had been
removing blood-stains from it.  His manner was strange, his look
wild.  He complained of illness, and going to his room took to his
bed.

May senior did not return.  Later that evening the nearest neighbors
were aroused, and during that night and the following day a search
was prosecuted through the wood where the spring was.  It resulted
in little but the discovery of both men's footprints in the clay
about the spring.  John May in the meantime had grown rapidly worse
with what the local physician called brain fever, and in his
delirium raved of murder, but did not say whom he conceived to have
been murdered, nor whom he imagined to have done the deed.  But his
threat was recalled by the brothers Jackson and he was arrested on
suspicion and a deputy sheriff put in charge of him at his home.
Public opinion ran strongly against him and but for his illness he
would probably have been hanged by a mob.  As it was, a meeting of
the neighbors was held on Tuesday and a committee appointed to watch
the case and take such action at any time as circumstances might
seem to warrant.

On Wednesday all was changed.  From the town of Nolan, eight miles
away, came a story which put a quite different light on the matter.
Nolan consisted of a school house, a blacksmith's shop, a "store"
and a half-dozen dwellings.  The store was kept by one Henry Odell,
a cousin of the elder May.  On the afternoon of the Sunday of May's
disappearance Mr. Odell and four of his neighbors, men of
credibility, were sitting in the store smoking and talking.  It was
a warm day; and both the front and the back door were open.  At
about three o'clock Charles May, who was well known to three of
them, entered at the front door and passed out at the rear.  He was
without hat or coat.  He did not look at them, nor return their
greeting, a circumstance which did not surprise, for he was
evidently seriously hurt.  Above the left eyebrow was a wound--a
deep gash from which the blood flowed, covering the whole left side
of the face and neck and saturating his light-gray shirt.  Oddly
enough, the thought uppermost in the minds of all was that he had
been fighting and was going to the brook directly at the back of the
store, to wash himself.

Perhaps there was a feeling of delicacy--a backwoods etiquette which
restrained them from following him to offer assistance; the court
records, from which, mainly, this narrative is drawn, are silent as
to anything but the fact.  They waited for him to return, but he did
not return.

Bordering the brook behind the store is a forest extending for six
miles back to the Medicine Lodge Hills.  As soon as it became known
in the neighborhood of the missing man's dwelling that he had been
seen in Nolan there was a marked alteration in public sentiment and
feeling.  The vigilance committee went out of existence without the
formality of a resolution.  Search along the wooded bottom lands of
May Creek was stopped and nearly the entire male population of the
region took to beating the bush about Nolan and in the Medicine
Lodge Hills.  But of the missing man no trace was found.

One of the strangest circumstances of this strange case is the
formal indictment and trial of a man for murder of one whose body no
human being professed to have seen--one not known to be dead.  We
are all more or less familiar with the vagaries and eccentricities
of frontier law, but this instance, it is thought, is unique.
However that may be, it is of record that on recovering from his
illness John May was indicted for the murder of his missing father.
Counsel for the defense appears not to have demurred and the case
was tried on its merits.  The prosecution was spiritless and
perfunctory; the defense easily established--with regard to the
deceased--an alibi.  If during the time in which John May must have
killed Charles May, if he killed him at all, Charles May was miles
away from where John May must have been, it is plain that the
deceased must have come to his death at the hands of someone else.

John May was acquitted, immediately left the country, and has never
been heard of from that day.  Shortly afterward his mother and
sisters removed to St. Louis.  The farm having passed into the
possession of a man who owns the land adjoining, and has a dwelling
of his own, the May house has ever since been vacant, and has the
somber reputation of being haunted.

One day after the May family had left the country, some boys,
playing in the woods along May Creek, found concealed under a mass
of dead leaves, but partly exposed by the rooting of hogs, a spade,
nearly new and bright, except for a spot on one edge, which was
rusted and stained with blood.  The implement had the initials C. M.
cut into the handle.

This discovery renewed, in some degree, the public excitement of a
few months before.  The earth near the spot where the spade was
found was carefully examined, and the result was the finding of the
dead body of a man.  It had been buried under two or three feet of
soil and the spot covered with a layer of dead leaves and twigs.
There was but little decomposition, a fact attributed to some
preservative property in the mineral-bearing soil.

Above the left eyebrow was a wound--a deep gash from which blood had
flowed, covering the whole left side of the face and neck and
saturating the light-gray shirt.  The skull had been cut through by
the blow.  The body was that of Charles May.

But what was it that passed through Mr. Odell's store at Nolan?




"MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCES"




THE DIFFICULTY OF CROSSING A FIELD



One morning in July, 1854, a planter named Williamson, living six
miles from Selma, Alabama, was sitting with his wife and a child on
the veranda of his dwelling.  Immediately in front of the house was
a lawn, perhaps fifty yards in extent between the house and public
road, or, as it was called, the "pike."  Beyond this road lay a
close-cropped pasture of some ten acres, level and without a tree,
rock, or any natural or artificial object on its surface.  At the
time there was not even a domestic animal in the field.  In another
field, beyond the pasture, a dozen slaves were at work under an
overseer.

Throwing away the stump of a cigar, the planter rose, saying:  "I
forgot to tell Andrew about those horses."  Andrew was the overseer.

Williamson strolled leisurely down the gravel walk, plucking a
flower as he went, passed across the road and into the pasture,
pausing a moment as he closed the gate leading into it, to greet a
passing neighbor, Armour Wren, who lived on an adjoining plantation.
Mr. Wren was in an open carriage with his son James, a lad of
thirteen.  When he had driven some two hundred yards from the point
of meeting, Mr. Wren said to his son:  "I forgot to tell Mr.
Williamson about those horses."

Mr. Wren had sold to Mr. Williamson some horses, which were to have
been sent for that day, but for some reason not now remembered it
would be inconvenient to deliver them until the morrow.  The
coachman was directed to drive back, and as the vehicle turned
Williamson was seen by all three, walking leisurely across the
pasture.  At that moment one of the coach horses stumbled and came
near falling.  It had no more than fairly recovered itself when
James Wren cried:  "Why, father, what has become of Mr. Williamson?"

It is not the purpose of this narrative to answer that question.

Mr. Wren's strange account of the matter, given under oath in the
course of legal proceedings relating to the Williamson estate, here
follows:

"My son's exclamation caused me to look toward the spot where I had
seen the deceased [sic] an instant before, but he was not there, nor
was he anywhere visible.  I cannot say that at the moment I was
greatly startled, or realized the gravity of the occurrence, though
I thought it singular.  My son, however, was greatly astonished and
kept repeating his question in different forms until we arrived at
the gate.  My black boy Sam was similarly affected, even in a
greater degree, but I reckon more by my son's manner than by
anything he had himself observed.  [This sentence in the testimony
was stricken out.]  As we got out of the carriage at the gate of the
field, and while Sam was hanging [sic] the team to the fence, Mrs.
Williamson, with her child in her arms and followed by several
servants, came running down the walk in great excitement, crying:
'He is gone, he is gone!  O God! what an awful thing!' and many
other such exclamations, which I do not distinctly recollect.  I got
from them the impression that they related to something more--than
the mere disappearance of her husband, even if that had occurred
before her eyes.  Her manner was wild, but not more so, I think,
than was natural under the circumstances.  I have no reason to think
she had at that time lost her mind.  I have never since seen nor
heard of Mr. Williamson."

This testimony, as might have been expected, was corroborated in
almost every particular by the only other eye-witness (if that is a
proper term)--the lad James.  Mrs. Williamson had lost her reason
and the servants were, of course, not competent to testify.  The boy
James Wren had declared at first that he SAW the disappearance, but
there is nothing of this in his testimony given in court.  None of
the field hands working in the field to which Williamson was going
had seen him at all, and the most rigorous search of the entire
plantation and adjoining country failed to supply a clew.  The most
monstrous and grotesque fictions, originating with the blacks, were
current in that part of the State for many years, and probably are
to this day; but what has been here related is all that is certainly
known of the matter.  The courts decided that Williamson was dead,
and his estate was distributed according to law.



AN UNFINISHED RACE



James Burne Worson was a shoemaker who lived in Leamington,
Warwickshire, England.  He had a little shop in one of the by-ways
leading off the road to Warwick.  In his humble sphere he was
esteemed an honest man, although like many of his class in English
towns he was somewhat addicted to drink.  When in liquor he would
make foolish wagers.  On one of these too frequent occasions he was
boasting of his prowess as a pedestrian and athlete, and the outcome
was a match against nature.  For a stake of one sovereign he
undertook to run all the way to Coventry and back, a distance of
something more than forty miles.  This was on the 3d day of
September in 1873.  He set out at once, the man with whom he had
made the bet--whose name is not remembered--accompanied by Barham
Wise, a linen draper, and Hamerson Burns, a photographer, I think,
following in a light cart or wagon.

For several miles Worson went on very well, at an easy gait, without
apparent fatigue, for he had really great powers of endurance and
was not sufficiently intoxicated to enfeeble them.  The three men in
the wagon kept a short distance in the rear, giving him occasional
friendly "chaff" or encouragement, as the spirit moved them.
Suddenly--in the very middle of the roadway, not a dozen yards from
them, and with their eyes full upon him--the man seemed to stumble,
pitched headlong forward, uttered a terrible cry and vanished!  He
did not fall to the earth--he vanished before touching it.  No trace
of him was ever discovered.

After remaining at and about the spot for some time, with aimless
irresolution, the three men returned to Leamington, told their
astonishing story and were afterward taken into custody.  But they
were of good standing, had always been considered truthful, were
sober at the time of the occurrence, and nothing ever transpired to
discredit their sworn account of their extraordinary adventure,
concerning the truth of which, nevertheless, public opinion was
divided, throughout the United Kingdom.  If they had something to
conceal, their choice of means is certainly one of the most amazing
ever made by sane human beings.



CHARLES ASHMORE'S TRAIL



The family of Christian Ashmore consisted of his wife, his mother,
two grown daughters, and a son of sixteen years.  They lived in
Troy, New York, were well-to-do, respectable persons, and had many
friends, some of whom, reading these lines, will doubtless learn for
the first time the extraordinary fate of the young man.  From Troy
the Ashmores moved in 1871 or 1872 to Richmond, Indiana, and a year
or two later to the vicinity of Quincy, Illinois, where Mr. Ashmore
bought a farm and lived on it.  At some little distance from the
farmhouse was a spring with a constant flow of clear, cold water,
whence the family derived its supply for domestic use at all
seasons.

On the evening of the 9th of November in 1878, at about nine
o'clock, young Charles Ashmore left the family circle about the
hearth, took a tin bucket and started toward the spring.  As he did
not return, the family became uneasy, and going to the door by which
he had left the house, his father called without receiving an
answer.  He then lighted a lantern and with the eldest daughter,
Martha, who insisted on accompanying him, went in search.  A light
snow had fallen, obliterating the path, but making the young man's
trail conspicuous; each footprint was plainly defined.  After going
a little more than half-way--perhaps seventy-five yards--the father,
who was in advance, halted, and elevating his lantern stood peering
intently into the darkness ahead.

"What is the matter, father?" the girl asked.

This was the matter:  the trail of the young man had abruptly ended,
and all beyond was smooth, unbroken snow.  The last footprints were
as conspicuous as any in the line; the very nail-marks were
distinctly visible.  Mr. Ashmore looked upward, shading his eyes
with his hat held between them and the lantern.  The stars were
shining; there was not a cloud in the sky; he was denied the
explanation which had suggested itself, doubtful as it would have
been--a new snowfall with a limit so plainly defined.  Taking a wide
circuit round the ultimate tracks, so as to leave them undisturbed
for further examination, the man proceeded to the spring, the girl
following, weak and terrified.  Neither had spoken a word of what
both had observed.  The spring was covered with ice, hours old.

Returning to the house they noted the appearance of the snow on both
sides of the trail its entire length.  No tracks led away from it.

The morning light showed nothing more.  Smooth, spotless, unbroken,
the shallow snow lay everywhere.

Four days later the grief-stricken mother herself went to the spring
for water.  She came back and related that in passing the spot where
the footprints had ended she had heard the voice of her son and had
been eagerly calling to him, wandering about the place, as she had
fancied the voice to be now in one direction, now in another, until
she was exhausted with fatigue and emotion.

Questioned as to what the voice had said, she was unable to tell,
yet averred that the words were perfectly distinct.  In a moment the
entire family was at the place, but nothing was heard, and the voice
was believed to be an hallucination caused by the mother's great
anxiety and her disordered nerves.  But for months afterward, at
irregular intervals of a few days, the voice was heard by the
several members of the family, and by others.  All declared it
unmistakably the voice of Charles Ashmore; all agreed that it seemed
to come from a great distance, faintly, yet with entire distinctness
of articulation; yet none could determine its direction, nor repeat
its words.  The intervals of silence grew longer and longer, the
voice fainter and farther, and by midsummer it was heard no more.

If anybody knows the fate of Charles Ashmore it is probably his
mother.  She is dead.



SCIENCE TO THE FRONT



In connection with this subject of "mysterious disappearance"--of
which every memory is stored with abundant example--it is pertinent
to note the belief of Dr. Hem, of Leipsic; not by way of
explanation, unless the reader may choose to take it so, but because
of its intrinsic interest as a singular speculation.  This
distinguished scientist has expounded his views in a book entitled
"Verschwinden und Seine Theorie," which has attracted some
attention, "particularly," says one writer, "among the followers of
Hegel, and mathematicians who hold to the actual existence of a so-
called non-Euclidean space--that is to say, of space which has more
dimensions than length, breadth, and thickness--space in which it
would be possible to tie a knot in an endless cord and to turn a
rubber ball inside out without 'a solution of its continuity,' or in
other words, without breaking or cracking it."

Dr. Hem believes that in the visible world there are void places--
vacua, and something more--holes, as it were, through which animate
and inanimate objects may fall into the invisible world and be seen
and heard no more.  The theory is something like this:  Space is
pervaded by luminiferous ether, which is a material thing--as much a
substance as air or water, though almost infinitely more attenuated.
All force, all forms of energy must be propagated in this; every
process must take place in it which takes place at all.  But let us
suppose that cavities exist in this otherwise universal medium, as
caverns exist in the earth, or cells in a Swiss cheese.  In such a
cavity there would be absolutely nothing.  It would be such a vacuum
as cannot be artificially produced; for if we pump the air from a
receiver there remains the luminiferous ether.  Through one of these
cavities light could not pass, for there would be nothing to bear
it.  Sound could not come from it; nothing could be felt in it.  It
would not have a single one of the conditions necessary to the
action of any of our senses.  In such a void, in short, nothing
whatever could occur.  Now, in the words of the writer before
quoted--the learned doctor himself nowhere puts it so concisely:  "A
man inclosed in such a closet could neither see nor be seen; neither
hear nor be heard; neither feel nor be felt; neither live nor die,
for both life and death are processes which can take place only
where there is force, and in empty space no force could exist."  Are
these the awful conditions (some will ask) under which the friends
of the lost are to think of them as existing, and doomed forever to
exist?

Baldly and imperfectly as here stated, Dr. Hem's theory, in so far
as it professes to be an adequate explanation of "mysterious
disappearances," is open to many obvious objections; to fewer as he
states it himself in the "spacious volubility" of his book.  But
even as expounded by its author it does not explain, and in truth is
incompatible with some incidents of, the occurrences related in
these memoranda:  for example, the sound of Charles Ashmore's voice.
It is not my duty to indue facts and theories with affinity.

A.B.



Footnotes:

{1}  The Isle of Pines was once a famous rendezvous of pirates.





  SHAPES OF CLAY




  THE PASSING SHOW.

  I.


  I know not if it was a dream. I viewed
  A city where the restless multitude,
    Between the eastern and the western deep
  Had roared gigantic fabrics, strong and rude.

  Colossal palaces crowned every height;
  Towers from valleys climbed into the light;
    O'er dwellings at their feet, great golden domes
  Hung in the blue, barbarically bright.

  But now, new-glimmering to-east, the day
  Touched the black masses with a grace of gray,
    Dim spires of temples to the nation's God
  Studding high spaces of the wide survey.

  Well did the roofs their solemn secret keep
  Of life and death stayed by the truce of sleep,
    Yet whispered of an hour-when sleepers wake,
  The fool to hope afresh, the wise to weep.

  The gardens greened upon the builded hills
  Above the tethered thunders of the mills
    With sleeping wheels unstirred to service yet
  By the tamed torrents and the quickened rills.

  A hewn acclivity, reprieved a space,
  Looked on the builder's blocks about his base
    And bared his wounded breast in sign to say:
  "Strike! 't is my destiny to lodge your race.

  "'T was but a breath ago the mammoth browsed
  Upon my slopes, and in my caves I housed
    Your shaggy fathers in their nakedness,
  While on their foeman's offal they caroused."

  Ships from afar afforested the bay.
  Within their huge and chambered bodies lay
    The wealth of continents; and merrily sailed
  The hardy argosies to far Cathay.

  Beside the city of the living spread--
  Strange fellowship!--the city of the dead;
    And much I wondered what its humble folk,
  To see how bravely they were housed, had said.

  Noting how firm their habitations stood,
  Broad-based and free of perishable wood--
    How deep in granite and how high in brass
  The names were wrought of eminent and good,

  I said: "When gold or power is their aim,
  The smile of beauty or the wage of shame,
    Men dwell in cities; to this place they fare
  When they would conquer an abiding fame."

  From the red East the sun--a solemn rite--
  Crowned with a flame the cross upon a height
    Above the dead; and then with all his strength
  Struck the great city all aroar with light!


  II.

  I know not if it was a dream. I came
  Unto a land where something seemed the same
    That I had known as 't were but yesterday,
  But what it was I could not rightly name.

  It was a strange and melancholy land.
  Silent and desolate. On either hand
    Lay waters of a sea that seemed as dead,
  And dead above it seemed the hills to stand,

  Grayed all with age, those lonely hills--ah me,
  How worn and weary they appeared to be!
    Between their feet long dusty fissures clove
  The plain in aimless windings to the sea.

  One hill there was which, parted from the rest,
  Stood where the eastern water curved a-west.
    Silent and passionless it stood. I thought
  I saw a scar upon its giant breast.

  The sun with sullen and portentous gleam
  Hung like a menace on the sea's extreme;
    Nor the dead waters, nor the far, bleak bars
  Of cloud were conscious of his failing beam.

  It was a dismal and a dreadful sight,
  That desert in its cold, uncanny light;
    No soul but I alone to mark the fear
  And imminence of everlasting night!

  All presages and prophecies of doom
  Glimmered and babbled in the ghastly gloom,
    And in the midst of that accursèd scene
  A wolf sat howling on a broken tomb.




  ELIXER VITAE.


  Of life's elixir I had writ, when sleep
  (Pray Heaven it spared him who the writing read!)
  Sealed upon my senses with so deep
  A stupefaction that men thought me dead.
  The centuries stole by with noiseless tread,
  Like spectres in the twilight of my dream;
  I saw mankind in dim procession sweep
  Through life, oblivion at each extreme.
  Meanwhile my beard, like Barbarossa's growing,
  Loaded my lap and o'er my knees was flowing.

  The generations came with dance and song,
  And each observed me curiously there.
  Some asked: "Who was he?" Others in the throng
  Replied: "A wicked monk who slept at prayer."
  Some said I was a saint, and some a bear--
  These all were women. So the young and gay,
  Visibly wrinkling as they fared along,
  Doddered at last on failing limbs away;
  Though some, their footing in my beard entangled,
  Fell into its abysses and were strangled.

  At last a generation came that walked
  More slowly forward to the common tomb,
  Then altogether stopped. The women talked
  Excitedly; the men, with eyes agloom
  Looked darkly on them with a look of doom;
  And one cried out: "We are immortal now--
  How need we these?" And a dread figure stalked,
  Silent, with gleaming axe and shrouded brow,
  And all men cried: "Decapitate the women,
  Or soon there'll be no room to stand or swim in!"

  So (in my dream) each lovely head was chopped
  From its fair shoulders, and but men alone
  Were left in all the world. Birth being stopped,
  Enough of room remained in every zone,
  And Peace ascended Woman's vacant throne.
  Thus, life's elixir being found (the quacks
  Their bread-and-butter in it gladly sopped)
  'Twas made worth having by the headsman's axe.
  Seeing which, I gave myself a hearty shaking,
  And crumbled all to powder in the waking.




  CONVALESCENT.


  What! "Out of danger?"   Can the slighted Dame
  Or canting Pharisee no more defame?
  Will Treachery caress my hand no more,
  Nor Hatred He alurk about my door?--
  Ingratitude, with benefits dismissed,
  Not close the loaded palm to make a fist?
  Will Envy henceforth not retaliate
  For virtues it were vain to emulate?
  Will Ignorance my knowledge fail to scout,
  Not understanding what 'tis all about,
  Yet feeling in its light so mean and small
  That all his little soul is turned to gall?

  What! "Out of danger?" Jealousy disarmed?
  Greed from exaction magically charmed?
  Ambition stayed from trampling whom it meets,
  Like horses fugitive in crowded streets?
  The Bigot, with his candle, book and bell,
  Tongue-tied, unlunged and paralyzed as well?
  The Critic righteously to justice haled,
  His own ear to the post securely nailed--
  What most he dreads unable to inflict,
  And powerless to hawk the faults he's picked?
  The liar choked upon his choicest lie,
  And impotent alike to villify
  Or flatter for the gold of thrifty men
  Who hate his person but employ his pen--
  Who love and loathe, respectively, the dirt
  Belonging to his character and shirt?

  What! "Out of danger?"--Nature's minions all,
  Like hounds returning to the huntsman's call,
  Obedient to the unwelcome note
  That stays them from the quarry's bursting throat?--
  Famine and Pestilence and Earthquake dire,
  Torrent and Tempest, Lightning, Frost and Fire,
  The soulless Tiger and the mindless Snake,
  The noxious Insect from the stagnant lake
  (Automaton malevolences wrought
  Out of the substance of Creative Thought)--
  These from their immemorial prey restrained,
  Their fury baffled and their power chained?

  I'm safe? Is that what the physician said?
  What! "Out of danger?" Then, by Heaven, I'm dead!




  AT THE CLOSE OF THE CANVASS.


  'Twas a Venerable Person, whom I met one Sunday morning,
  All appareled as a prophet of a melancholy sect;
  And in a jeremaid of objurgatory warning
  He lifted up his _jodel_ to the following effect:

  O ye sanguinary statesmen, intermit your verbal tussles
  O ye editors and orators, consent to hear my lay!
  And a little while the digital and maxillary muscles
  And attend to what a Venerable Person has to say.

  Cease your writing, cease your shouting, cease your wild unearthly lying;
  Cease to bandy such expressions as are never, never found
  In the letter of a lover; cease "exposing" and "replying"--
  Let there be abated fury and a decrement of sound.

  For to-morrow will be Monday and the fifth day of November--
  Only day of opportunity before the final rush.
  _Carpe diem!_ go conciliate each person who's a member
    Of the other party--do it while you can without a blush.

  "Lo! the time is close upon you when the madness of the season
    Having howled itself to silence, like a Minnesota 'clone,
  Will at last be superseded by the still, small voice of reason,
    When the whelpage of your folly you would willingly disown.

  "Ah, 'tis mournful to consider what remorses will be thronging,
    With a consciousness of having been so ghastly indiscreet,
  When by accident untoward two ex-gentlemen belonging
    To the opposite political denominations meet!

  "Yes, 'tis melancholy, truly, to forecast the fierce, unruly
    Supersurging of their blushes, like the flushes upon high
  When Aurora Borealis lights her circumpolar palace
    And in customary manner sets her banner in the sky.

  "Each will think: 'This falsifier knows that I too am a liar.
  Curse him for a son of Satan, all unholily compound!
  Curse my leader for another! Curse that pelican, my mother!
  Would to God that I when little in my victual had been drowned!'"

  Then that Venerable Person went away without returning
  And, the madness of the season having also taken flight,
  All the people soon were blushing like the skies to crimson burning
  When Aurora Borealis fires her premises by night.




  NOVUM ORGANUM.


  In Bacon see the culminating prime
  Of Anglo-Saxon intellect and crime.
  He dies and Nature, settling his affairs,
  Parts his endowments among us, his heirs:
  To every one a pinch of brain for seed,
  And, to develop it, a pinch of greed.
  Each thrifty heir, to make the gift suffice,
  Buries the talent to manure the vice.




  GEOTHEOS.


  As sweet as the look of a lover
   Saluting the eyes of a maid,
   That blossom to blue as the maid
  Is ablush to the glances above her,
   The sunshine is gilding the glade
   And lifting the lark out of shade.

  Sing therefore high praises, and therefore
   Sing songs that are ancient as gold,
   Of Earth in her garments of gold;
  Nor ask of their meaning, nor wherefore
   They charm as of yore, for behold!
   The Earth is as fair as of old.

  Sing songs of the pride of the mountains,
   And songs of the strength of the seas,
   And the fountains that fall to the seas
  From the hands of the hills, and the fountains
   That shine in the temples of trees,
   In valleys of roses and bees.

  Sing songs that are dreamy and tender,
    Of slender Arabian palms,
    And shadows that circle the palms,
  Where caravans, veiled from the splendor,
    Are kneeling in blossoms and balms,
    In islands of infinite calms.

  Barbaric, O Man, was thy runing
    When mountains were stained as with wine
    By the dawning of Time, and as wine
  Were the seas, yet its echoes are crooning,
    Achant in the gusty pine
    And the pulse of the poet's line.




  YORICK.


  Hard by an excavated street one sat
  In solitary session on the sand;
  And ever and anon he spake and spat
  And spake again--a yellow skull in hand,
  To which that retrospective Pioneer
  Addressed the few remarks that follow here:

  "Who are you? Did you come 'der blains agross,'
  Or 'Horn aroundt'? In days o' '49
  Did them thar eye-holes see the Southern Cross
  From the Antarctic Sea git up an' shine?
  Or did you drive a bull team 'all the way
  From Pike,' with Mr. Joseph Bowers?--say!

  "Was you in Frisco when the water came
  Up to Montgum'ry street? and do you mind
  The time when Peters run the faro game--
  Jim Peters from old Mississip--behind
  Wells Fargo's, where he subsequent was bust
  By Sandy, as regards both bank and crust?

  "I wonder was you here when Casey shot
  James King o' William? And did you attend
  The neck-tie dance ensuin'? _I_ did not,
  But j'ined the rush to Go Creek with my friend
  Ed'ard McGowan; for we was resolved
  In sech diversions not to be involved.

  "Maybe I knowed you; seems to me I've seed
    Your face afore. I don't forget a face,
  But names I disremember--I'm that breed
    Of owls. I'm talking some'at into space
  An' maybe my remarks is too derned free,
  Seein' yer name is unbeknown to me.

  "Ther' was a time, I reckon, when I knowed
    Nigh onto every dern galoot in town.
  That was as late as '50. Now she's growed
    Surprisin'! Yes, me an' my pardner, Brown,
  Was wide acquainted. If ther' was a cuss
  We didn't know, the cause was--he knowed us.

  "Maybe you had that claim adjoinin' mine
    Up thar in Calaveras. Was it you
  To which Long Mary took a mighty shine,
    An' throwed squar' off on Jake the Kangaroo?
  I guess if she could see ye now she'd take
  Her chance o' happiness along o' Jake.

  "You ain't so purty now as you was then:
    Yer eyes is nothin' but two prospect holes,
  An' women which are hitched to better men
    Would hardly for sech glances damn their souls,
  As Lengthie did. By G----! I _hope_ it's you,
  For" _(kicks the skull)_ "I'm Jake the Kangaroo."




  A VISION OF DOOM.


  I stood upon a hill. The setting sun
  Was crimson with a curse and a portent,
  And scarce his angry ray lit up the land
  That lay below, whose lurid gloom appeared
  Freaked with a moving mist, which, reeking up
  From dim tarns hateful with some horrid ban,
  Took shapes forbidden and without a name.
  Gigantic night-birds, rising from the reeds
  With cries discordant, startled all the air,
  And bodiless voices babbled in the gloom--
  The ghosts of blasphemies long ages stilled,
  And shrieks of women, and men's curses. All
  These visible shapes, and sounds no mortal ear
  Had ever heard, some spiritual sense
  Interpreted, though brokenly; for I
  Was haunted by a consciousness of crime,
  Some giant guilt, but whose I knew not. All
  These things malign, by sight and sound revealed,
  Were sin-begotten; that I knew--no more--
  And that but dimly, as in dreadful dreams
  The sleepy senses babble to the brain
  Imperfect witness. As I stood a voice,
  But whence it came I knew not, cried aloud
  Some words to me in a forgotten tongue,
  Yet straight I knew me for a ghost forlorn,
  Returned from the illimited inane.
  Again, but in a language that I knew,
  As in reply to something which in me
  Had shaped itself a thought, but found no words,
  It spake from the dread mystery about:
  "Immortal shadow of a mortal soul
  That perished with eternity, attend.
  What thou beholdest is as void as thou:
  The shadow of a poet's dream--himself
  As thou, his soul as thine, long dead,
  But not like thine outlasted by its shade.
  His dreams alone survive eternity
  As pictures in the unsubstantial void.
  Excepting thee and me (and we because
  The poet wove us in his thought) remains
  Of nature and the universe no part
  Or vestige but the poet's dreams. This dread,
  Unspeakable land about thy feet, with all
  Its desolation and its terrors--lo!
  'T is but a phantom world. So long ago
  That God and all the angels since have died
  That poet lived--yourself long dead--his mind
  Filled with the light of a prophetic fire,
  And standing by the Western sea, above
  The youngest, fairest city in the world,
  Named in another tongue than his for one
  Ensainted, saw its populous domain
  Plague-smitten with a nameless shame. For there
  Red-handed murder rioted; and there
  The people gathered gold, nor cared to loose
  The assassin's fingers from the victim's throat,
  But said, each in his vile pursuit engrossed:
  'Am I my brother's keeper? Let the Law
  Look to the matter.' But the Law did not.
  And there, O pitiful! the babe was slain
  Within its mother's breast and the same grave
  Held babe and mother; and the people smiled,
  Still gathering gold, and said: 'The Law, the Law,'
  Then the great poet, touched upon the lips
  With a live coal from Truth's high altar, raised
  His arms to heaven and sang a song of doom--
  Sang of the time to be, when God should lean
  Indignant from the Throne and lift his hand,
  And that foul city be no more!--a tale,
  A dream, a desolation and a curse!
  No vestige of its glory should survive
  In fact or memory: its people dead,
  Its site forgotten, and its very name
  Disputed."

  "Was the prophecy fulfilled?"
  The sullen disc of the declining sun
  Was crimson with a curse and a portent,
  And scarce his angry ray lit up the land
  That lay below, whose lurid gloom appeared
  Freaked with a moving mist, which, reeking up
  From dim tarns hateful with a horrid ban,
  Took shapes forbidden and without a name.
  Gigantic night-birds, rising from the reeds
  With cries discordant, startled all the air,
  And bodiless voices babbled in the gloom.
  But not to me came any voice again;
  And, covering my face with thin, dead hands,
  I wept, and woke, and cried aloud to God!




  POLITICS.


  That land full surely hastens to its end
  Where public sycophants in homage bend
  The populace to flatter, and repeat
  The doubled echoes of its loud conceit.
  Lowly their attitude but high their aim,
  They creep to eminence through paths of shame,
  Till fixed securely in the seats of pow'r,
  The dupes they flattered they at last devour.




  POESY.


  Successive bards pursue Ambition's fire
  That shines, Oblivion, above thy mire.
  The latest mounts his predecessor's trunk,
  And sinks his brother ere himself is sunk.
  So die ingloriously Fame's _élite_,
  But dams of dunces keep the line complete.




  IN DEFENSE.


  You may say, if you please, Johnny Bull, that our girls
  Are crazy to marry your dukes and your earls;
  But I've heard that the maids of your own little isle
  Greet bachelor lords with a favoring smile.

  Nay, titles, 'tis said in defense of our fair,
  Are popular here because popular there;
  And for them our ladies persistently go
  Because 'tis exceedingly English, you know.

  Whatever the motive, you'll have to confess
  The effort's attended with easy success;
  And--pardon the freedom--'tis thought, over here,
  'Tis mortification you mask with a sneer.

  It's all very well, sir, your scorn to parade
  Of the high nasal twang of the Yankee maid,
  But, ah, to my lord when he dares to propose
  No sound is so sweet as that "Yes" from the nose.

  Our ladies, we grant, walk alone in the street
  (Observe, by-the-by, on what delicate feet!)
  'Tis a habit they got here at home, where they say
  The men from politeness go seldom astray.

  Ah, well, if the dukes and the earls and that lot
  Can stand it (God succor them if they cannot!)
  Your commoners ought to assent, I am sure,
  And what they 're not called on to suffer, endure.

  "'Tis nothing but money?" "Your nobles are bought?"
  As to that, I submit, it is commonly thought
  That England's a country not specially free
  Of Croesi and (if you'll allow it) Croesae.

  You've many a widow and many a girl
  With money to purchase a duke or an earl.
  'Tis a very remarkable thing, you'll agree,
  When goods import buyers from over the sea.

  Alas for the woman of Albion's isle!
  She may simper; as well as she can she may smile;
  She may wear pantalettes and an air of repose--
  But my lord of the future will talk through his nose.




  AN INVOCATION.

  [Read at the Celebration of Independence Day in San
  Francisco, in 1888.]


  Goddess of Liberty! O thou
    Whose tearless eyes behold the chain,
    And look unmoved upon the slain,
  Eternal peace upon thy brow,--

  Before thy shrine the races press,
    Thy perfect favor to implore--
    The proudest tyrant asks no more,
  The ironed anarchist no less.

  Thine altar-coals that touch the lips
    Of prophets kindle, too, the brand
    By Discord flung with wanton hand
  Among the houses and the ships.

  Upon thy tranquil front the star
    Burns bleak and passionless and white,
    Its cold inclemency of light
  More dreadful than the shadows are.

  Thy name we do not here invoke
    Our civic rites to sanctify:
    Enthroned in thy remoter sky,
  Thou heedest not our broken yoke.

  Thou carest not for such as we:
    Our millions die to serve the still
    And secret purpose of thy will.
  They perish--what is that to thee?

  The light that fills the patriot's tomb
    Is not of thee. The shining crown
    Compassionately offered down
  To those who falter in the gloom,

  And fall, and call upon thy name,
    And die desiring--'tis the sign
    Of a diviner love than thine,
  Rewarding with a richer fame.

  To him alone let freemen cry
    Who hears alike the victor's shout,
    The song of faith, the moan of doubt,
  And bends him from his nearer sky.

  God of my country and my race!
    So greater than the gods of old--
    So fairer than the prophets told
  Who dimly saw and feared thy face,--

  Who didst but half reveal thy will
   And gracious ends to their desire,
   Behind the dawn's advancing fire
  Thy tender day-beam veiling still,--

  To whom the unceasing suns belong,
   And cause is one with consequence,--
   To whose divine, inclusive sense
  The moan is blended with the song,--

  Whose laws, imperfect and unjust,
   Thy just and perfect purpose serve:
   The needle, howsoe'er it swerve,
  Still warranting the sailor's trust,--

  God, lift thy hand and make us free
   To crown the work thou hast designed.
   O, strike away the chains that bind
  Our souls to one idolatry!

  The liberty thy love hath given
   We thank thee for. We thank thee for
   Our great dead fathers' holy war
  Wherein our manacles were riven.

  We thank thee for the stronger stroke
   Ourselves delivered and incurred
   When--thine incitement half unheard--
  The chains we riveted we broke.

  We thank thee that beyond the sea
    The people, growing ever wise,
    Turn to the west their serious eyes
  And dumbly strive to be as we.

  As when the sun's returning flame
    Upon the Nileside statue shone,
    And struck from the enchanted stone
  The music of a mighty fame,

  Let Man salute the rising day
    Of Liberty, but not adore.
    'Tis Opportunity--no more--
  A useful, not a sacred, ray.

  It bringeth good, it bringeth ill,
    As he possessing shall elect.
    He maketh it of none effect
  Who walketh not within thy will.

  Give thou or more or less, as we
    Shall serve the right or serve the wrong.
    Confirm our freedom but so long
  As we are worthy to be free.

  But when (O, distant be the time!)
    Majorities in passion draw
    Insurgent swords to murder Law,
  And all the land is red with crime;

  Or--nearer menace!--when the band
    Of feeble spirits cringe and plead
    To the gigantic strength of Greed,
  And fawn upon his iron hand;--

  Nay, when the steps to state are worn
    In hollows by the feet of thieves,
    And Mammon sits among the sheaves
  And chuckles while the reapers mourn;

  Then stay thy miracle!--replace
    The broken throne, repair the chain,
    Restore the interrupted reign
  And veil again thy patient face.

  Lo! here upon the world's extreme
    We stand with lifted arms and dare
    By thine eternal name to swear
  Our country, which so fair we deem--

  Upon whose hills, a bannered throng,
    The spirits of the sun display
    Their flashing lances day by day
  And hear the sea's pacific song--

  Shall be so ruled in right and grace
    That men shall say: "O, drive afield
    The lawless eagle from the shield,
  And call an angel to the place!"




  RELIGION.


  Hassan Bedreddin, clad in rags, ill-shod,
  Sought the great temple of the living God.
    The worshippers arose and drove him forth,
  And one in power beat him with a rod.

  "Allah," he cried, "thou seest what I got;
  Thy servants bar me from the sacred spot."
    "Be comforted," the Holy One replied;
  "It is the only place where I am not."




  A MORNING FANCY.


  I drifted (or I seemed to) in a boat
    Upon the surface of a shoreless sea
  Whereon no ship nor anything did float,
    Save only the frail bark supporting me;
    And that--it was so shadowy--seemed to be
  Almost from out the very vapors wrought
    Of the great ocean underneath its keel;
  And all that blue profound appeared as naught
    But thicker sky, translucent to reveal,
  Miles down, whatever through its spaces glided,
  Or at the bottom traveled or abided.

  Great cities there I saw--of rich and poor,
    The palace and the hovel; mountains, vales,
  Forest and field, the desert and the moor,
    Tombs of the good and wise who'd lived in jails,
    And seas of denser fluid, white with sails
  Pushed at by currents moving here and there
    And sensible to sight above the flat
  Of that opaquer deep. Ah, strange and fair
    The nether world that I was gazing at
  With beating heart from that exalted level,
  And--lest I founder--trembling like the devil!

  The cities all were populous: men swarmed
    In public places--chattered, laughed and wept;
  And savages their shining bodies warmed
    At fires in primal woods. The wild beast leapt
    Upon its prey and slew it as it slept.
  Armies went forth to battle on the plain
    So far, far down in that unfathomed deep
  The living seemed as silent as the slain,
    Nor even the widows could be heard to weep.
  One might have thought their shaking was but laughter;
  And, truly, most were married shortly after.

  Above the wreckage of that silent fray
    Strange fishes swam in circles, round and round--
  Black, double-finned; and once a little way
    A bubble rose and burst without a sound
    And a man tumbled out upon the ground.
  Lord! 'twas an eerie thing to drift apace
    On that pellucid sea, beneath black skies
  And o'er the heads of an undrowning race;
    And when I woke I said--to her surprise
  Who came with chocolate, for me to drink it:
  "The atmosphere is deeper than you think it."




  VISIONS OF SIN.

  KRASLAJORSK, SIBERIA, March 29.

  "My eyes are better, and I shall travel slowly toward home."
    DANENHOWER.


  From the regions of the Night,
  Coming with recovered sight--
  From the spell of darkness free,
  What will Danenhower see?

  He will see when he arrives,
  Doctors taking human lives.
  He will see a learned judge
  Whose decision will not budge
  Till both litigants are fleeced
  And his palm is duly greased.
  Lawyers he will see who fight
  Day by day and night by night;
  Never both upon a side,
  Though their fees they still divide.
  Preachers he will see who teach
  That it is divine to preach--
  That they fan a sacred fire
  And are worthy of their hire.
  He will see a trusted wife

  (Pride of some good husband's life)
  Enter at a certain door
  And--but he will see no more.
  He will see Good Templars reel--
  See a prosecutor steal,
  And a father beat his child.
  He'll perhaps see Oscar Wilde.

  From the regions of the Night
  Coming with recovered sight--
  From the bliss of blindness free,
  That's what Danenhower'll see.

  1882.




  THE TOWN OF DAE.


  _Swains and maidens, young and old,
  You to me this tale have told._

  Where the squalid town of Dae
  Irks the comfortable sea,
  Spreading webs to gather fish,
  As for wealth we set a wish,
  Dwelt a king by right divine,
  Sprung from Adam's royal line,
    Town of Dae by the sea,
    Divers kinds of kings there be.

  Name nor fame had Picklepip:
  Ne'er a soldier nor a ship
  Bore his banners in the sun;
    Naught knew he of kingly sport,
    And he held his royal court
  Under an inverted tun.
  Love and roses, ages through,
    Bloom where cot and trellis stand;
  Never yet these blossoms grew--
  Never yet was room for two--
    In a cask upon the strand.

  So it happened, as it ought,
  That his simple schemes he wrought
  Through the lagging summer's day
  In a solitary way.
  So it happened, as was best,
  That he took his nightly rest
    With no dreadful incubus
  This way eyed and that way tressed,
    Featured thus, and thus, and thus,
  Lying lead-like on a breast
  By cares of State enough oppressed.
  Yet in dreams his fancies rude
  Claimed a lordly latitude.
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  Dreamers mate above their state
    And waken back to their degree.

  Once to cask himself away
  He prepared at close of day.
  As he tugged with swelling throat
  At a most unkingly coat--
  Not to get it off, but on,
  For the serving sun was gone--
  Passed a silk-appareled sprite
  Toward her castle on the height,
  Seized and set the garment right.
  Turned the startled Picklepip--
  Splendid crimson cheek and lip!
  Turned again to sneak away,

  But she bade the villain stay,
  Bade him thank her, which he did
  With a speech that slipped and slid,
  Sprawled and stumbled in its gait
  As a dancer tries to skate.
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  In the face of silk and lace
    Rags too bold should never be.

  Lady Minnow cocked her head:
  "Mister Picklepip," she said,
  "Do you ever think to wed?"
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  No fair lady ever made a
    Wicked speech like that to me!

  Wretched little Picklepip
  Said he hadn't any ship,
  Any flocks at his command,
  Nor to feed them any land;
  Said he never in his life
  Owned a mine to keep a wife.
  But the guilty stammer so
  That his meaning wouldn't flow;
  So he thought his aim to reach
  By some figurative speech:
  Said his Fate had been unkind
  Had pursued him from behind
    (How the mischief could it else?)

  Came upon him unaware,
  Caught him by the collar--there
  Gushed the little lady's glee
    Like a gush of golden bells:
  "Picklepip, why, that is _me_!"
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  Grammar's for great scholars--she
    Loved the summer and the lea.

  Stupid little Picklepip
  Allowed the subtle hint to slip--
  Maundered on about the ship
  That he did not chance to own;
    Told this grievance o'er and o'er,
    Knowing that she knew before;
  Told her how he dwelt alone.
  Lady Minnow, for reply,
  Cut him off with "So do I!"
  But she reddened at the fib;
  Servitors had she, _ad lib._
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  In her youth who speaks no truth
    Ne'er shall young and honest be.

  Witless little Picklepip
  Manned again his mental ship
  And veered her with a sudden shift.
    Painted to the lady's thought
    How he wrestled and he wrought

  Stoutly with the swimming drift
    By the kindly river brought
  From the mountain to the sea,
  Fuel for the town of Dae.
  Tedious tale for lady's ear:
    From her castle on the height,
    She had watched her water-knight
  Through the seasons of a year,
  Challenge more than met his view
  And conquer better than he knew.
  Now she shook her pretty pate
  And stamped her foot--'t was growing late:
  "Mister Picklepip, when I
  Drifting seaward pass you by;
  When the waves my forehead kiss
    And my tresses float above--
    Dead and drowned for lack of love--
  You'll be sorry, sir, for this!"
  And the silly creature cried--
  Feared, perchance, the rising tide.
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  Madam Adam, when she had 'em,
    May have been as bad as she.

  _Fiat lux!_ Love's lumination
  Fell in floods of revelation!
  Blinded brain by world aglare,
  Sense of pulses in the air,

  Sense of swooning and the beating
  Of a voice somewhere repeating
  Something indistinctly heard!
    And the soul of Picklepip
    Sprang upon his trembling lip,
  But he spake no further word
  Of the wealth he did not own;
  In that moment had outgrown
  Ship and mine and flock and land--
  Even his cask upon the strand.
  Dropped a stricken star to earth,
  Type of wealth and worldly worth.
  Clomb the moon into the sky,
  Type of love's immensity!
  Shaking silver seemed the sea,
  Throne of God the town of Dae!
    Town of Dae by the sea,
  From above there cometh love,
    Blessing all good souls that be.




  AN ANARCHIST.


  False to his art and to the high command
  God laid upon him, Markham's rebel hand
  Beats all in vain the harp he touched before:
  It yields a jingle and it yields no more.
  No more the strings beneath his finger-tips
  Sing harmonies divine. No more his lips,
  Touched with a living coal from sacred fires,
  Lead the sweet chorus of the golden wires.
  The voice is raucous and the phrases squeak;
  They labor, they complain, they sweat, they reek!
  The more the wayward, disobedient song
  Errs from the right to celebrate the wrong,
  More diligently still the singer strums,
  To drown the horrid sound, with all his thumbs.
  Gods, what a spectacle! The angels lean
  Out of high Heaven to view the sorry scene,
  And Israfel, "whose heart-strings are a lute,"
  Though now compassion makes their music mute,
  Among the weeping company appears,
  Pearls in his eyes and cotton in his ears.




  AN OFFER OF MARRIAGE.


  Once I "dipt into the future far as human eye could see,"
  And saw--it was not Sandow, nor John Sullivan, but she--
  The Emancipated Woman, who was weeping as she ran
  Here and there for the discovery of Expurgated Man.
  But the sun of Evolution ever rose and ever set,
  And that tardiest of mortals hadn't evoluted yet.
  Hence the tears that she cascaded, hence the sighs that tore apart
  All the tendinous connections of her indurated heart.
  Cried Emancipated Woman, as she wearied of the search:
  "In Advancing I have left myself distinctly in the lurch!
  Seeking still a worthy partner, from the land of brutes and dudes
  I have penetrated rashly into manless solitudes.
  Now without a mate of any kind where am I?--that's to say,
  Where shall I be to-morrow?--where exert my rightful sway
  And the purifying strength of my emancipated mind?
  Can solitude be lifted up, vacuity refined?
  Calling, calling from the shadows in the rear of my Advance--
  From the Region of Unprogress in the Dark Domain of Chance--
  Long I heard the Unevolvable beseeching my return
  To share the degradation he's reluctant to unlearn.
  But I fancy I detected--though I pray it wasn't that--
  A low reverberation, like an echo in a hat.
  So I've held my way regardless, evoluting year by year,
  Till I'm what you now behold me--or would if you were here--
  A condensed Emancipation and a Purifier proud
  An Independent Entity appropriately loud!
  Independent? Yes, in spirit, but (O, woful, woful state!)
  Doomed to premature extinction by privation of a mate--
  To extinction or reversion, for Unexpurgated Man
  Still awaits me in the backward if I sicken of the van.
  O the horrible dilemma!--to be odiously linked
  With an Undeveloped Species, or become a Type Extinct!"

  As Emancipated Woman wailed her sorrow to the air,
  Stalking out of desolation came a being strange and rare--
  Plato's Man!--bipedal, featherless from mandible to rump,
  Its wings two quilless flippers and its tail a plumeless stump.
  First it scratched and then it clucked, as if in hospitable terms
  It invited her to banquet on imaginary worms.
  Then it strutted up before her with a lifting of the head,
  And in accents of affection and of sympathy it said:
  "My estate is some 'at 'umble, but I'm qualified to draw
  Near the hymeneal altar and whack up my heart and claw
  To Emancipated Anything as walks upon the earth;
  And them things is at your service for whatever they are worth.
  I'm sure to be congenial, marm, nor e'er deserve a scowl--
  I'm Emancipated Rooster, I am Expurgated Fowl!"

  From the future and its wonders I withdrew my gaze, and then
  Wrote this wild unfestive prophecy about the Coming Hen.




  ARMA VIRUMQUE.


  "Ours is a Christian Army"; so he said
  A regiment of bangomen who led.
  "And ours a Christian Navy," added he
  Who sailed a thunder-junk upon the sea.
  Better they know than men unwarlike do
  What is an army and a navy, too.
  Pray God there may be sent them by-and-by
  The knowledge what a Christian is, and why.
  For somewhat lamely the conception runs
  Of a brass-buttoned Jesus firing guns.




  ON A PROPOSED CREMATORY.


  When a fair bridge is builded o'er the gulf
  Between two cities, some ambitious fool,
  Hot for distinction, pleads for earliest leave
  To push his clumsy feet upon the span,
  That men in after years may single him,
  Saying: "Behold the fool who first went o'er!"
  So be it when, as now the promise is,
  Next summer sees the edifice complete
  Which some do name a crematorium,
  Within the vantage of whose greater maw's
  Quicker digestion we shall cheat the worm
  And circumvent the handed mole who loves,
  With tunnel, adit, drift and roomy stope,
  To mine our mortal parts in all their dips
  And spurs and angles. Let the fool stand forth
  To link his name with this fair enterprise,
  As first decarcassed by the flame. And if
  With rival greedings for the fiery fame
  They push in clamoring multitudes, or if
  With unaccustomed modesty they all
  Hold off, being something loth to qualify,
  Let me select the fittest for the rite.
  By heaven! I'll make so warrantable, wise
  And excellent censure of their true deserts,
  And such a searching canvass of their claims,
  That none shall bait the ballot. I'll spread my choice
  Upon the main and general of those
  Who, moved of holy impulse, pulpit-born,
  Protested 'twere a sacrilege to burn
  God's gracious images, designed to rot,
  And bellowed for the right of way for each
  Distempered carrion through the water pipes.
  With such a sturdy, boisterous exclaim
  They did discharge themselves from their own throats
  Against the splintered gates of audience
  'Twere wholesomer to take them in at mouth
  Than ear. These shall burn first: their ignible
  And seasoned substances--trunks, legs and arms,
  Blent indistinguishable in a mass,
  Like winter-woven serpents in a pit--
  None vantaged of his fellow-fools in point
  Of precedence, and all alive--shall serve
  As fueling to fervor the retort
  For after cineration of true men.




  A DEMAND.


  You promised to paint me a picture,
          Dear Mat,
    And I was to pay you in rhyme.
  Although I am loth to inflict your
    Most easy of consciences, I'm
  Of opinion that fibbing is awful,
  And breaking a contract unlawful,
    Indictable, too, as a crime,
          A slight and all that.

  If, Lady Unbountiful, any
          Of that
    By mortals called pity has part
  In your obdurate soul--if a penny
    You care for the health of my heart,
  By performing your undertaking
  You'll succor that organ from breaking--
    And spare it for some new smart,
          As puss does a rat.

  Do you think it is very becoming,
          Dear Mat,
    To deny me my rights evermore
  And--bless you! if I begin summing
    Your sins they will make a long score!
  You never were generous, madam,
  If you had been Eve and I Adam
    You'd have given me naught but the core,
          And little of that.

  Had I been content with a Titian,
          A cat
    By Landseer, a meadow by Claude,
  No doubt I'd have had your permission
    To take it--by purchase abroad.
  But why should I sail o'er the ocean
  For Landseers and Claudes? I've a notion
    All's bad that the critics belaud.
          I wanted a Mat.

  Presumption's a sin, and I suffer
          For that:
    But still you _did_ say that sometime,
  If I'd pay you enough (here's enougher--
    That's more than enough) of rhyme
  You'd paint me a picture. I pay you
  Hereby in advance; and I pray you
    Condone, while you can, your crime,
          And send me a Mat.

  But if you don't do it I warn you,
          Dear Mat,
    I'll raise such a clamor and cry
  On Parnassus the Muses will scorn you
    As mocker of poets and fly
  With bitter complaints to Apollo:
    "Her spirit is proud, her heart hollow,
    Her beauty"--they'll hardly deny,
          On second thought, _that_!




  THE WEATHER WIGHT.


  The way was long, the hill was steep,
  My footing scarcely I could keep.

  The night enshrouded me in gloom,
  I heard the ocean's distant boom--

  The trampling of the surges vast
  Was borne upon the rising blast.

  "God help the mariner," I cried,
  "Whose ship to-morrow braves the tide!"

  Then from the impenetrable dark
  A solemn voice made this remark:

  "For this locality--warm, bright;
  Barometer unchanged; breeze light."

  "Unseen consoler-man," I cried,
  "Whoe'er you are, where'er abide,

  "Thanks--but my care is somewhat less
  For Jack's, than for my own, distress.

  "Could I but find a friendly roof,
  Small odds what weather were aloof.

  "For he whose comfort is secure
  Another's woes can well endure."

  "The latch-string's out," the voice replied,
  "And so's the door--jes' step inside."

  Then through the darkness I discerned
  A hovel, into which I turned.

  Groping about beneath its thatch,
  I struck my head and then a match.

  A candle by that gleam betrayed
  Soon lent paraffinaceous aid.

  A pallid, bald and thin old man
  I saw, who this complaint began:

  "Through summer suns and winter snows
  I sets observin' of my toes.

  "I rambles with increasin' pain
  The path of duty, but in vain.

  "Rewards and honors pass me by--
  No Congress hears this raven cry!"

  Filled with astonishment, I spoke:
  "Thou ancient raven, why this croak?

  "With observation of your toes
  What Congress has to do, Heaven knows!

  "And swallow me if e'er I knew
  That one could sit and ramble too!"

  To answer me that ancient swain
  Took up his parable again:

  "Through winter snows and summer suns
  A Weather Bureau here I runs.

  "I calls the turn, and can declare
  Jes' when she'll storm and when she'll fair.

  "Three times a day I sings out clear
  The probs to all which wants to hear.

  "Some weather stations run with light
  Frivolity is seldom right.

  "A scientist from times remote,
  In Scienceville my birth is wrote.

  "And when I h'ist the 'rainy' sign
  Jes' take your clo'es in off the line."

  "Not mine, O marvelous old man,
  The methods of your art to scan,

  "Yet here no instruments there be--
  Nor 'ometer nor 'scope I see.

  "Did you (if questions you permit)
  At the asylum leave your kit?"

  That strange old man with motion rude
  Grew to surprising altitude.

  "Tools (and sarcazzems too) I scorns--
  I tells the weather by my corns.

  "No doors and windows here you see--
  The wind and m'isture enters free.

  "No fires nor lights, no wool nor fur
  Here falsifies the tempercher.

  "My corns unleathered I expose
  To feel the rain's foretellin' throes.

  "No stockin' from their ears keeps out
  The comin' tempest's warnin' shout.

  "Sich delicacy some has got
  They know next summer's to be hot.

  "This here one says (for that he's best):
  'Storm center passin' to the west.'

  "This feller's vitals is transfixed
  With frost for Janawary sixt'.

  "One chap jes' now is occy'pied
  In fig'rin on next Fridy's tide.

  "I've shaved this cuss so thin and true
  He'll spot a fog in South Peru.

  "Sech are my tools, which ne'er a swell
  Observatory can excel.

  "By long a-studyin' their throbs
  I catches onto all the probs."

  Much more, no doubt, he would have said,
  But suddenly he turned and fled;

  For in mine eye's indignant green
  Lay storms that he had not foreseen,

  Till all at once, with silent squeals,
  His toes "caught on" and told his heels.




  T.A.H.


  Yes, he was that, or that, as you prefer--
  Did so and so, though, faith, it wasn't all;
  Lived like a fool, or a philosopher.
  And had whatever's needful for a fall.
  As rough inflections on a planet merge
  In the true bend of the gigantic sphere,
  Nor mar the perfect circle of its verge,
  So in the survey of his worth the small
  Asperities of spirit disappear,
  Lost in the grander curves of character.
  He lately was hit hard: none knew but I
  The strength and terror of that ghastly stroke--
  Not even herself. He uttered not a cry,
  But set his teeth and made a revelry;
  Drank like a devil--staining sometimes red
  The goblet's edge; diced with his conscience; spread,
  Like Sisyphus, a feast for Death, and spoke
  His welcome in a tongue so long forgot
  That even his ancient guest remembered not
  What race had cursed him in it. Thus my friend
  Still conjugating with each failing sense
  The verb "to die" in every mood and tense,
  Pursued his awful humor to the end.
  When like a stormy dawn the crimson broke
  From his white lips he smiled and mutely bled,
  And, having meanly lived, is grandly dead.




  MY MONUMENT.


  It is pleasant to think, as I'm watching my ink
    A-drying along my paper,
  That a monument fine will surely be mine
    When death has extinguished my taper.

  From each rhyming scribe of the journalist tribe
    Purged clean of all sentiments narrow,
  A pebble will mark his respect for the stark
    Stiff body that's under the barrow.

  By fellow-bards thrown, thus stone upon stone
    Will make my celebrity deathless.
  O, I wish I could think, as I gaze at my ink,
    They'd wait till my carcass is breathless.




  MAD.


  O ye who push and fight
    To hear a wanton sing--
  Who utter the delight
    That has the bogus ring,--

  O men mature in years,
    In understanding young,
  The membranes of whose ears
    She tickles with her tongue,--

  O wives and daughters sweet,
    Who call it love of art
  To kiss a woman's feet
    That crush a woman's heart,--

  O prudent dams and sires,
    Your docile young who bring
  To see how man admires
    A sinner if she sing,--

  O husbands who impart
    To each assenting spouse
  The lesson that shall start
    The buds upon your brows,--

  All whose applauding hands
    Assist to rear the fame
  That throws o'er all the lands
    The shadow of its shame,--

  Go drag her car!--the mud
    Through which its axle rolls
  Is partly human blood
    And partly human souls.

  Mad, mad!--your senses whirl
    Like devils dancing free,
  Because a strolling girl
    Can hold the note high C.

  For this the avenging rod
    Of Heaven ye dare defy,
  And tear the law that God
    Thundered from Sinai!




  HOSPITALITY.


  Why ask me, Gastrogogue, to dine
  (Unless to praise your rascal wine)
  Yet never ask some luckless sinner
  Who needs, as I do not, a dinner?




  FOR A CERTAIN CRITIC.


  Let lowly themes engage my humble pen--
  Stupidities of critics, not of men.
  Be it mine once more the maunderings to trace
  Of the expounders' self-directed race--
  Their wire-drawn fancies, finically fine,
  Of diligent vacuity the sign.
  Let them in jargon of their trade rehearse
  The moral meaning of the random verse
  That runs spontaneous from the poet's pen
  To be half-blotted by ambitious men
  Who hope with his their meaner names to link
  By writing o'er it in another ink
  The thoughts unreal which they think they think,
  Until the mental eye in vain inspects
  The hateful palimpsest to find the text.

  The lark ascending heavenward, loud and long
  Sings to the dawning day his wanton song.
  The moaning dove, attentive to the sound,
  Its hidden meaning hastens to expound:
  Explains its principles, design--in brief,
  Pronounces it a parable of grief!

  The bee, just pausing ere he daubs his thigh
  With pollen from a hollyhock near by,
  Declares he never heard in terms so just
  The labor problem thoughtfully discussed!
  The browsing ass looks up and clears his whistle
  To say: "A monologue upon the thistle!"
  Meanwhile the lark, descending, folds his wing
  And innocently asks: "What!--did I sing?"

  O literary parasites! who thrive
  Upon the fame of better men, derive
  Your sustenance by suction, like a leech,
  And, for you preach of them, think masters preach,--
  Who find it half is profit, half delight,
  To write about what you could never write,--
  Consider, pray, how sharp had been the throes
  Of famine and discomfiture in those
  You write of if they had been critics, too,
  And doomed to write of nothing but of you!

  Lo! where the gaping crowd throngs yonder tent,
  To see the lion resolutely bent!
  The prosing showman who the beast displays
  Grows rich and richer daily in its praise.
  But how if, to attract the curious yeoman,
  The lion owned the show and showed the showman?




  RELIGIOUS PROGRESS.


  Every religion is important. When men rise above existing
  conditions a new religion comes in, and it is better
  than the old one.--_Professor Howison_.


  Professor dear, I think it queer
    That all these good religions
  ('Twixt you and me, some two or three
    Are schemes for plucking pigeons)--

  I mean 'tis strange that every change
    Our poor minds to unfetter
  Entails a new religion--true
    As t' other one, and better.

  From each in turn the truth we learn,
    That wood or flesh or spirit
  May justly boast it rules the roast
    Until we cease to fear it.

  Nay, once upon a time long gone
    Man worshipped Cat and Lizard:
  His God he'd find in any kind
    Of beast, from a to izzard.

  When risen above his early love
    Of dirt and blood and slumber,
  He pulled down these vain deities,
    And made one out of lumber.

  "Far better that than even a cat,"
    The Howisons all shouted;
  "When God is wood religion's good!"
    But one poor cynic doubted.

  "A timber God--that's very odd!"
    Said Progress, and invented
  The simple plan to worship Man,
    Who, kindly soul! consented.

  But soon our eye we lift asky,
    Our vows all unregarded,
  And find (at least so says the priest)
    The Truth--and Man's discarded.

  Along our line of march recline
    Dead gods devoid of feeling;
  And thick about each sun-cracked lout
    Dried Howisons are kneeling.




  MAGNANIMITY.


  "To the will of the people we loyally bow!"
  That's the minority shibboleth now.
  O noble antagonists, answer me flat--
  What would you do if you didn't do that?




  TO HER.


  O, Sinner A, to me unknown
  Be such a conscience as your own!
  To ease it you to Sinner B
  Confess the sins of Sinner C.




  TO A SUMMER POET.


  Yes, the Summer girl is flirting on the beach,
      With a him.
  And the damboy is a-climbing for the peach,
      On the limb;
  Yes, the bullfrog is a-croaking
  And the dudelet is a-smoking
      Cigarettes;
  And the hackman is a-hacking
  And the showman is a-cracking
      Up his pets;
  Yes, the Jersey 'skeeter flits along the shore
  And the snapdog--we have heard it o'er and o'er;
      Yes, my poet,
      Well we know it--
  Know the spooners how they spoon
      In the bright
      Dollar light
  Of the country tavern moon;
      Yes, the caterpillars fall
      From the trees (we know it all),
  And with beetles all the shelves
      Are alive.

      Please unbuttonhole us--O,
      Have the grace to let us go,
          For we know
    How you Summer poets thrive,
      By the recapitulation
      And insistent iteration
  Of the wondrous doings incident to Life Among
          Ourselves!
    So, I pray you stop the fervor and the fuss.
      For you, poor human linnet,
      There's a half a living in it,
    But there's not a copper cent in it for us!




  ARTHUR McEWEN.


  Posterity with all its eyes
  Will come and view him where he lies.
  Then, turning from the scene away
  With a concerted shrug, will say:
  "H'm, Scarabaeus Sisyphus--
  What interest has that to us?
  We can't admire at all, at all,
  A tumble-bug without its ball."
  And then a sage will rise and say:
  "Good friends, you err--turn back, I pray:
  This freak that you unwisely shun
  Is bug and ball rolled into one."




  CHARLES AND PETER.


  Ere Gabriel's note to silence died
  All graves of men were gaping wide.

  Then Charles A. Dana, of "The Sun,"
  Rose slowly from the deepest one.

  "The dead in Christ rise first, 't is writ,"
  Quoth he--"ick, bick, ban, doe,--I'm It!"

  (His headstone, footstone, counted slow,
  Were "ick" and "bick," he "ban" and "doe":

  Of beating Nick the subtle art
  Was part of his immortal part.)

  Then straight to Heaven he took his flight,
  Arriving at the Gates of Light.

  There Warden Peter, in the throes
  Of sleep, lay roaring in the nose.

  "Get up, you sluggard!" Dana cried--
  "I've an engagement there inside."

  The Saint arose and scratched his head.
  "I recollect your face," he said.

  "(And, pardon me, 't is rather hard),
  But----" Dana handed him a card.

  "Ah, yes, I now remember--bless
  My soul, how dull I am I--yes, yes,

  "We've nothing better here than bliss.
  Walk in. But I must tell you this:

  "We've rest and comfort, though, and peace."
  "H'm--puddles," Dana said, "for geese.

  "Have you in Heaven no Hell?" "Why, no,"
  Said Peter, "nor, in truth, below.

  "'T is not included in our scheme--
  'T is but a preacher's idle dream."

  The great man slowly moved away.
  "I'll call," he said, "another day.

  "On earth I played it, o'er and o'er,
  And Heaven without it were a bore."

  "O, stuff!--come in. You'll make," said Pete,
  "A hell where'er you set your feet."

  1885.




  CONTEMPLATION.


  I muse upon the distant town
    In many a dreamy mood.
  Above my head the sunbeams crown
    The graveyard's giant rood.
  The lupin blooms among the tombs.
    The quail recalls her brood.

  Ah, good it is to sit and trace
    The shadow of the cross;
  It moves so still from place to place
    O'er marble, bronze and moss;
  With graves to mark upon its arc
    Our time's eternal loss.

  And sweet it is to watch the bee
    That reve's in the rose,
  And sense the fragrance floating free
    On every breeze that blows
  O'er many a mound, where, safe and sound,
    Mine enemies repose.




  CREATION.


  God dreamed--the suns sprang flaming into place,
  And sailing worlds with many a venturous race!
  He woke--His smile alone illumined space.




  BUSINESS.


  Two villains of the highest rank
  Set out one night to rob a bank.
  They found the building, looked it o'er,
  Each window noted, tried each door,
  Scanned carefully the lidded hole
  For minstrels to cascade the coal--
  In short, examined five-and-twenty
  Good paths from poverty to plenty.
  But all were sealed, they saw full soon,
  Against the minions of the moon.
  "Enough," said one: "I'm satisfied."
  The other, smiling fair and wide,
  Said: "I'm as highly pleased as you:
  No burglar ever can get through.
  Fate surely prospers our design--
  The booty all is yours and mine."
  So, full of hope, the following day
  To the exchange they took their way
  And bought, with manner free and frank,
  Some stock of that devoted bank;
  And they became, inside the year,
  One President and one Cashier.

  Their crime I can no further trace--
  The means of safety to embrace,
  I overdrew and left the place.




  A POSSIBILITY.


  If the wicked gods were willing
    (Pray it never may be true!)
  That a universal chilling
      Should ensue
  Of the sentiment of loving,--
    If they made a great undoing
  Of the plan of turtle-doving,
    Then farewell all poet-lore,
      Evermore.
  If there were no more of billing
    There would be no more of cooing
  And we all should be but owls--
      Lonely fowls
  Blinking wonderfully wise,
    With our great round eyes--
  Sitting singly in the gloaming and no longer two and two,
  As unwilling to be wedded as unpracticed how to woo;
    With regard to being mated,
    Asking still with aggravated
  Ungrammatical acerbity: "To who? To who?"




  TO A CENSOR.

  "The delay granted by the weakness and good nature of
  our judges is responsible for half the murders."--_Daily Newspaper_.


  Delay responsible? Why, then; my friend,
  Impeach Delay and you will make an end.
  Thrust vile Delay in jail and let it rot
  For doing all the things that it should not.
  Put not good-natured judges under bond,
  But make Delay in damages respond.
  Minos, Aeacus, Rhadamanthus, rolled
  Into one pitiless, unsmiling scold--
  Unsparing censor, be your thongs uncurled
  To "lash the rascals naked through the world."
  The rascals? Nay, Rascality's the thing
  Above whose back your knotted scourges sing.
  _Your_ satire, truly, like a razor keen,
  "Wounds with a touch that's neither felt nor seen;"
  For naught that you assail with falchion free
  Has either nerves to feel or eyes to see.
  Against abstractions evermore you charge
  You hack no helmet and you need no targe.
  That wickedness is wrong and sin a vice,
  That wrong's not right and foulness never nice,
  Fearless affirm. All consequences dare:
  Smite the offense and the offender spare.
  When Ananias and Sapphira lied
  Falsehood, had you been there, had surely died.
  When money-changers in the Temple sat,
  At money-changing you'd have whirled the "cat"
  (That John-the-Baptist of the modern pen)
  And all the brokers would have cried amen!

  Good friend, if any judge deserve your blame
  Have you no courage, or has he no name?
  Upon his method will you wreak your wrath,
  Himself all unmolested in his path?
  Fall to! fall to!--your club no longer draw
  To beat the air or flail a man of straw.
  Scorn to do justice like the Saxon thrall
  Who cuffed the offender's shadow on a wall.
  Let rascals in the flesh attest your zeal--
  Knocked on the mazzard or tripped up at heel!

  We know that judges are corrupt. We know
  That crimes are lively and that laws are slow.
  We know that lawyers lie and doctors slay;
  That priests and preachers are but birds of pray;
  That merchants cheat and journalists for gold
  Flatter the vicious while at vice they scold.
  'Tis all familiar as the simple lore
  That two policemen and two thieves make four.

  But since, while some are wicked, some are good,
  (As trees may differ though they all are wood)
  Names, here and there, to show whose head is hit,
  The bad would sentence and the good acquit.
  In sparing everybody none you spare:
  Rebukes most personal are least unfair.
  To fire at random if you still prefer,
  And swear at Dog but never kick a cur,
  Permit me yet one ultimate appeal
  To something that you understand and feel:
  Let thrift and vanity your heart persuade--
  You might be read if you would learn your trade.

  Good brother cynics (you have doubtless guessed
  Not one of you but all are here addressed)
  Remember this: the shaft that seeks a heart
  Draws all eyes after it; an idle dart
  Shot at some shadow flutters o'er the green,
  Its flight unheeded and its fall unseen.




  THE HESITATING VETERAN.



  When I was young and full of faith
    And other fads that youngsters cherish
  A cry rose as of one that saith
    With unction: "Help me or I perish!"
  'Twas heard in all the land, and men
    The sound were each to each repeating.
  It made my heart beat faster then
    Than any heart can now be beating.

  For the world is old and the world is gray--
    Grown prudent and, I guess, more witty.
  She's cut her wisdom teeth, they say,
    And doesn't now go in for Pity.
  Besides, the melancholy cry
    Was that of one, 'tis now conceded,
  Whose plight no one beneath the sky
    Felt half so poignantly as he did.

  Moreover, he was black. And yet
    That sentimental generation
  With an austere compassion set
    Its face and faith to the occasion.
  Then there were hate and strife to spare,
    And various hard knocks a-plenty;
  And I ('twas more than my true share,
    I must confess) took five-and-twenty.

  That all is over now--the reign
    Of love and trade stills all dissensions,
  And the clear heavens arch again
    Above a land of peace and pensions.
  The black chap--at the last we gave
    Him everything that he had cried for,
  Though many white chaps in the grave
    'Twould puzzle to say what they died for.

  I hope he's better off--I trust
    That his society and his master's
  Are worth the price we paid, and must
    Continue paying, in disasters;
  But sometimes doubts press thronging round
    ('Tis mostly when my hurts are aching)
  If war for union was a sound
    And profitable undertaking.

  'Tis said they mean to take away
    The Negro's vote for he's unlettered.
  'Tis true he sits in darkness day
    And night, as formerly, when fettered;
  But pray observe--howe'er he vote
    To whatsoever party turning,
  He'll be with gentlemen of note
    And wealth and consequence and learning.
  With Hales and Morgans on each side,
    How could a fool through lack of knowledge,
  Vote wrong? If learning is no guide
    Why ought one to have been in college?
  O Son of Day, O Son of Night!
    What are your preferences made of?
  I know not which of you is right,
    Nor which to be the more afraid of.

  The world is old and the world is bad,
    And creaks and grinds upon its axis;
  And man's an ape and the gods are mad!--
    There's nothing sure, not even our taxes.
  No mortal man can Truth restore,
    Or say where she is to be sought for.
  I know what uniform I wore--
    O, that I knew which side I fought for!




  A YEAR'S CASUALTIES.


  Slain as they lay by the secret, slow,
  Pitiless hand of an unseen foe,
  Two score thousand old soldiers have crossed
  The river to join the loved and lost.
  In the space of a year their spirits fled,
  Silent and white, to the camp of the dead.

  One after one, they fall asleep
  And the pension agents awake to weep,
  And orphaned statesmen are loud in their wail
  As the souls flit by on the evening gale.
  O Father of Battles, pray give us release
  From the horrors of peace, the horrors of peace!




  INSPIRATION.



  O hoary sculptor, stay thy hand:
    I fain would view the lettered stone.
  What carvest thou?--perchance some grand
    And solemn fancy all thine own.
  For oft to know the fitting word
    Some humble worker God permits.
      "Jain Ann Meginnis,
          Agid 3rd.
      He givith His beluved fits."




  TO-DAY.


  I saw a man who knelt in prayer,
    And heard him say:
  "I'll lay my inmost spirit bare
        To-day.

  "Lord, for to-morrow and its need
    I do not pray;
  Let me upon my neighbor feed
        To-day.

  "Let me my duty duly shirk
    And run away
  From any form or phase of work
        To-day.

  "From Thy commands exempted still
    Let me obey
  The promptings of my private will
        To-day.

  "Let me no word profane, no lie
    Unthinking say
  If anyone is standing by
        To-day.

  "My secret sins and vices grave
    Let none betray;
  The scoffer's jeers I do not crave
          To-day.

  "And if to-day my fortune all
    Should ebb away,
  Help me on other men's to fall
          To-day.

  "So, for to-morrow and its mite
    I do not pray;
  Just give me everything in sight
          To-day."

  I cried: "Amen!" He rose and ran
    Like oil away.
  I said: "I've seen an honest man
          To-day."




  AN ALIBI.


  A famous journalist, who long
  Had told the great unheaded throng
  Whate'er they thought, by day or night.
  Was true as Holy Writ, and right,
  Was caught in--well, on second thought,
  It is enough that he was caught,
  And being thrown in jail became
  The fuel of a public flame.

  "_Vox populi vox Dei_," said
  The jailer. Inxling bent his head
  Without remark: that motto good
  In bold-faced type had always stood
  Above the columns where his pen
  Had rioted in praise of men
  And all they said--provided he
  Was sure they mostly did agree.
  Meanwhile a sharp and bitter strife
  To take, or save, the culprit's life
  Or liberty (which, I suppose,
  Was much the same to him) arose
  Outside. The journal that his pen
  Adorned denounced his crime--but then
  Its editor in secret tried
  To have the indictment set aside.
  The opposition papers swore
  His father was a rogue before,
  And all his wife's relations were
  Like him and similar to her.
  They begged their readers to subscribe
  A dollar each to make a bribe
  That any Judge would feel was large
  Enough to prove the gravest charge--
  Unless, it might be, the defense
  Put up superior evidence.
  The law's traditional delay
  Was all too short: the trial day
  Dawned red and menacing. The Judge
  Sat on the Bench and wouldn't budge,
  And all the motions counsel made
  Could not move _him_--and there he stayed.
  "The case must now proceed," he said,
  "While I am just in heart and head,
  It happens--as, indeed, it ought--
  Both sides with equal sums have bought
  My favor: I can try the cause
  Impartially." (Prolonged applause.)

  The prisoner was now arraigned
  And said that he was greatly pained
  To be suspected--_he_, whose pen
  Had charged so many other men
  With crimes and misdemeanors! "Why,"
  He said, a tear in either eye,
  "If men who live by crying out
  'Stop thief!' are not themselves from doubt
  Of their integrity exempt,
  Let all forego the vain attempt
  To make a reputation! Sir,
  I'm innocent, and I demur."
  Whereat a thousand voices cried
  Amain he manifestly lied--
  _Vox populi_ as loudly roared
  As bull by _picadores_ gored,
  In his own coin receiving pay
  To make a Spanish holiday.

  The jury--twelve good men and true--
  Were then sworn in to see it through,
  And each made solemn oath that he
  As any babe unborn was free
  From prejudice, opinion, thought,
  Respectability, brains--aught
  That could disqualify; and some
  Explained that they were deaf and dumb.
  A better twelve, his Honor said,
  Was rare, except among the dead.
  The witnesses were called and sworn.
  The tales they told made angels mourn,
  And the Good Book they'd kissed became
  Red with the consciousness of shame.

  Whenever one of them approached
  The truth, "That witness wasn't coached,
  Your Honor!" cried the lawyers both.
  "Strike out his testimony," quoth
  The learned judge: "This Court denies
  Its ear to stories which surprise.
  I hold that witnesses exempt
  From coaching all are in contempt."
  Both Prosecution and Defense
  Applauded the judicial sense,
  And the spectators all averred
  Such wisdom they had never heard:
  'Twas plain the prisoner would be
  Found guilty in the first degree.
  Meanwhile that wight's pale cheek confessed
  The nameless terrors in his breast.
  He felt remorseful, too, because
  He wasn't half they said he was.
  "If I'd been such a rogue," he mused
  On opportunities unused,
  "I might have easily become
  As wealthy as Methusalum."
  This journalist adorned, alas,
  The middle, not the Bible, class.

  With equal skill the lawyers' pleas
  Attested their divided fees.
  Each gave the other one the lie,
  Then helped him frame a sharp reply.

  Good Lord! it was a bitter fight,
  And lasted all the day and night.
  When once or oftener the roar
  Had silenced the judicial snore
  The speaker suffered for the sport
  By fining for contempt of court.
  Twelve jurors' noses good and true
  Unceasing sang the trial through,
  And even _vox populi_ was spent
  In rattles through a nasal vent.
  Clerk, bailiff, constables and all
  Heard Morpheus sound the trumpet call
  To arms--his arms--and all fell in
  Save counsel for the Man of Sin.
  That thaumaturgist stood and swayed
  The wand their faculties obeyed--
  That magic wand which, like a flame.
  Leapt, wavered, quivered and became
  A wonder-worker--known among
  The ignoble vulgar as a Tongue.

  How long, O Lord, how long my verse
  Runs on for better or for worse
  In meter which o'ermasters me,
  Octosyllabically free!--
  A meter which, the poets say,
  No power of restraint can stay;--
  A hard-mouthed meter, suited well
  To him who, having naught to tell,
  Must hold attention as a trout
  Is held, by paying out and out
  The slender line which else would break
  Should one attempt the fish to take.
  Thus tavern guides who've naught to show
  But some adjacent curio
  By devious trails their patrons lead
  And make them think 't is far indeed.
  Where was I?

          While the lawyer talked
  The rogue took up his feet and walked:
  While all about him, roaring, slept,
  Into the street he calmly stepped.
  In very truth, the man who thought
  The people's voice from heaven had caught
  God's inspiration took a change
  Of venue--it was passing strange!
  Straight to his editor he went
  And that ingenious person sent
  A Negro to impersonate
  The fugitive. In adequate
  Disguise he took his vacant place
  And buried in his arms his face.
  When all was done the lawyer stopped
  And silence like a bombshell dropped
  Upon the Court: judge, jury, all
  Within that venerable hall
  (Except the deaf and dumb, indeed,
  And one or two whom death had freed)
  Awoke and tried to look as though
  Slumber was all they did not know.

  And now that tireless lawyer-man
  Took breath, and then again began:
  "Your Honor, if you did attend
  To what I've urged (my learned friend
  Nodded concurrence) to support
  The motion I have made, this court
  May soon adjourn. With your assent
  I've shown abundant precedent
  For introducing now, though late,
  New evidence to exculpate
  My client. So, if you'll allow,
  I'll prove an _alibi_!" "What?--how?"
  Stammered the judge. "Well, yes, I can't
  Deny your showing, and I grant
  The motion. Do I understand
  You undertake to prove--good land!--
  That when the crime--you mean to show
  Your client wasn't _there_?" "O, no,
  I cannot quite do that, I find:
  My _alibi's_ another kind
  Of _alibi_,--I'll make it clear,
  Your Honor, that he isn't _here_."
  The Darky here upreared his head,
  Tranquillity affrighted fled
  And consternation reigned instead!




  REBUKE.


  When Admonition's hand essays
    Our greed to curse,
  Its lifted finger oft displays
    Our missing purse.




  J.F.B.


  How well this man unfolded to our view
    The world's beliefs of Death and Heaven and Hell--
    This man whose own convictions none could tell,
  Nor if his maze of reason had a clew.
  Dogmas he wrote for daily bread, but knew
    The fair philosophies of doubt so well
    That while we listened to his words there fell
  Some that were strangely comforting, though true.
  Marking how wise we grew upon his doubt,
    We said: "If so, by groping in the night,
    He can proclaim some certain paths of trust,
  How great our profit if he saw about
  His feet the highways leading to the light."
    Now he sees all. Ah, Christ! his mouth is dust!




  THE DYING STATESMAN.


  It is a politician man--
    He draweth near his end,
  And friends weep round that partisan,
    Of every man the friend.

  Between the Known and the Unknown
    He lieth on the strand;
  The light upon the sea is thrown
    That lay upon the land.

  It shineth in his glazing eye,
    It burneth on his face;
  God send that when we come to die
    We know that sign of grace!

  Upon his lips his blessed sprite
    Poiseth her joyous wing.
  "How is it with thee, child of light?
    Dost hear the angels sing?"

  "The song I hear, the crown I see,
    And know that God is love.
  Farewell, dark world--I go to be
    A postmaster above!"

  For him no monumental arch,
    But, O, 'tis good and brave
  To see the Grand Old Party march
    To office o'er his grave!




  THE DEATH OF GRANT.


  Father! whose hard and cruel law
    Is part of thy compassion's plan,
    Thy works presumptuously we scan
  For what the prophets say they saw.

  Unbidden still the awful slope
    Walling us in we climb to gain
    Assurance of the shining plain
  That faith has certified to hope.

  In vain!--beyond the circling hill
    The shadow and the cloud abide.
    Subdue the doubt, our spirits guide
  To trust the Record and be still.

  To trust it loyally as he
    Who, heedful of his high design,
    Ne'er raised a seeking eye to thine,
  But wrought thy will unconsciously,

  Disputing not of chance or fate,
    Nor questioning of cause or creed;
    For anything but duty's deed
  Too simply wise, too humbly great.

  The cannon syllabled his name;
    His shadow shifted o'er the land,
    Portentous, as at his command
  Successive cities sprang to flame!

  He fringed the continent with fire,
    The rivers ran in lines of light!
    Thy will be done on earth--if right
  Or wrong he cared not to inquire.

  His was the heavy hand, and his
    The service of the despot blade;
    His the soft answer that allayed
  War's giant animosities.

  Let us have peace: our clouded eyes,
    Fill, Father, with another light,
    That we may see with clearer sight
  Thy servant's soul in Paradise.




  THE FOUNTAIN REFILLED.


  Of Hans Pietro Shanahan
  (Who was a most ingenious man)
  The Muse of History records
  That he'd get drunk as twenty lords.

  He'd get so truly drunk that men
  Stood by to marvel at him when
  His slow advance along the street
  Was but a vain cycloidal feat.

  And when 'twas fated that he fall
  With a wide geographical sprawl,
  They signified assent by sounds
  Heard (faintly) at its utmost bounds.

  And yet this Mr. Shanahan
  (Who was a most ingenious man)
  Cast not on wine his thirsty eyes
  When it was red or otherwise.

  All malt, or spirituous, tope
  He loathed as cats dissent from soap;
  And cider, if it touched his lip,
  Evoked a groan at every sip.

  But still, as heretofore explained,
  He not infrequently was grained.
  (I'm not of those who call it "corned."
  Coarse speech I've always duly scorned.)

  Though truth to say, and that's but right,
  Strong drink (it hath an adder's bite!)
  Was what had put him in the mud,
  The only kind he used was blood!

  Alas, that an immortal soul
  Addicted to the flowing bowl,
  The emptied flagon should again
  Replenish from a neighbor's vein.

  But, Mr. Shanahan was so
  Constructed, and his taste that low.
  Nor more deplorable was he
  In kind of thirst than in degree;

  For sometimes fifty souls would pay
  The debt of nature in a day
  To free him from the shame and pain
  Of dread Sobriety's misreign.

  His native land, proud of its sense
  Of his unique inabstinence,
  Abated something of its pride
  At thought of his unfilled inside.

  And some the boldness had to say
  'Twere well if he were called away
  To slake his thirst forevermore
  In oceans of celestial gore.

  But Hans Pietro Shanahan
  (Who was a most ingenious man)
  Knew that his thirst was mortal; so
  Remained unsainted here below--

  Unsainted and unsaintly, for
  He neither went to glory nor
  To abdicate his power deigned
  Where, under Providence, he reigned,

  But kept his Boss's power accurst
  To serve his wild uncommon thirst.
  Which now had grown so truly great
  It was a drain upon the State.

  Soon, soon there came a time, alas!
  When he turned down an empty glass--
  All practicable means were vain
  His special wassail to obtain.

  In vain poor Decimation tried
  To furnish forth the needful tide;
  And Civil War as vainly shed
  Her niggard offering of red.

  Poor Shanahan! his thirst increased
  Until he wished himself deceased,
  Invoked the firearm and the knife,
  But could not die to save his life!

  He was so dry his own veins made
  No answer to the seeking blade;
  So parched that when he would have passed
  Away he could not breathe his last.

  'Twas then, when almost in despair,
  (Unlaced his shoon, unkempt his hair)
  He saw as in a dream a way
  To wet afresh his mortal clay.

  Yes, Hans Pietro Shanahan
  (Who was a most ingenious man)
  Saw freedom, and with joy and pride
  "Thalassa! (or Thalatta!)" cried.

  Straight to the Aldermen went he,
  With many a "pull" and many a fee,
  And many a most corrupt "combine"
  (The Press for twenty cents a line

  Held out and fought him--O, God, bless
  Forevermore the holy Press!)
  Till he had franchises complete
  For trolley lines on every street!

  The cars were builded and, they say,
  Were run on rails laid every way--
  Rhomboidal roads, and circular,
  And oval--everywhere a car--

  Square, dodecagonal (in great
  Esteem the shape called Figure 8)
  And many other kinds of shapes
  As various as tails of apes.

  No other group of men's abodes
  E'er had such odd electric roads,
  That winding in and winding out,
  Began and ended all about.

  No city had, unless in Mars,
  That city's wealth of trolley cars.
  They ran by day, they flew by night,
  And O, the sorry, sorry sight!

  And Hans Pietro Shanahan
  (Who was a most ingenious man)
  Incessantly, the Muse records,
  Lay drunk as twenty thousand lords!




  LAUS LUCIS.

  Theosophists are about to build a "Temple for the revival of the
  Mysteries of Antiquity."--_Vide the Newspapers, passim_.


  Each to his taste: some men prefer to play
  At mystery, as others at piquet.
  Some sit in mystic meditation; some
  Parade the street with tambourine and drum.
  One studies to decipher ancient lore
  Which, proving stuff, he studies all the more;
  Another swears that learning is but good
  To darken things already understood,
  Then writes upon Simplicity so well
  That none agree on what he wants to tell,
  And future ages will declare his pen
  Inspired by gods with messages to men.
  To found an ancient order those devote
  Their time--with ritual, regalia, goat,
  Blankets for tossing, chairs of little ease
  And all the modern inconveniences;
  These, saner, frown upon unmeaning rites
  And go to church for rational delights.
  So all are suited, shallow and profound,
  The prophets prosper and the world goes round.
  For me--unread in the occult, I'm fain
  To damn all mysteries alike as vain,
  Spurn the obscure and base my faith upon
  The Revelations of the good St. John.

  1897.




  NANINE.


  We heard a song-bird trilling--
    'T was but a night ago.
  Such rapture he was rilling
    As only we could know.

  This morning he is flinging
    His music from the tree,
  But something in the singing
    Is not the same to me.

  His inspiration fails him,
    Or he has lost his skill.
  Nanine, Nanine, what ails him
    That he should sing so ill?

  Nanine is not replying--
    She hears no earthly song.
  The sun and bird are lying
   And the night is, O, so long!




  TECHNOLOGY.


  'Twas a serious person with locks of gray
    And a figure like a crescent;
  His gravity, clearly, had come to stay,
    But his smile was evanescent.

  He stood and conversed with a neighbor, and
    With (likewise) a high falsetto;
  And he stabbed his forefinger into his hand
    As if it had been a stiletto.

  His words, like the notes of a tenor drum,
    Came out of his head unblended,
  And the wonderful altitude of some
    Was exceptionally splendid.

  While executing a shake of the head,
    With the hand, as it were, of a master,
  This agonizing old gentleman said:
    "'Twas a truly sad disaster!

  "Four hundred and ten longs and shorts in all,
    Went down"--he paused and snuffled.
  A single tear was observed to fall,
    And the old man's drum was muffled.

  "A very calamitous year," he said.
    And again his head-piece hoary
  He shook, and another pearl he shed,
    As if he wept _con amore._

  "O lacrymose person," I cried, "pray why
    Should these failures so affect you?
  With speculators in stocks no eye
    That's normal would ever connect you."

  He focused his orbs upon mine and smiled
    In a sinister sort of manner.
  "Young man," he said, "your words are wild:
    I spoke of the steamship 'Hanner.'

  "For she has went down in a howlin' squall,
    And my heart is nigh to breakin'--
  Four hundred and ten longs and shorts in all
    Will never need undertakin'!

  "I'm in the business myself," said he,
    "And you've mistook my expression;
  For I uses the technical terms, you see,
    Employed in my perfession."

  That old undertaker has joined the throng
    On the other side of the River,
  But I'm still unhappy to think I'm a "long,"
   And a tape-line makes me shiver.




  A REPLY TO A LETTER.


  O nonsense, parson--tell me not they thrive
    And jubilate who follow your dictation.
  The good are the unhappiest lot alive--
    I know they are from careful observation.
    If freedom from the terrors of damnation
  Lengthens the visage like a telescope,
  And lacrymation is a sign of hope,
    Then I'll continue, in my dreadful plight,
  To tread the dusky paths of sin, and grope
    Contentedly without your lantern's light;
    And though in many a bog beslubbered quite,
  Refuse to flay me with ecclesiastic soap.

  You say 'tis a sad world, seeing I'm condemned,
    With many a million others of my kidney.
  Each continent's Hammed, Japheted and Shemmed
    With sinners--worldlings like Sir Philip Sidney
  And scoffers like Voltaire, who thought it bliss
  To simulate respect for Genesis--
    Who bent the mental knee as if in prayer,
    But mocked at Moses underneath his hair,
  And like an angry gander bowed his head to hiss.

  Seeing such as these, who die without contrition,
  Must go to--beg your pardon, sir--perdition,
    The sons of light, you tell me, can't be gay,
  But count it sin of the sort called omission
    The groan to smother or the tear to stay
    Or fail to--what is that they live by?--pray.
  So down they flop, and the whole serious race is
  Put by divine compassion on a praying basis.

  Well, if you take it so to heart, while yet
    Our own hearts are so light with nature's leaven,
  You'll weep indeed when we in Hades sweat,
    And you look down upon us out of Heaven.
  In fancy, lo! I see your wailing shades
  Thronging the crystal battlements. Cascades
  Of tears spring singing from each golden spout,
    Run roaring from the verge with hoarser sound,
    Dash downward through the glimmering profound,
  Quench the tormenting flame and put the Devil out!

  Presumptuous ass! to you no power belongs
  To pitchfork me to Heaven upon the prongs
    Of a bad pen, whose disobedient sputter,
  With less of ink than incoherence fraught
    Befits the folly that it tries to utter.
    Brains, I observe, as well as tongues, can stutter:
  You suffer from impediment of thought.

  When next you "point the way to Heaven," take care:
  Your fingers all being thumbs, point, Heaven knows where!
  Farewell, poor dunce! your letter though I blame,
  Bears witness how my anger I can tame:
  I've called you everything except your hateful name!




  TO OSCAR WILDE.


  Because from Folly's lips you got
    Some babbled mandate to subdue
    The realm of Common Sense, and you
  Made promise and considered not--

  Because you strike a random blow
    At what you do not understand,
    And beckon with a friendly hand
  To something that you do not know,

  I hold no speech of your desert,
    Nor answer with porrected shield
    The wooden weapon that you wield,
  But meet you with a cast of dirt.

  Dispute with such a thing as you--
    Twin show to the two-headed calf?
    Why, sir, if I repress my laugh,
  'T is more than half the world can do.

  1882.




  PRAYER.


  Fear not in any tongue to call
  Upon the Lord--He's skilled in all.
  But if He answereth my plea
  He speaketh one unknown to me.




  A "BORN LEADER OF MEN."


    Tuckerton Tamerlane Morey Mahosh
      Is a statesman of world-wide fame,
    With a notable knack at rhetorical bosh
      To glorify somebody's name--
  Somebody chosen by Tuckerton's masters
  To succor the country from divers disasters
      Portentous to Mr. Mahosh.

    Percy O'Halloran Tarpy Cabee
      Is in the political swim.
    He cares not a button for men, not he:
      Great principles captivate him--
  Principles cleverly cut out and fitted
  To Percy's capacity, duly submitted,
      And fought for by Mr. Cabee.

    Drusus Turn Swinnerton Porfer Fitzurse
      Holds office the most of his life.
    For men nor for principles cares he a curse,
      But much for his neighbor's wife.
  The Ship of State leaks, but _he_ doesn't pump any,
  Messrs. Mahosh, Cabee & Company
      Pump for good Mr. Fitzurse.




  TO THE BARTHOLDI STATUE.


  O Liberty, God-gifted--
    Young and immortal maid--
  In your high hand uplifted;
    The torch declares your trade.

  Its crimson menace, flaming
    Upon the sea and shore,
  Is, trumpet-like, proclaiming
    That Law shall be no more.

  Austere incendiary,
    We're blinking in the light;
  Where is your customary
    Grenade of dynamite?

  Where are your staves and switches
    For men of gentle birth?
  Your mask and dirk for riches?
    Your chains for wit and worth?

  Perhaps, you've brought the halters
    You used in the old days,
  When round religion's altars
    You stabled Cromwell's bays?

  Behind you, unsuspected,
    Have you the axe, fair wench,
  Wherewith you once collected
    A poll-tax from the French?

  America salutes you--
    Preparing to disgorge.
  Take everything that suits you,
    And marry Henry George.

  1894



  AN UNMERRY CHRISTMAS.


  Christmas, you tell me, comes but once a year.
  One place it never comes, and that is here.
  Here, in these pages no good wishes spring,
  No well-worn greetings tediously ring--
  For Christmas greetings are like pots of ore:
  The hollower they are they ring the more.
  Here shall no holly cast a spiny shade,
  Nor mistletoe my solitude invade,
  No trinket-laden vegetable come,
  No jorum steam with Sheolate of rum.
  No shrilling children shall their voices rear.
  Hurrah for Christmas without Christmas cheer!

  No presents, if you please--I know too well
  What Herbert Spencer, if he didn't tell
  (I know not if he did) yet might have told
  Of present-giving in the days of old,
  When Early Man with gifts propitiated
  The chiefs whom most he doubted, feared and hated,
  Or tendered them in hope to reap some rude
  Advantage from the taker's gratitude.
  Since thus the Gift its origin derives
  (How much of its first character survives
  You know as well as I) my stocking's tied,
  My pocket buttoned--with my soul inside.
  I save my money and I save my pride.

  Dinner? Yes; thank you--just a human body
  Done to a nutty brown, and a tear toddy
  To give me appetite; and as for drink,
  About a half a jug of blood, I think,
  Will do; for still I love the red, red wine,
  Coagulating well, with wrinkles fine
  Fretting the satin surface of its flood.
  O tope of kings--divine Falernian--blood!

  Duse take the shouting fowls upon the limb,
  The kneeling cattle and the rising hymn!
  Has not a pagan rights to be regarded--
  His heart assaulted and his ear bombarded
  With sentiments and sounds that good old Pan
  Even in his demonium would ban?

  No, friends--no Christmas here, for I have sworn
  To keep my heart hard and my knees unworn.
  Enough you have of jester, player, priest:
  I as the skeleton attend your feast,
  In the mad revelry to make a lull
  With shaken finger and with bobbing skull.
  However you my services may flout,
  Philosophy disdain and reason doubt,
  I mean to hold in customary state,
  My dismal revelry and celebrate
  My yearly rite until the crack o' doom,
  Ignore the cheerful season's warmth and bloom
  And cultivate an oasis of gloom.




  BY A DEFEATED LITIGANT.


  Liars for witnesses; for lawyers brutes
  Who lose their tempers to retrieve their suits;
  Cowards for jurors; and for judge a clown
  Who ne'er took up the law, yet lays it down;
  Justice denied, authority abused,
  And the one honest person the accused--
  Thy courts, my country, all these awful years,
  Move fools to laughter and the wise to tears.




  AN EPITAPH.


  Here lies Greer Harrison, a well cracked louse--
  So small a tenant of so big a house!
  He joyed in fighting with his eyes (his fist
  Prudently pendent from a peaceful wrist)
  And loved to loll on the Parnassian mount,
  His pen to suck and all his thumbs to count,--
  What poetry he'd written but for lack
  Of skill, when he had counted, to count back!
  Alas, no more he'll climb the sacred steep
  To wake the lyre and put the world to sleep!
  To his rapt lip his soul no longer springs
  And like a jaybird from a knot-hole sings.
  No more the clubmen, pickled with his wine,
  Spread wide their ears and hiccough "That's divine!"
  The genius of his purse no longer draws
  The pleasing thunders of a paid applause.
  All silent now, nor sound nor sense remains,
  Though riddances of worms improve his brains.
  All his no talents to the earth revert,
  And Fame concludes the record: "Dirt to dirt!"




  THE POLITICIAN.


  "Let Glory's sons manipulate
  The tiller of the Ship of State.
  Be mine the humble, useful toil
  To work the tiller of the soil."




  AN INSCRIPTION

  For a Proposed Monument in Washington to Him who
  Made it Beautiful.


  Erected to "Boss" Shepherd by the dear
    Good folk he lived and moved among in peace--
    Guarded on either hand by the police,
  With soldiers in his front and in his rear.




  FROM VIRGINIA TO PARIS.


  The polecat, sovereign of its native wood,
  Dashes damnation upon bad and good;
  The health of all the upas trees impairs
  By exhalations deadlier than theirs;
  Poisons the rattlesnake and warts the toad--
  The creeks go rotten and the rocks corrode!
  She shakes o'er breathless hill and shrinking dale
  The horrid aspergillus of her tail!
  From every saturated hair, till dry,
  The spargent fragrances divergent fly,
  Deafen the earth and scream along the sky!

  Removed to alien scenes, amid the strife
  Of urban odors to ungladden life--
  Where gas and sewers and dead dogs conspire
  The flesh to torture and the soul to fire--
  Where all the "well defined and several stinks"
  Known to mankind hold revel and high jinks--
  Humbled in spirit, smitten with a sense
  Of lost distinction, leveled eminence,
  She suddenly resigns her baleful trust,
  Nor ever lays again our mortal dust.
  Her powers atrophied, her vigor sunk,
  She lives deodorized, a sweeter skunk.




  A "MUTE INGLORIOUS MILTON."


  "O, I'm the Unaverage Man,
    But you never have heard of me,
  For my brother, the Average Man, outran
    My fame with rapiditee,
    And I'm sunk in Oblivion's sea,
  But my bully big brother the world can span
    With his wide notorietee.
  I do everything that I can
    To make 'em attend to me,
  But the papers ignore the Unaverage Man
    With a weird uniformitee."

  So sang with a dolorous note
    A voice that I heard from the beach;
  On the sable waters it seemed to float
    Like a mortal part of speech.
  The sea was Oblivion's sea,
    And I cried as I plunged to swim:
  "The Unaverage Man shall reside with me."
    But he didn't--I stayed with him!




  THE FREE TRADER'S LAMENT.


  Oft from a trading-boat I purchased spice
    And shells and corals, brought for my inspection
  From the fair tropics--paid a Christian price
  And was content in my fool's paradise,
    Where never had been heard the word "Protection."

  'T was my sole island; there I dwelt alone--
    No customs-house, collector nor collection,
  But a man came, who, in a pious tone
  Condoled with me that I had never known
    The manifest advantage of Protection.

  So, when the trading-boat arrived one day,
    He threw a stink-pot into its mid-section.
  The traders paddled for their lives away,
  Nor came again into that haunted bay,
    The blessed home thereafter of Protection.

  Then down he sat, that philanthropic man,
    And spat upon some mud of his selection,
  And worked it, with his knuckles in a pan,
  To shapes of shells and coral things, and span
    A thread of song in glory of Protection.

  He baked them in the sun. His air devout
    Enchanted me. I made a genuflexion:
  "God help you, gentle sir," I said. "No doubt,"
  He answered gravely, "I'll get on without
    Assistance now that we have got Protection."

  Thenceforth I bought his wares--at what a price
    For shells and corals of such imperfection!
  "Ah, now," said he, "your lot is truly nice."
  But still in all that isle there was no spice
    To season to my taste that dish, Protection.




  SUBTERRANEAN PHANTASIES.


  I died. As meekly in the earth I lay,
   With shriveled fingers reverently folded,
  The worm--uncivil engineer!--my clay
   Tunneled industriously, and the mole did.
   My body could not dodge them, but my soul did;
  For that had flown from this terrestrial ball
  And I was rid of it for good and all.

  So there I lay, debating what to do--
   What measures might most usefully be taken
  To circumvent the subterranean crew
   Of anthropophagi and save my bacon.
   My fortitude was all this while unshaken,
  But any gentleman, of course, protests
  Against receiving uninvited guests.

  However proud he might be of his meats,
   Not even Apicius, nor, I think, Lucullus,
  Wasted on tramps his culinary sweets;
   "_Aut Caesar_," say judicious hosts, "_aut nullus_."
   And though when Marcius came unbidden Tullus
  Aufidius feasted him because he starved,
  Marcius by Tullus afterward was carved.

  We feed the hungry, as the book commands
    (For men might question else our orthodoxy)
  But do not care to see the outstretched hands,
    And so we minister to them by proxy.
    When Want, in his improper person, knocks he
  Finds we're engaged. The graveworm's very fresh
  To think we like his presence in the flesh.

  So, as I said, I lay in doubt; in all
    That underworld no judges could determine
  My rights. When Death approaches them they fall,
    And falling, naturally soil their ermine.
    And still below ground, as above, the vermin
  That work by dark and silent methods win
  The case--the burial case that one is in.

  Cases at law so slowly get ahead,
    Even when the right is visibly unclouded,
  That if all men are classed as quick and dead,
    The judges all are dead, though some unshrouded.
    Pray Jove that when they're actually crowded
  On Styx's brink, and Charon rows in sight,
  His bark prove worse than Cerberus's bite.

  Ah! Cerberus, if you had but begot
    A race of three-mouthed dogs for man to nourish
  And woman to caress, the muse had not
    Lamented the decay of virtues currish,
    And triple-hydrophobia now would flourish,
  For barking, biting, kissing to employ
  Canine repeaters were indeed a joy.

  Lord! how we cling to this vile world! Here I,
    Whose dust was laid ere I began this carping,
  By moles and worms and such familiar fry
    Run through and through, am singing still and harping
    Of mundane matters--flatting, too, and sharping.
  I hate the Angel of the Sleeping Cup:
  So I'm for getting--and for shutting--up.




  IN MEMORIAM


  Beauty (they called her) wasn't a maid
  Of many things in the world afraid.
  She wasn't a maid who turned and fled
  At sight of a mouse, alive or dead.
  She wasn't a maid a man could "shoo"
  By shouting, however abruptly, "Boo!"
  She wasn't a maid who'd run and hide
  If her face and figure you idly eyed.
  She was'nt a maid who'd blush and shake
  When asked what part of the fowl she'd take.
  (I blush myself to confess she preferred,
  And commonly got, the most of the bird.)
  She wasn't a maid to simper because
  She was asked to sing--if she ever was.

  In short, if the truth must be displayed
  _In puris_--Beauty wasn't a maid.
  Beauty, furry and fine and fat,
  Yawny and clawy, sleek and all that,
  Was a pampered and spoiled Angora cat!

  I loved her well, and I'm proud that she
  Wasn't indifferent, quite, to me;
  In fact I have sometimes gone so far
  (You know, mesdames, how silly men are)
  As to think she preferred--excuse the conceit--
  _My_ legs upon which to sharpen her feet.
  Perhaps it shouldn't have gone for much,
  But I started and thrilled beneath her touch!

  Ah, well, that's ancient history now:
  The fingers of Time have touched my brow,
  And I hear with never a start to-day
  That Beauty has passed from the earth away.
  Gone!--her death-song (it killed her) sung.
  Gone!--her fiddlestrings all unstrung.
  Gone to the bliss of a new _régime_
  Of turkey smothered in seas of cream;
  Of roasted mice (a superior breed,
  To science unknown and the coarser need
  Of the living cat) cooked by the flame
  Of the dainty soul of an erring dame
  Who gave to purity all her care,
  Neglecting the duty of daily prayer,--
  Crisp, delicate mice, just touched with spice
  By the ghost of a breeze from Paradise;
  A very digestible sort of mice.

  Let scoffers sneer, I propose to hold
  That Beauty has mounted the Stair of Gold,
  To eat and eat, forever and aye,
  On a velvet rug from a golden tray.
  But the human spirit--that is my creed--
  Rots in the ground like a barren seed.
  That is my creed, abhorred by Man
  But approved by Cat since time began.
  Till Death shall kick at me, thundering "Scat!"
  I shall hold to that, I shall hold to that.




  THE STATESMEN.


  How blest the land that counts among
    Her sons so many good and wise,
  To execute great feats of tongue
    When troubles rise.

  Behold them mounting every stump
    Our liberty by speech to guard.
  Observe their courage:--see them jump
    And come down hard!

  "Walk up, walk up!" each cries aloud,
    "And learn from me what you must do
  To turn aside the thunder cloud,
    The earthquake too.

  "Beware the wiles of yonder quack
    Who stuffs the ears of all that pass.
  I--I alone can show that black
    Is white as grass."

  They shout through all the day and break
    The silence of the night as well.
  They'd make--I wish they'd _go_ and make--
      Of Heaven a Hell.

  A advocates free silver, B
    Free trade and C free banking laws.
  Free board, clothes, lodging would from me
      Win warm applause.

  Lo, D lifts up his voice: "You see
    The single tax on land would fall
  On all alike." More evenly
      No tax at all.

  "With paper money" bellows E
    "We'll all be rich as lords." No doubt--
  And richest of the lot will be
      The chap without.

  As many "cures" as addle wits
    Who know not what the ailment is!
  Meanwhile the patient foams and spits
      Like a gin fizz.

  Alas, poor Body Politic,
    Your fate is all too clearly read:
  To be not altogether quick,
      Nor very dead.

  You take your exercise in squirms,
    Your rest in fainting fits between.
  'T is plain that your disorder's worms--
      Worms fat and lean.

  Worm Capital, Worm Labor dwell
    Within your maw and muscle's scope.
  Their quarrels make your life a Hell,
      Your death a hope.

  God send you find not such an end
    To ills however sharp and huge!
  God send you convalesce! God send
      You vermifuge.




  THE BROTHERS.


  Scene--_A lawyer's dreadful den.
  Enter stall-fed citizen._

  LAWYER.--'Mornin'. How-de-do?

  CITIZEN.--Sir, same to you.
  Called as counsel to retain you
  In a case that I'll explain you.
  Sad, _so_ sad! Heart almost broke.
  Hang it! where's my kerchief? Smoke?
  Brother, sir, and I, of late,
  Came into a large estate.
  Brother's--h'm, ha,--rather queer
  Sometimes _(tapping forehead) _here.
  What he needs--you know--a "writ"--
  Something, eh? that will permit
  Me to manage, sir, in fine,
  His estate, as well as mine.
  'Course he'll _kick_; 't will break, I fear,
  His loving heart--excuse this tear.

  LAWYER.--Have you nothing more?
  All of this you said before--
  When last night I took your case.

  CITIZEN.--Why, sir, your face
  Ne'er before has met my view!

  LAWYER.--Eh? The devil! True:
  My mistake--it was your brother.
  But you're very like each other.




  THE CYNIC'S BEQUEST


  In that fair city, Ispahan,
  There dwelt a problematic man,
  Whose angel never was released,
  Who never once let out his beast,
  But kept, through all the seasons' round,
  Silence unbroken and profound.
  No Prophecy, with ear applied
  To key-hole of the future, tried
  Successfully to catch a hint
  Of what he'd do nor when begin 't;
  As sternly did his past defy
  Mild Retrospection's backward eye.
  Though all admired his silent ways,
  The women loudest were in praise:
  For ladies love those men the most
  Who never, never, never boast--
  Who ne'er disclose their aims and ends
  To naughty, naughty, naughty friends.

  Yet, sooth to say, the fame outran
  The merit of this doubtful man,
  For taciturnity in him,
  Though not a mere caprice or whim,
  Was not a virtue, such as truth,
  High birth, or beauty, wealth or youth.

  'Twas known, indeed, throughout the span
  Of Ispahan, of Gulistan--
  These utmost limits of the earth
  Knew that the man was dumb from birth.

  Unto the Sun with deep salaams
  The Parsee spreads his morning palms
  (A beacon blazing on a height
  Warms o'er his piety by night.)
  The Moslem deprecates the deed,
  Cuts off the head that holds the creed,
  Then reverently goes to grass,
  Muttering thanks to Balaam's Ass
  For faith and learning to refute
  Idolatry so dissolute!
  But should a maniac dash past,
  With straws in beard and hands upcast,
  To him (through whom, whene'er inclined
  To preach a bit to Madmankind,
  The Holy Prophet speaks his mind)
  Our True Believer lifts his eyes
  Devoutly and his prayer applies;
  But next to Solyman the Great
  Reveres the idiot's sacred state.
  Small wonder then, our worthy mute
  Was held in popular repute.
  Had he been blind as well as mum,
  Been lame as well as blind and dumb,
  No bard that ever sang or soared
  Could say how he had been adored.
  More meagerly endowed, he drew
  An homage less prodigious. True,
  No soul his praises but did utter--
  All plied him with devotion's butter,
  But none had out--'t was to their credit--
  The proselyting sword to spread it.
  I state these truths, exactly why
  The reader knows as well as I;
  They've nothing in the world to do
  With what I hope we're coming to
  If Pegasus be good enough
  To move when he has stood enough.
  Egad! his ribs I would examine
  Had I a sharper spur than famine,
  Or even with that if 'twould incline
  To examine his instead of mine.
  Where was I? Ah, that silent man
  Who dwelt one time in Ispahan--
  He had a name--was known to all
  As Meerza Solyman Zingall.

  There lived afar in Astrabad,
  A man the world agreed was mad,
  So wickedly he broke his joke
  Upon the heads of duller folk,
  So miserly, from day to day,
  He gathered up and hid away
  In vaults obscure and cellars haunted
  What many worthy people wanted,
  A stingy man!--the tradesmen's palms
  Were spread in vain: "I give no alms
  Without inquiry"--so he'd say,
  And beat the needy duns away.
  The bastinado did, 'tis true,
  Persuade him, now and then, a few
  Odd tens of thousands to disburse
  To glut the taxman's hungry purse,
  But still, so rich he grew, his fear
  Was constant that the Shah might hear.
  (The Shah had heard it long ago,
  And asked the taxman if 'twere so,
  Who promptly answered, rather airish,
  The man had long been on the parish.)
  The more he feared, the more he grew
  A cynic and a miser, too,
  Until his bitterness and pelf
  Made him a terror to himself;
  Then, with a razor's neckwise stroke,
  He tartly cut his final joke.
  So perished, not an hour too soon,
  The wicked Muley Ben Maroon.

  From Astrabad to Ispahan
  At camel speed the rumor ran
  That, breaking through tradition hoar,
  And throwing all his kinsmen o'er,
  The miser'd left his mighty store
  Of gold--his palaces and lands--
  To needy and deserving hands
  (Except a penny here and there
  To pay the dervishes for prayer.)
  'Twas known indeed throughout the span
  Of earth, and into Hindostan,
  That our beloved mute was the
  Residuary legatee.
  The people said 'twas very well,
  And each man had a tale to tell
  Of how he'd had a finger in 't
  By dropping many a friendly hint
  At Astrabad, you see. But ah,
  They feared the news might reach the Shah!
  To prove the will the lawyers bore 't
  Before the Kadi's awful court,
  Who nodded, when he heard it read,
  Confirmingly his drowsy head,
  Nor thought, his sleepiness so great,
  Himself to gobble the estate.
  "I give," the dead had writ, "my all
  To Meerza Solyman Zingall
  Of Ispahan. With this estate
  I might quite easily create
  Ten thousand ingrates, but I shun
  Temptation and create but one,
  In whom the whole unthankful crew
  The rich man's air that ever drew
  To fat their pauper lungs I fire
  Vicarious with vain desire!
  From foul Ingratitude's base rout
  I pick this hapless devil out,
  Bestowing on him all my lands,
  My treasures, camels, slaves and bands
  Of wives--I give him all this loot,
  And throw my blessing in to boot.
  Behold, O man, in this bequest
  Philanthropy's long wrongs redressed:
  To speak me ill that man I dower
  With fiercest will who lacks the power.
  Allah il Allah! now let him bloat
  With rancor till his heart's afloat,
  Unable to discharge the wave
  Upon his benefactor's grave!"

  Forth in their wrath the people came
  And swore it was a sin and shame
  To trick their blessed mute; and each
  Protested, serious of speech,
  That though _he'd_ long foreseen the worst
  He'd been against it from the first.
  By various means they vainly tried
  The testament to set aside,
  Each ready with his empty purse
  To take upon himself the curse;
  For _they_ had powers of invective
  Enough to make it ineffective.
  The ingrates mustered, every man,
  And marched in force to Ispahan
  (Which had not quite accommodation)
  And held a camp of indignation.

  The man, this while, who never spoke--
  On whom had fallen this thunder-stroke
  Of fortune, gave no feeling vent
  Nor dropped a clue to his intent.
  Whereas no power to him came
  His benefactor to defame,
  Some (such a length had slander gone to)
  Even whispered that he didn't want to!
  But none his secret could divine;
  If suffering he made no sign,
  Until one night as winter neared
  From all his haunts he disappeared--
  Evanished in a doubtful blank
  Like little crayfish in a bank,
  Their heads retracting for a spell,
  And pulling in their holes as well.

  All through the land of Gul, the stout
  Young Spring is kicking Winter out.
  The grass sneaks in upon the scene,
  Defacing it with bottle-green.

  The stumbling lamb arrives to ply
  His restless tail in every eye,
  Eats nasty mint to spoil his meat
  And make himself unfit to eat.
  Madly his throat the bulbul tears--
  In every grove blasphemes and swears
  As the immodest rose displays
  Her shameless charms a dozen ways.
  Lo! now, throughout the utmost span
  Of Ispahan--of Gulistan--
  A big new book's displayed in all
  The shops and cumbers every stall.
  The price is low--the dealers say 'tis--
  And the rich are treated to it gratis.
  Engraven on its foremost page
  These title-words the eye engage:
  "The Life of Muley Ben Maroon,
  Of Astrabad--Rogue, Thief, Buffoon
  And Miser--Liver by the Sweat
  Of Better Men: A Lamponette
  Composed in Rhyme and Written all
  By Meerza Solyman Zingall!"




  CORRECTED NEWS.


  'T was a maiden lady (the newspapers say)
  Pious and prim and a bit gone-gray.
    She slept like an angel, holy and white,
    Till ten o' the clock in the shank o' the night
  (When men and other wild animals prey)
  And then she cried in the viewless gloom:
  "There's a man in the room, a man in the room!"
  And this maiden lady (they make it appear)
  Leapt out of the window, five fathom sheer!

  Alas, that lying is such a sin
  When newspaper men need bread and gin
    And none can be had for less than a lie!
  For the maiden lady a bit gone-gray
  Saw the man in the room from across the way,
  And leapt, not out of the window but in--
    _Ten_ fathom sheer, as I hope to die!




  AN EXPLANATION.


  "I never yet exactly could determine
  Just how it is that the judicial ermine
  Is kept so safely from predacious vermin."

  "It is not so, my friend: though in a garret
  'Tis kept in camphor, and you often air it,
  The vermin will get into it and wear it."




  JUSTICE.


  Jack Doe met Dick Roe, whose wife he loved,
    And said: "I will get the best of him."
  So pulling a knife from his boot, he shoved
    It up to the hilt in the breast of him.

  Then he moved that weapon forth and back,
    Enlarging the hole he had made with it,
  Till the smoking liver fell out, and Jack
    Merrily, merrily played with it.

  Then he reached within and he seized the slack
    Of the lesser bowel, and, traveling
  Hither and thither, looked idly back
    On that small intestine, raveling.

  The wretched Richard, with many a grin
    Laid on with exceeding suavity,
  Curled up and died, and they ran John in
    And charged him with sins of gravity.

  The case was tried and a verdict found:
    The jury, with great humanity,
  Acquitted the prisoner on the ground
    Of extemporary insanity.




  MR. FINK'S DEBATING DONKEY.


  Of a person known as Peters I will humbly crave your leave
  An unusual adventure into narrative to weave--
  Mr. William Perry Peters, of the town of Muscatel,
  A public educator and an orator as well.
  Mr. Peters had a weakness which, 'tis painful to relate,
  Was a strong predisposition to the pleasures of debate.
  He would foster disputation wheresoever he might be;
  In polygonal contention none so happy was as he.
  'Twas observable, however, that the exercises ran
  Into monologue by Peters, that rhetorical young man.
  And the Muscatelian rustics who assisted at the show,
  By involuntary silence testified their overthrow--
  Mr. Peters, all unheedful of their silence and their grief,
  Still effacing every vestige of erroneous belief.
  O, he was a sore affliction to all heretics so bold
  As to entertain opinions that he didn't care to hold.

  One day--'t was in pursuance of a pedagogic plan
  For the mental elevation of Uncultivated Man--
  Mr. Peters, to his pupils, in dismissing them, explained
  That the Friday evening following (unless, indeed, it rained)
  Would be signalized by holding in the schoolhouse a debate
  Free to all who their opinions might desire to ventilate
  On the question, "Which is better, as a serviceable gift,
  Speech or hearing, from barbarity the human mind to lift?"
  The pupils told their fathers, who, forehanded always, met
  At the barroom to discuss it every evening, dry or wet,
  They argued it and argued it and spat upon the stove,
  And the non-committal "barkeep" on their differences throve.
  And I state it as a maxim in a loosish kind of way:
  You'll have the more to back your word the less you have to say.
  Public interest was lively, but one Ebenezer Fink
  Of the Rancho del Jackrabbit, only seemed to sit and think.

  On the memorable evening all the men of Muscatel
  Came to listen to the logic and the eloquence as well--
  All but William Perry Peters, whose attendance there, I fear.
  Was to wreak his ready rhetoric upon the public ear,
  And prove (whichever side he took) that hearing wouldn't lift
  The human mind as ably as the other, greater gift.
  The judges being chosen and the disputants enrolled,
  The question he proceeded _in extenso_ to unfold:
  "_Resolved_--The sense of hearing lifts the mind up out of reach
  Of the fogs of error better than the faculty of speech."
  This simple proposition he expounded, word by word,
  Until they best understood it who least perfectly had heard.
  Even the judges comprehended as he ventured to explain--
  The impact of a spit-ball admonishing in vain.
  Beginning at a period before Creation's morn,
  He had reached the bounds of tolerance and Adam yet unborn.
  As down the early centuries of pre-historic time
  He tracked important principles and quoted striking rhyme,
  And Whisky Bill, prosaic soul! proclaiming him a jay,
  Had risen and like an earthquake, "reeled unheededly away,"
  And a late lamented cat, when opportunity should serve,
  Was preparing to embark upon her parabolic curve,
  A noise arose outside--the door was opened with a bang
  And old Ebenezer Fink was heard ejaculating "G'lang!"
  Straight into that assembly gravely marched without a wink
  An ancient ass--the property it was of Mr. Fink.
  Its ears depressed and beating time to its infestive tread,
  Silent through silence moved amain that stately quadruped!
  It stopped before the orator, and in the lamplight thrown
  Upon its tail they saw that member weighted with a stone.
  Then spake old Ebenezer: "Gents, I heern o' this debate
  On w'ether v'ice or y'ears is best the mind to elevate.
  Now 'yer's a bird ken throw some light uponto that tough theme:
  He has 'em both, I'm free to say, oncommonly extreme.
  He wa'n't invited for to speak, but he will not refuse
  (If t'other gentleman ken wait) to exposay his views."

  Ere merriment or anger o'er amazement could prevail;
  He cut the string that held the stone on that canary's tail.
  Freed from the weight, that member made a gesture of delight,
  Then rose until its rigid length was horizontal quite.
  With lifted head and level ears along his withers laid,
  Jack sighed, refilled his lungs and then--to put it mildly--brayed!
  He brayed until the stones were stirred in circumjacent hills,
  And sleeping women rose and fled, in divers kinds of frills.
  'T is said that awful bugle-blast--to make the story brief--
  Wafted William Perry Peters through the window, like a leaf!

  Such is the tale. If anything additional occurred
  'Tis not set down, though, truly, I remember to have heard
  That a gentleman named Peters, now residing at Soquel,
  A considerable distance from the town of Muscatel,
  Is opposed to education, and to rhetoric, as well.




  TO MY LAUNDRESS.


  Saponacea, wert thou not so fair
    I'd curse thee for thy multitude of sins--
    For sending home my clothes all full of pins--
  A shirt occasionally that's a snare
  And a delusion, got, the Lord knows where,
  The Lord knows why--a sock whose outs and ins
    None know, nor where it ends nor where begins,
  And fewer cuffs than ought to be my share.
  But when I mark thy lilies how they grow,
    And the red roses of thy ripening charms,
      I bless the lovelight in thy dark eyes dreaming.
  I'll never pay thee, but I'd gladly go
    Into the magic circle of thine arms,
      Supple and fragrant from repeated steaming.




  FAME.


  One thousand years I slept beneath the sod,
    My sleep in 1901 beginning,
  Then, by the action of some scurvy god
    Who happened then to recollect my sinning,
    I was revived and given another inning.
  On breaking from my grave I saw a crowd--
    A formless multitude of men and women,
  Gathered about a ruin. Clamors loud
    I heard, and curses deep enough to swim in;
    And, pointing at me, one said: "Let's put _him_ in."
  Then each turned on me with an evil look,
  As in my ragged shroud I stood and shook.

  "Nay, good Posterity," I cried, "forbear!
    If that's a jail I fain would be remaining
  Outside, for truly I should little care
    To catch my death of cold. I'm just regaining
    The life lost long ago by my disdaining
  To take precautions against draughts like those
    That, haply, penetrate that cracked and splitting
  Old structure." Then an aged wight arose
    From a chair of state in which he had been sitting,
    And with preliminary coughing, spitting
  And wheezing, said: "'T is not a jail, we're sure,
  Whate'er it may have been when it was newer.

  "'T was found two centuries ago, o'ergrown
    With brush and ivy, all undoored, ungated;
  And in restoring it we found a stone
    Set here and there in the dilapidated
    And crumbling frieze, inscribed, in antiquated
  Big characters, with certain uncouth names,
    Which we conclude were borne of old by awful
  Rapscallions guilty of all sinful games--
    Vagrants engaged in purposes unlawful,
    And orators less sensible than jawful.
  So each ten years we add to the long row
  A name, the most unworthy that we know."

  "But why," I asked, "put _me_ in?" He replied:
    "You look it"--and the judgment pained me greatly;
  Right gladly would I then and there have died,
    But that I'd risen from the grave so lately.
    But on examining that solemn, stately
  Old ruin I remarked: "My friend, you err--
    The truth of this is just what I expected.
  This building in its time made quite a stir.
    I lived (was famous, too) when 't was erected.
    The names here first inscribed were much respected.
  This is the Hall of Fame, or I'm a stork,
  And this goat pasture once was called New York."




  OMNES VANITAS.


  Alas for ambition's possessor!
    Alas for the famous and proud!
  The Isle of Manhattan's best dresser
    Is wearing a hand-me-down shroud.

  The world has forgotten his glory;
    The wagoner sings on his wain,
  And Chauncey Depew tells a story,
    And jackasses laugh in the lane.




  ASPIRATION.

  No man can truthfully say that he would not like to
  be President.--_William C. Whitney._


  Lo! the wild rabbit, happy in the pride
  Of qualities to meaner beasts denied,
  Surveys the ass with reverence and fear,
  Adoring his superior length of ear,
  And says: "No living creature, lean or fat,
  But wishes in his heart to be like That!"




  DEMOCRACY.


  Let slaves and subjects with unvaried psalms
  Before their sovereign execute salaams;
  The freeman scorns one idol to adore--
  Tom, Dick and Harry and himself are four.




  THE NEW "ULALUME."


  The skies they were ashen and sober,
    The leaves they were crisped and sere,--
    "     "      "    withering   "    "
  It was night in the lonesome October
    Of my most immemorial year;
  It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,--
  "   "   down "   " dark tarn "  "
    In  the  misty   mid    region   of    Weir,--
    "    "   ghoul-haunted woodland   "     "




  CONSOLATION.


  Little's the good to sit and grieve
  Because the serpent tempted Eve.
  Better to wipe your eyes and take
  A club and go out and kill a snake.

  What do you gain by cursing Nick
  For playing her such a scurvy trick?
  Better go out and some villain find
  Who serves the devil, and beat him blind.

  But if you prefer, as I suspect,
  To philosophize, why, then, reflect:
  If the cunning rascal upon the limb
  Hadn't tempted her she'd have tempted him.




  FATE.


  Alas, alas, for the tourist's guide!--
  He turned from the beaten trail aside,
  Wandered bewildered, lay down and died.

  O grim is the Irony of Fate:
  It switches the man of low estate
  And loosens the dogs upon the great.

  It lights the fireman to roast the cook;
  The fisherman squirms upon the hook,
  And the flirt is slain with a tender look.

  The undertaker it overtakes;
  It saddles the cavalier, and makes
  The haughtiest butcher into steaks.

  Assist me, gods, to balk the decree!
  Nothing I'll do and nothing I'll be,
  In order that nothing be done to me.




  PHILOSOPHER BIMM.


  Republicans think Jonas Bimm
    A Democrat gone mad,
  And Democrats consider him
    Republican and bad.

  The Tough reviles him as a Dude
    And gives it him right hot;
  The Dude condemns his crassitude
    And calls him _sans culottes._

  Derided as an Anglophile
    By Anglophobes, forsooth,
  As Anglophobe he feels, the while,
    The Anglophilic tooth.

  The Churchman calls him Atheist;
    The Atheists, rough-shod,
  Have ridden o'er him long and hissed
    "The wretch believes in God!"

  The Saints whom clergymen we call
    Would kill him if they could;
  The Sinners (scientists and all)
    Complain that he is good.

  All men deplore the difference
    Between themselves and him,
  And all devise expedients
    For paining Jonas Bimm.

  I too, with wild demoniac glee,
    Would put out both his eyes;
  For Mr. Bimm appears to me
    Insufferably wise!




  REMINDED.


  Beneath my window twilight made
  Familiar mysteries of shade.
  Faint voices from the darkening down
  Were calling vaguely to the town.
  Intent upon a low, far gleam
  That burned upon the world's extreme,
  I sat, with short reprieve from grief,
  And turned the volume, leaf by leaf,
  Wherein a hand, long dead, had wrought
  A million miracles of thought.
  My fingers carelessly unclung
  The lettered pages, and among
  Them wandered witless, nor divined
  The wealth in which, poor fools, they mined.
  The soul that should have led their quest
  Was dreaming in the level west,
  Where a tall tower, stark and still,
  Uplifted on a distant hill,
  Stood lone and passionless to claim
  Its guardian star's returning flame.

  I know not how my dream was broke,
  But suddenly my spirit woke
  Filled with a foolish fear to look
  Upon the hand that clove the book,
  Significantly pointing; next
  I bent attentive to the text,
  And read--and as I read grew old--
  The mindless words: "Poor Tom's a-cold!"

  Ah me! to what a subtle touch
  The brimming cup resigns its clutch
  Upon the wine. Dear God, is 't writ
  That hearts their overburden bear
  Of bitterness though thou permit
  The pranks of Chance, alurk in nooks,
  And striking coward blows from books,
  And dead hands reaching everywhere?




  SALVINI IN AMERICA.


  Come, gentlemen--your gold.
    Thanks: welcome to the show.
  To hear a story told
    In words you do not know.

  Now, great Salvini, rise
    And thunder through your tears,
  Aha! friends, let your eyes
    Interpret to your ears.

  Gods! 't is a goodly game.
    Observe his stride--how grand!
  When legs like his declaim
    Who can misunderstand?

  See how that arm goes round.
    It says, as plain as day:
  "I love," "The lost is found,"
    "Well met, sir," or, "Away!"

  And mark the drawing down
    Of brows. How accurate
  The language of that frown:
    Pain, gentlemen--or hate.

  Those of the critic trade
    Swear it is all as clear
  As if his tongue were made
    To fit an English ear.

  Hear that Italian phrase!
    Greek to your sense, 't is true;
  But shrug, expression, gaze--
    Well, they are Grecian too.

  But it is Art! God wot
    Its tongue to all is known.
  Faith! he to whom 't were not
    Would better hold his own.

  Shakespeare says act and word
    Must match together true.
  From what you've seen and heard,
    How can you doubt they do?

  Enchanting drama! Mark
    The crowd "from pit to dome",
  One box alone is dark--
    The prompter stays at home.

  Stupendous artist! You
    Are lord of joy and woe:
  We thrill if you say "Boo,"
    And thrill if you say "Bo."




  ANOTHER WAY.


  I lay in silence, dead. A woman came
    And laid a rose upon my breast and said:
  "May God be merciful." She spoke my name,
    And added: "It is strange to think him dead.

  "He loved me well enough, but 't was his way
    To speak it lightly." Then, beneath her breath:
  "Besides"--I knew what further she would say,
    But then a footfall broke my dream of death.

  To-day the words are mine. I lay the rose
    Upon her breast, and speak her name and deem
  It strange indeed that she is dead. God knows
    I had more pleasure in the other dream.




  ART.


  For Gladstone's portrait five thousand pounds
    Were paid, 't is said, to Sir John Millais.
    I cannot help thinking that such fine pay
  Transcended reason's uttermost bounds.

  For it seems to me uncommonly queer
    That a painted British stateman's price
    Exceeds the established value thrice
  Of a living statesman over here.




  AN ENEMY TO LAW AND ORDER.


  A is defrauded of his land by B,
  Who's driven from the premises by C.
  D buys the place with coin of plundered E.
  "That A's an Anarchist!" says F to G.




  TO ONE ACROSS THE WAY.


  When at your window radiant you've stood
    I've sometimes thought--forgive me if I've erred--
    That some slight thought of me perhaps has stirred
  Your heart to beat less gently than it should.
  I know you beautiful; that you are good
    I hope--or fear--I cannot choose the word,
    Nor rightly suit it to the thought. I've heard
  Reason at love's dictation never could.
  Blindly to this dilemma so I grope,
    As one whose every pathway has a snare:
      If you are minded in the saintly fashion
  Of your pure face my passion's without hope;
    If not, alas! I equally despair,
    For what to me were hope without the passion?




  THE DEBTOR ABROAD.


  Grief for an absent lover, husband, friend,
  Is barely felt before it comes to end:
  A score of early consolations serve
  To modify its mouth's dejected curve.
  But woes of creditors when debtors flee
  Forever swell the separating sea.
  When standing on an alien shore you mark
  The steady course of some intrepid bark,
  How sweet to think a tear for you abides,
  Not all unuseful, in the wave she rides!--
  That sighs for you commingle in the gale
  Beneficently bellying her sail!




  FORESIGHT.


  An "actors' cemetery"! Sure
    The devil never tires
  Of planning places to procure
  The sticks to feed his fires.




  A FAIR DIVISION.


  Another Irish landlord gone to grass,
  Slain by the bullets of the tenant class!
  Pray, good agrarians, what wrong requires
  Such foul redress? Between you and the squires
  All Ireland's parted with an even hand--
  For you have all the ire, they all the land.




  GENESIS.


  God said: "Let there be Man," and from the clay
  Adam came forth and, thoughtful, walked away.
  The matrix whence his body was obtained,
  An empty, man-shaped cavity, remained
  All unregarded from that early time
  Till in a recent storm it filled with slime.
  Now Satan, envying the Master's power
  To make the meat himself could but devour,
  Strolled to the place and, standing by the pool,
  Exerted all his will to make a fool.
  A miracle!--from out that ancient hole
  Rose Morehouse, lacking nothing but a soul.
  "To give him that I've not the power divine,"
  Said Satan, sadly, "but I'll lend him mine."
  He breathed it into him, a vapor black,
  And to this day has never got it back.




  LIBERTY.


  "'Let there be Liberty!' God said, and, lo!
  The red skies all were luminous. The glow
    Struck first Columbia's kindling mountain peaks
  One hundred and eleven years ago!"

  So sang a patriot whom once I saw
  Descending Bunker's holy hill. With awe
    I noted that he shone with sacred light,
  Like Moses with the tables of the Law.

  One hundred and eleven years? O small
  And paltry period compared with all
    The tide of centuries that flowed and ebbed
  To etch Yosemite's divided wall!

  Ah, Liberty, they sing you always young
  Whose harps are in your adoration strung
    (Each swears you are his countrywoman, too,
  And speak no language but his mother tongue).

  And truly, lass, although with shout and horn
  Man has all-hailed you from creation's morn,
    I cannot think you old--I think, indeed,
  You are by twenty centuries unborn.

  1886.




  THE PASSING OF "BOSS" SHEPHERD.


  The sullen church-bell's intermittent moan,
  The dirge's melancholy monotone,
  The measured march, the drooping flags, attest
  A great man's progress to his place of rest.
  Along broad avenues himself decreed
  To serve his fellow men's disputed need--
  Past parks he raped away from robbers' thrift
  And gave to poverty, wherein to lift
  Its voice to curse the giver and the gift--
  Past noble structures that he reared for men
  To meet in and revile him, tongue and pen,
  Draws the long retinue of death to show
  The fit credentials of a proper woe.

  "Boss" Shepherd, you are dead. Your hand no more
  Throws largess to the mobs that ramp and roar
  For blood of benefactors who disdain
  Their purity of purpose to explain,
  Their righteous motive and their scorn of gain.
  Your period of dream--'twas but a breath--
  Is closed in the indifference of death.
  Sealed in your silences, to you alike
  If hands are lifted to applaud or strike.
  No more to your dull, inattentive ear
  Praise of to-day than curse of yesteryear.
  From the same lips the honied phrases fall
  That still are bitter from cascades of gall.
  We note the shame; you in your depth of dark
  The red-writ testimony cannot mark
  On every honest cheek; your senses all
  Locked, _incommunicado_, in your pall,
  Know not who sit and blush, who stand and bawl.

  "Seven Grecian cities claim great Homer dead,
  Through which the living Homer begged his
    bread."
  So sang, as if the thought had been his own,
  An unknown bard, improving on a known.
  "Neglected genius!"--that is sad indeed,
  But malice better would ignore than heed,
  And Shepherd's soul, we rightly may suspect,
  Prayed often for the mercy of neglect
  When hardly did he dare to leave his door
  Without a guard behind him and before
  To save him from the gentlemen that now
  In cheap and easy reparation bow
  Their corrigible heads above his corse
  To counterfeit a grief that's half remorse.

  The pageant passes and the exile sleeps,
  And well his tongue the solemn secret keeps
  Of the great peace he found afar, until,
  Death's writ of extradition to fulfill,
  They brought him, helpless, from that friendly zone
  To be a show and pastime in his own--
  A final opportunity to those
  Who fling with equal aim the stone and rose;
  That at the living till his soul is freed,
  This at the body to conceal the deed!

  Lone on his hill he's lying to await
  What added honors may befit his state--
  The monument, the statue, or the arch
  (Where knaves may come to weep and dupes to march)
  Builded by clowns to brutalize the scenes
  His genius beautified. To get the means,
  His newly good traducers all are dunned
  For contributions to the conscience fund.
  If each subscribe (and pay) one cent 'twill rear
  A structure taller than their tallest ear.

  Washington, May 4, 1903.




  TO MAUDE.


  Not as two errant spheres together grind
    With monstrous ruin in the vast of space,
    Destruction born of that malign embrace,
  Their hapless peoples all to death consigned--
  Not so when our intangible worlds of mind,
    Even mine and yours, each with its spirit race
    Of beings shadowy in form and face,
  Shall drift together on some blessed wind.
  No, in that marriage of gloom and light
    All miracles of beauty shall be wrought,
      Attesting a diviner faith than man's;
  For all my sad-eyed daughters of the night
    Shall smile on your sweet seraphim of thought,
      Nor any jealous god forbid the banns.




  THE BIRTH OF VIRTUE.


  When, long ago, the young world circling flew
  Through wider reaches of a richer blue,
  New-eyed, the men and maids saw, manifest,
  The thoughts untold in one another's breast:
  Each wish displayed, and every passion learned--
  A look revealed them as a look discerned.
  But sating Time with clouds o'ercast their eyes;
  Desire was hidden, and the lips framed lies.
  A goddess then, emerging from the dust,
  Fair Virtue rose, the daughter of Distrust.




  STONEMAN IN HEAVEN.


  The Seraphs came to Christ, and said: "Behold!
  The man, presumptuous and overbold,
  Who boasted that his mercy could excel
  Thine own, is dead and on his way to Hell."

  Gravely the Saviour asked: "What did he do
  To make his impious assertion true?"

  "He was a Governor, releasing all
  The vilest felons ever held in thrall.
  No other mortal, since the dawn of time,
  Has ever pardoned such a mass of crime!"

  Christ smiled benignly on the Seraphim:
  "Yet I am victor, for I pardon _him_."




  THE SCURRIL PRESS.

  TOM JONESMITH _(loquitur)_: I've slept right through
  The night--a rather clever thing to do.
  How soundly women sleep _(looks at his wife.)_
  They're all alike. The sweetest thing in life
  Is woman when she lies with folded tongue,
  Its toil completed and its day-song sung.
  (_Thump_) That's the morning paper. What a bore
  That it should be delivered at the door.
  There ought to be some expeditious way
  To get it _to_ one. By this long delay
  The fizz gets off the news _(a rap is heard)_.
  That's Jane, the housemaid; she's an early bird;
  She's brought it to the bedroom door, good soul.
  _(Gets up and takes it in.)_ Upon the whole
  The system's not so bad a one. What's here?
  Gad, if they've not got after--listen dear
  _(To sleeping wife)_--young Gastrotheos! Well,
  If Freedom shrieked when Kosciusko fell
  She'll shriek again--with laughter--seeing how
  They treated Gast. with her. Yet I'll allow
  'T is right if he goes dining at The Pup
  With Mrs. Thing.

  WIFE _(briskly, waking up)_:
  With her? The hussy! Yes, it serves him right.

  JONESMITH (_continuing to "seek the light"_):
  What's this about old Impycu? That's good!
  Grip--that's the funny man--says Impy should
  Be used as a decoy in shooting tramps.
  I knew old Impy when he had the "stamps"
  To buy us all out, and he wasn't then
  So bad a chap to have about. Grip's pen
  Is just a tickler!--and the world, no doubt,
  Is better with it than it was without.
  What? thirteen ladies--Jumping Jove! we know
  Them nearly all!--who gamble at a low
  And very shocking game of cards called "draw"!
  O cracky, how they'll squirm! ha-ha! haw-haw!
  Let's see what else (_wife snores_). Well, I'll be blest!
  A woman doesn't understand a jest.
  Hello! What, what? the scurvy wretch proceeds
  To take a fling at _me_, condemn him! (_reads_):
  Tom Jonesmith--my name's Thomas, vulgar cad!--_Of
  the new Shavings Bank_--the man's gone mad!
  That's libelous; I'll have him up for that--_Has
  had his corns cut_. Devil take the rat!
  What business is 't of his, I'd like to know?
  He didn't have to cut them. Gods! what low
  And scurril things our papers have become!
  You skim their contents and you get but scum.
  Here, Mary, (_waking wife_) I've been attacked
  In this vile sheet. By Jove, it is a fact!

  WIFE (_reading it_): How wicked! Who do you
  Suppose 't was wrote it?

                           JONESMITH: Who? why, who
  But Grip, the so-called funny man--he wrote
  Me up because I'd not discount his note.
  (_Blushes like sunset at the hideous lie--
  He'll think of one that's better by and by--
  Throws down the paper on the floor, and treads
  A lively measure on it--kicks the shreds
  And patches all about the room, and still
  Performs his jig with unabated will._)

  WIFE (_warbling sweetly, like an Elfland horn_):
  Dear, do be careful of that second corn.

  STANLEY.
  Noting some great man's composition vile:
  A head of wisdom and a heart of guile,
  A will to conquer and a soul to dare,
  Joined to the manners of a dancing bear,
  Fools unaccustomed to the wide survey
  Of various Nature's compensating sway,
  Untaught to separate the wheat and chaff,
  To praise the one and at the other laugh,
  Yearn all in vain and impotently seek
  Some flawless hero upon whom to wreak
  The sycophantic worship of the weak.
  Not so the wise, from superstition free,
  Who find small pleasure in the bended knee;
  Quick to discriminate 'twixt good and bad,
  And willing in the king to find the cad--
  No reason seen why genius and conceit,
  The power to dazzle and the will to cheat,
  The love of daring and the love of gin,
  Should not dwell, peaceful, in a single skin.
  To such, great Stanley, you're a hero still,
  Despite your cradling in a tub for swill.
  Your peasant manners can't efface the mark
  Of light you drew across the Land of Dark.

  In you the extremes of character are wed,
  To serve the quick and villify the dead.
  Hero and clown! O, man of many sides,
  The Muse of Truth adores you and derides,
  And sheds, impartial, the revealing ray
  Upon your head of gold and feet of clay.




  ONE OF THE UNFAIR SEX.


  She stood at the ticket-seller's
    Serenely removing her glove,
  While hundreds of strugglers and yellers,
    And some that were good at a shove,
    Were clustered behind her like bats in
      a cave and unwilling to speak their love.

  At night she still stood at that window
    Endeavoring her money to reach;
  The crowds right and left, how they sinned--O,
    How dreadfully sinned in their speech!
    Ten miles either way they extended
      their lines, the historians teach.

  She stands there to-day--legislation
    Has failed to remove her. The trains
  No longer pull up at that station;
    And over the ghastly remains
    Of the army that waited and died of
      old age fall the snows and the rains.




  THE LORD'S PRAYER ON A COIN.


  Upon this quarter-eagle's leveled face,
  The Lord's Prayer, legibly inscribed, I trace.
  "Our Father which"--the pronoun there is funny,
  And shows the scribe to have addressed the money--
  "Which art in Heaven"--an error this, no doubt:
  The preposition should be stricken out.
  Needless to quote; I only have designed
  To praise the frankness of the pious mind
  Which thought it natural and right to join,
  With rare significancy, prayer and coin.




  A LACKING FACTOR.


  "You acted unwisely," I cried, "as you see
    By the outcome." He calmly eyed me:
  "When choosing the course of my action," said he,
    "I had not the outcome to guide me."




  THE ROYAL JESTER.


  Once on a time, so ancient poets sing,
  There reigned in Godknowswhere a certain king.
  So great a monarch ne'er before was seen:
  He was a hero, even to his queen,
  In whose respect he held so high a place
  That none was higher,--nay, not even the ace.
  He was so just his Parliament declared
  Those subjects happy whom his laws had spared;
  So wise that none of the debating throng
  Had ever lived to prove him in the wrong;
  So good that Crime his anger never feared,
  And Beauty boldly plucked him by the beard;
  So brave that if his army got a beating
  None dared to face him when he was retreating.
  This monarch kept a Fool to make his mirth,
  And loved him tenderly despite his worth.
  Prompted by what caprice I cannot say,
  He called the Fool before the throne one day
  And to that jester seriously said:
  "I'll abdicate, and you shall reign instead,
  While I, attired in motley, will make sport
  To entertain your Majesty and Court."

  'T was done and the Fool governed. He decreed
  The time of harvest and the time of seed;
  Ordered the rains and made the weather clear,
  And had a famine every second year;
  Altered the calendar to suit his freak,
  Ordaining six whole holidays a week;
  Religious creeds and sacred books prepared;
  Made war when angry and made peace when scared.
  New taxes he inspired; new laws he made;
  Drowned those who broke them, who observed them, flayed,
  In short, he ruled so well that all who'd not
  Been starved, decapitated, hanged or shot
  Made the whole country with his praises ring,
  Declaring he was every inch a king;
  And the High Priest averred 't was very odd
  If one so competent were not a god.

  Meantime, his master, now in motley clad,
  Wore such a visage, woeful, wan and sad,
  That some condoled with him as with a brother
  Who, having lost a wife, had got another.
  Others, mistaking his profession, often
  Approached him to be measured for a coffin.
  For years this highborn jester never broke
  The silence--he was pondering a joke.
  At last, one day, in cap-and-bells arrayed,
  He strode into the Council and displayed
  A long, bright smile, that glittered in the gloom
  Like a gilt epithet within a tomb.
  Posing his bauble like a leader's staff,
  To give the signal when (and why) to laugh,
  He brought it down with peremptory stroke
  And simultaneously cracked his joke!

  I can't repeat it, friends. I ne'er could school
  Myself to quote from any other fool:
  A jest, if it were worse than mine, would start
  My tears; if better, it would break my heart.
  So, if you please, I'll hold you but to state
  That royal Jester's melancholy fate.

  The insulted nation, so the story goes,
  Rose as one man--the very dead arose,
  Springing indignant from the riven tomb,
  And babes unborn leapt swearing from the womb!
  All to the Council Chamber clamoring went,
  By rage distracted and on vengeance bent.
  In that vast hall, in due disorder laid,
  The tools of legislation were displayed,
  And the wild populace, its wrath to sate,
  Seized them and heaved them at the Jester's pate.
  Mountains of writing paper; pools and seas
  Of ink, awaiting, to become decrees,
  Royal approval--and the same in stacks
  Lay ready for attachment, backed with wax;
  Pens to make laws, erasers to amend them;
  With mucilage convenient to extend them;
  Scissors for limiting their application,
  And acids to repeal all legislation--
  These, flung as missiles till the air was dense,
  Were most offensive weapons of offense,
  And by their aid the Fool was nigh destroyed.
  They ne'er had been so harmlessly employed.
  Whelmed underneath a load of legal cap,
  His mouth egurgitating ink on tap,
  His eyelids mucilaginously sealed,
  His fertile head by scissors made to yield
  Abundant harvestage of ears, his pelt,
  In every wrinkle and on every welt,
  Quickset with pencil-points from feet to gills
  And thickly studded with a pride of quills,
  The royal Jester in the dreadful strife
  Was made (in short) an editor for life!

  An idle tale, and yet a moral lurks
  In this as plainly as in greater works.
  I shall not give it birth: one moral here
  Would die of loneliness within a year.




  A CAREER IN LETTERS.


  When Liberverm resigned the chair
  Of This or That in college, where
  For two decades he'd gorged his brain
  With more than it could well contain,
  In order to relieve the stress
  He took to writing for the press.
  Then Pondronummus said, "I'll help
  This mine of talent to devel'p;"
  And straightway bought with coin and credit
  The _Thundergust_ for him to edit.

  The great man seized the pen and ink
  And wrote so hard he couldn't think;
  Ideas grew beneath his fist
  And flew like falcons from his wrist.
  His pen shot sparks all kinds of ways
  Till all the rivers were ablaze,
  And where the coruscations fell
  Men uttered words I dare not spell.

  Eftsoons with corrugated brow,
  Wet towels bound about his pow,
  Locked legs and failing appetite,
  He thought so hard he couldn't write.
  His soaring fancies, chickenwise,
  Came home to roost and wouldn't rise.
  With dimmer light and milder heat
  His goose-quill staggered o'er the sheet,
  Then dragged, then stopped; the finish came--
  He couldn't even write his name.
  The _Thundergust_ in three short weeks
  Had risen, roared, and split its cheeks.
  Said Pondronummus, "How unjust!
  The storm I raised has laid my dust!"

  When, Moneybagger, you have aught
  Invested in a vein of thought,
  Be sure you've purchased not, instead,
  That salted claim, a bookworm's head.




  THE FOLLOWING PAIR.


  O very remarkable mortal,
    What food is engaging your jaws
  And staining with amber their portal?
      "It's 'baccy I chaws."

  And why do you sway in your walking,
    To right and left many degrees,
  And hitch up your trousers when talking?
      "I follers the seas."

  Great indolent shark in the rollers,
    Is "'baccy," too, one of your faults?--
  You, too, display maculate molars.
      "I dines upon salts."

  Strange diet!--intestinal pain it
    Is commonly given to nip.
  And how can you ever obtain it?
      "I follers the ship."




  POLITICAL ECONOMY.


  "I beg you to note," said a Man to a Goose,
  As he plucked from her bosom the plumage all loose,
  "That pillows and cushions of feathers and beds
  As warm as maids' hearts and as soft as their heads,
  Increase of life's comforts the general sum--
  Which raises the standard of living." "Come, come,"
  The Goose said, impatiently, "tell me or cease,
  How that is of any advantage to geese."
  "What, what!" said the man--"you are very obtuse!
  Consumption no profit to those who produce?
  No good to accrue to Supply from a grand
  Progressive expansion, all round, of Demand?
  Luxurious habits no benefit bring
  To those who purvey the luxurious thing?
  Consider, I pray you, my friend, how the growth
  Of luxury promises--" "Promises," quoth
  The sufferer, "what?--to what course is it pledged
  To pay me for being so often defledged?"
  "Accustomed"--this notion the plucker expressed
  As he ripped out a handful of down from her breast--
  "To one kind of luxury, people soon yearn
  For others and ever for others in turn;
  And the man who to-night on your feathers will rest,
  His mutton or bacon or beef to digest,
  His hunger to-morrow will wish to assuage
  By dining on goose with a dressing of sage."




  VANISHED AT COCK-CROW.


  "I've found the secret of your charm," I said,
    Expounding with complacency my guess.
  Alas! the charm, even as I named it, fled,
    For all its secret was unconsciousness.




  THE UNPARDONABLE SIN.


  I reckon that ye never knew,
  That dandy slugger, Tom Carew,
  He had a touch as light an' free
  As that of any honey-bee;
  But where it lit there wasn't much
  To jestify another touch.
  O, what a Sunday-school it was
  To watch him puttin' up his paws
  An' roominate upon their heft--
  Particular his holy left!
  Tom was my style--that's all I say;
  Some others may be equal gay.
  What's come of him? Dunno, I'm sure--
  He's dead--which make his fate obscure.
  I only started in to clear
  One vital p'int in his career,
  Which is to say--afore he died
  He soiled his erming mighty snide.
  Ye see he took to politics
  And learnt them statesmen-fellers' tricks;
  Pulled wires, wore stovepipe hats, used scent,
  Just like he was the President;
  Went to the Legislator; spoke
  Right out agin the British yoke--
  But that was right. He let his hair
  Grow long to qualify for Mayor,
  An' once or twice he poked his snoot
  In Congress like a low galoot!
  It had to come--no gent can hope
  To wrastle God agin the rope.
  Tom went from bad to wuss. Being dead,
  I s'pose it oughtn't to be said,
  For sech inikities as flow
  From politics ain't fit to know;
  But, if you think it's actin' white
  To tell it--Thomas throwed a fight!




  INDUSTRIAL DISCONTENT.


  As time rolled on the whole world came to be
    A desolation and a darksome curse;
  And some one said: "The changes that you see
    In the fair frame of things, from bad to worse,
  Are wrought by strikes. The sun withdrew his glimmer
  Because the moon assisted with her shimmer.

  "Then, when poor Luna, straining very hard,
    Doubled her light to serve a darkling world,
  He called her 'scab,' and meanly would retard
    Her rising: and at last the villain hurled
  A heavy beam which knocked her o'er the Lion
  Into the nebula of great O'Ryan.

  "The planets all had struck some time before,
    Demanding what they said were equal rights:
  Some pointing out that others had far more
    That a fair dividend of satellites.
  So all went out--though those the best provided,
  If they had dared, would rather have abided.

  "The stars struck too--I think it was because
    The comets had more liberty than they,
  And were not bound by any hampering laws,
    While _they_ were fixed; and there are those who say
  The comets' tresses nettled poor Altair,
  An aged orb that hasn't any hair.

  "The earth's the only one that isn't in
    The movement--I suppose because she's watched
  With horror and disgust how her fair skin
    Her pranking parasites have fouled and blotched
  With blood and grease in every labor riot,
  When seeing any purse or throat to fly at."




  TEMPORA MUTANTUR.


  "The world is dull," I cried in my despair:
  "Its myths and fables are no longer fair.

  "Roll back thy centuries, O Father Time.
  To Greece transport me in her golden prime.

  "Give back the beautiful old Gods again--
  The sportive Nymphs, the Dryad's jocund train,

  "Pan piping on his reeds, the Naiades,
  The Sirens singing by the sleepy seas.

  "Nay, show me but a Gorgon and I'll dare
  To lift mine eyes to her peculiar hair

  "(The fatal horrors of her snaky pate,
  That stiffen men into a stony state)

  "And die--erecting, as my soul goes hence,
  A statue of myself, without expense."

  Straight as I spoke I heard the voice of Fate:
  "Look up, my lad, the Gorgon sisters wait."

  Raising my eyes, I saw Medusa stand,
  Stheno, Euryale, on either hand.

  I gazed unpetrified and unappalled--
  The girls had aged and were entirely bald!




  CONTENTMENT.


  Sleep fell upon my senses and I dreamed
    Long years had circled since my life had fled.
  The world was different, and all things seemed
    Remote and strange, like noises to the dead.
    And one great Voice there was; and something said:
  "Posterity is speaking--rightly deemed
  Infallible:" and so I gave attention,
  Hoping Posterity my name would mention.

  "Illustrious Spirit," said the Voice, "appear!
    While we confirm eternally thy fame,
  Before our dread tribunal answer, here,
    Why do no statues celebrate thy name,
    No monuments thy services proclaim?
  Why did not thy contemporaries rear
  To thee some schoolhouse or memorial college?
  It looks almighty queer, you must acknowledge."

  Up spake I hotly: "That is where you err!"
    But some one thundered in my ear: "You shan't
  Be interrupting these proceedings, sir;
    The question was addressed to General Grant."
    Some other things were spoken which I can't
  Distinctly now recall, but I infer,
  By certain flushings of my cheeks and forehead,
  Posterity's environment is torrid.

  Then heard I (this was in a dream, remark)
    Another Voice, clear, comfortable, strong,
  As Grant's great shade, replying from the dark,
    Said in a tone that rang the earth along,
    And thrilled the senses of the Judges' throng:
  "I'd rather you would question why, in park
  And street, my monuments were not erected
  Than why they were." Then, waking, I reflected.




  THE NEW ENOCH.


  Enoch Arden was an able
    Seaman; hear of his mishap--
  Not in wild mendacious fable,
   As 't was told by t' other chap;

  For I hold it is a youthful
    Indiscretion to tell lies,
  And the writer that is truthful
    Has the reader that is wise.

  Enoch Arden, able seaman,
    On an isle was cast away,
  And before he was a freeman
    Time had touched him up with gray.

  Long he searched the fair horizon,
    Seated on a mountain top;
  Vessel ne'er he set his eyes on
    That would undertake to stop.

  Seeing that his sight was growing
    Dim and dimmer, day by day,
  Enoch said he must be going.
    So he rose and went away--

  Went away and so continued
    Till he lost his lonely isle:
  Mr. Arden was so sinewed
    He could row for many a mile.

  Compass he had not, nor sextant,
    To direct him o'er the sea:
  Ere 't was known that he was extant,
    At his widow's home was he.

  When he saw the hills and hollows
    And the streets he could but know,
  He gave utterance as follows
    To the sentiments below:

  "Blast my tarry toplights! (shiver,
    Too, my timbers!) but, I say,
  W'at a larruk to diskiver,
    I have lost me blessid way!

  "W'at, alas, would be my bloomin'
    Fate if Philip now I see,
  Which I lammed?--or my old 'oman,
    Which has frequent basted _me_?"

  Scenes of childhood swam around him
    At the thought of such a lot:
  In a swoon his Annie found him
    And conveyed him to her cot.

  'T was the very house, the garden,
    Where their honeymoon was passed:
  'T was the place where Mrs. Arden
    Would have mourned him to the last.

  Ah, what grief she'd known without him!
    Now what tears of joy she shed!
  Enoch Arden looked about him:
    "Shanghaied!"--that was all he said.




  DISAVOWAL.


  Two bodies are lying in Phoenix Park,
  Grim and bloody and stiff and stark,
  And a Land League man with averted eye
  Crosses himself as he hurries by.
  And he says to his conscience under his breath:
  "I have had no hand in this deed of death!"

  A Fenian, making a circuit wide
  And passing them by on the other side,
  Shudders and crosses himself and cries:
  "Who says that I did it, he lies, he lies!"

  Gingerly stepping across the gore,
  Pat Satan comes after the two before,
  Makes, in a solemnly comical way,
  The sign of the cross and is heard to say:
  "O dear, what a terrible sight to see,
  For babes like them and a saint like me!"

  1882.




  AN AVERAGE.


  I ne'er could be entirely fond
  Of any maiden who's a blonde,
  And no brunette that e'er I saw
  Had charms my heart's whole
     warmth to draw.

  Yet sure no girl was ever made
  Just half of light and half of shade.
  And so, this happy mean to get,
  I love a blonde and a brunette.




  WOMAN.


  Study good women and ignore the rest,
  For he best knows the sex who knows the best.




  INCURABLE.


  From pride, joy, hate, greed, melancholy--
  From any kind of vice, or folly,
  Bias, propensity or passion
  That is in prevalence and fashion,
  Save one, the sufferer or lover
  May, by the grace of God, recover:
  Alone that spiritual tetter,
  The zeal to make creation better,
  Glows still immedicably warmer.
  Who knows of a reformed reformer?




  THE PUN.


  Hail, peerless Pun! thou last and best,
  Most rare and excellent bequest
  Of dying idiot to the wit
  He died of, rat-like, in a pit!

  Thyself disguised, in many a way
  Thou let'st thy sudden splendor play,
  Adorning all where'er it turns,
  As the revealing bull's-eye burns,
  Of the dim thief, and plays its trick
  Upon the lock he means to pick.

  Yet sometimes, too, thou dost appear
  As boldly as a brigadier
  Tricked out with marks and signs, all o'er,
  Of rank, brigade, division, corps,
  To show by every means he can
  An officer is not a man;
  Or naked, with a lordly swagger,
  Proud as a cur without a wagger,
  Who says: "See simple worth prevail--
  All dog, sir--not a bit of tail!"

  'T is then men give thee loudest welcome,
  As if thou wert a soul from Hell come.

  O obvious Pun! thou hast the grace
  Of skeleton clock without a case--
  With all its boweling displayed,
  And all its organs on parade.

  Dear Pun, you're common ground of bliss,
  Where _Punch_ and I can meet and kiss;
  Than thee my wit can stoop no low'r--
  No higher his does ever soar.




  A PARTISAN'S PROTEST.


  O statesmen, what would you be at,
    With torches, flags and bands?
  You make me first throw up my hat,
    And then my hands.




  TO NANINE.


  Dear, if I never saw your face again;
    If all the music of your voice were mute
    As that of a forlorn and broken lute;
  If only in my dreams I might attain
  The benediction of your touch, how vain
    Were Faith to justify the old pursuit
    Of happiness, or Reason to confute
  The pessimist philosophy of pain.
  Yet Love not altogether is unwise,
    For still the wind would murmur in the corn,
      And still the sun would splendor all the mere;
      And I--I could not, dearest, choose but hear
  Your voice upon the breeze and see your eyes
    Shine in the glory of the summer morn.




  VICE VERSA.


  Down in the state of Maine, the story goes,
    A woman, to secure a lapsing pension,
  Married a soldier--though the good Lord knows
    That very common act scarce calls for mention.
  What makes it worthy to be writ and read--
  The man she married had been nine hours dead!

  Now, marrying a corpse is not an act
    Familiar to our daily observation,
  And so I crave her pardon if the fact
    Suggests this interesting speculation:
  Should some mischance restore the man to life
  Would she be then a widow, or a wife?

  Let casuists contest the point; I'm not
    Disposed to grapple with so great a matter.
  'T would tie my thinker in a double knot
    And drive me staring mad as any hatter--
  Though I submit that hatters are, in fact,
  Sane, and all other human beings cracked.

  Small thought have I of Destiny or Chance;
    Luck seems to me the same thing as Intention;
  In metaphysics I could ne'er advance,
    And think it of the Devil's own invention.
  Enough of joy to know though when I wed
  I _must_ be married, yet I _may_ be dead.




  A BLACK-LIST.


  "Resolved that we will post," the tradesmen say,
  "All names of debtors who do never pay."
  "Whose shall be first?" inquires the ready scribe--
  "Who are the chiefs of the marauding tribe?"
  Lo! high Parnassus, lifting from the plain,
  Upon his hoary peak, a noble fane!
  Within that temple all the names are scrolled
  Of village bards upon a slab of gold;
  To that bad eminence, my friend, aspire,
  And copy thou the Roll of Fame, entire.
  Yet not to total shame those names devote,
  But add in mercy this explaining note:
  "These cheat because the law makes theft a crime,
  And they obey all laws but laws of rhyme."




  A BEQUEST TO MUSIC.


  "Let music flourish!" So he said and died.
    Hark! ere he's gone the minstrelsy begins:
  The symphonies ascend, a swelling tide,
  Melodious thunders fill the welkin wide--
    The grand old lawyers, chinning on their chins!




  AUTHORITY.


  "Authority, authority!" they shout
  Whose minds, not large enough to hold a doubt,
  Some chance opinion ever entertain,
  By dogma billeted upon their brain.
  "Ha!" they exclaim with choreatic glee,
  "Here's Dabster if you won't give in to me--
  Dabster, sir, Dabster, to whom all men look
  With reverence!" The fellow wrote a book.
  It matters not that many another wight
  Has thought more deeply, could more wisely write
  On t' other side--that you yourself possess
  Knowledge where Dabster did but faintly guess.
  God help you if ambitious to persuade
  The fools who take opinion ready-made
  And "recognize authorities." Be sure
  No tittle of their folly they'll abjure
  For all that you can say. But write it down,
  Publish and die and get a great renown--
  Faith! how they'll snap it up, misread, misquote,
  Swear that they had a hand in all you wrote,
  And ride your fame like monkeys on a goat!




  THE PSORIAD.


  The King of Scotland, years and years ago,
  Convened his courtiers in a gallant row
  And thus addressed them:

            "Gentle sirs, from you
  Abundant counsel I have had, and true:
  What laws to make to serve the public weal;
  What laws of Nature's making to repeal;
  What old religion is the only true one,
  And what the greater merit of some new one;
  What friends of yours my favor have forgot;
  Which of your enemies against me plot.
  In harvests ample to augment my treasures,
  Behold the fruits of your sagacious measures!
  The punctual planets, to their periods just,
  Attest your wisdom and approve my trust.
  Lo! the reward your shining virtues bring:
  The grateful placemen bless their useful king!
  But while you quaff the nectar of my favor
  I mean somewhat to modify its flavor
  By just infusing a peculiar dash
  Of tonic bitter in the calabash.
  And should you, too abstemious, disdain it,
  Egad! I'll hold your noses till you drain it!

  "You know, you dogs, your master long has felt
  A keen distemper in the royal pelt--
  A testy, superficial irritation,
  Brought home, I fancy, from some foreign nation.
  For this a thousand simples you've prescribed--
  Unguents external, draughts to be imbibed.
  You've plundered Scotland of its plants, the seas
  You've ravished, and despoiled the Hebrides,
  To brew me remedies which, in probation,
  Were sovereign only in their application.
  In vain, and eke in pain, have I applied
  Your flattering unctions to my soul and hide:
  Physic and hope have been my daily food--
  I've swallowed treacle by the holy rood!

  "Your wisdom, which sufficed to guide the year
  And tame the seasons in their mad career,
  When set to higher purposes has failed me
  And added anguish to the ills that ailed me.
  Nor that alone, but each ambitious leech
  His rivals' skill has labored to impeach
  By hints equivocal in secret speech.
  For years, to conquer our respective broils,
  We've plied each other with pacific oils.
  In vain: your turbulence is unallayed,
  My flame unquenched; your rioting unstayed;
  My life so wretched from your strife to save it
  That death were welcome did I dare to brave it.
  With zeal inspired by your intemperate pranks,
  My subjects muster in contending ranks.
  Those fling their banners to the startled breeze
  To champion some royal ointment; these
  The standard of some royal purge display
  And 'neath that ensign wage a wasteful fray!
  Brave tongues are thundering from sea to sea,
  Torrents of sweat roll reeking o'er the lea!
  My people perish in their martial fear,
  And rival bagpipes cleave the royal ear!

  "Now, caitiffs, tremble, for this very hour
  Your injured sovereign shall assert his power!
  Behold this lotion, carefully compound
  Of all the poisons you for me have found--
  Of biting washes such as tan the skin,
  And drastic drinks to vex the parts within.
  What aggravates an ailment will produce--
  I mean to rub you with this dreadful juice!
  Divided counsels you no more shall hatch--
  At last you shall unanimously scratch.
  Kneel, villains, kneel, and doff your shirts--God bless us!
  They'll seem, when you resume them, robes of Nessus!"

  The sovereign ceased, and, sealing what he spoke,
  From Arthur's Seat[1] confirming thunders broke.
  The conscious culprits, to their fate resigned,
  Sank to their knees, all piously inclined.
  This act, from high Ben Lomond where she floats,
  The thrifty goddess, Caledonia, notes.
  Glibly as nimble sixpence, down she tilts
  Headlong, and ravishes away their kilts,
  Tears off each plaid and all their shirts discloses,
  Removes each shirt and their broad backs exposes.
  The king advanced--then cursing fled amain
  Dashing the phial to the stony plain
  (Where't straight became a fountain brimming o'er,
  Whence Father Tweed derives his liquid store)
  For lo! already on each back _sans_ stitch
  The red sign manual of the Rosy Witch!

  [Footnote 1: A famous height overlooking Edinburgh.]




  ONEIROMANCY.


  I fell asleep and dreamed that I
  Was flung, like Vulcan, from the sky;
  Like him was lamed--another part:
  His leg was crippled and my heart.
  I woke in time to see my love
  Conceal a letter in her glove.




  PEACE.


  When lion and lamb have together lain down
    Spectators cry out, all in chorus;
  "The lamb doesn't shrink nor the lion frown--
    A miracle's working before us!"

  But 't is patent why Hot-head his wrath holds in,
    And Faint-heart her terror and loathing;
  For the one's but an ass in a lion's skin,
    The other a wolf in sheep's clothing.




  THANKSGIVING.


  _The Superintendent of an Almshouse. A Pauper._

  SUPERINTENDENT:

  So _you're_ unthankful--you'll not eat the bird?
  You sit about the place all day and gird.
  I understand you'll not attend the ball
  That's to be given to-night in Pauper Hall.

  PAUPER:

  Why, that is true, precisely as you've heard:
  I have no teeth and I will eat no bird.

  SUPERINTENDENT:

  Ah! see how good is Providence. Because
  Of teeth He has denuded both your jaws
  The fowl's made tender; you can overcome it
  By suction; or at least--well, you can gum it,
  Attesting thus the dictum of the preachers
  That Providence is good to all His creatures--
  Turkeys excepted. Come, ungrateful friend,
  If our Thanksgiving dinner you'll attend
  You shall say grace--ask God to bless at least
  The soft and liquid portions of the feast.

  PAUPER.

  Without those teeth my speech is rather thick--
  He'll hardly understand Gum Arabic.
  No, I'll not dine to-day. As to the ball,
  'Tis known to you that I've no legs at all.
  I had the gout--hereditary; so,
  As it could not be cornered in my toe
  They cut my legs off in the fond belief
  That shortening me would make my anguish brief.
  Lacking my legs I could not prosecute
  With any good advantage a pursuit;
  And so, because my father chose to court
  Heaven's favor with his ortolans and Port
  (Thanksgiving every day!) the Lord supplied
  Saws for my legs, an almshouse for my pride
  And, once a year, a bird for my inside.
  No, I'll not dance--my light fantastic toe
  Took to its heels some twenty years ago.
  Some small repairs would be required for putting
  My feelings on a saltatory footing.

  _(Sings)_

  O the legless man's an unhappy chap--
    _Tum-hi, tum-hi, tum-he o'haddy._
  The favors o' fortune fall not in his lap--
    _Tum-hi, tum-heedle-do hum._
  The plums of office avoid his plate
  No matter how much he may stump the State--
      _Tum-hi, ho-heeee._
  The grass grows never beneath his feet,
  But he cannot hope to make both ends meet--
      _Tum-hi._
  With a gleeless eye and a somber heart,
  He plays the role of his mortal part:
  Wholly himself he can never be.
  O, a soleless corporation is he!
      _Tum_.

  SUPERINTENDENT:

  The chapel bell is calling, thankless friend,
  Balls you may not, but church you _shall_, attend.
  Some recognition cannot be denied
  To the great mercy that has turned aside
  The sword of death from us and let it fall
  Upon the people's necks in Montreal;
  That spared our city, steeple, roof and dome,
  And drowned the Texans out of house and home;
  Blessed all our continent with peace, to flood
  The Balkan with a cataclysm of blood.
  Compared with blessings of so high degree,
  Your private woes look mighty small--to me.




  L'AUDACE.


  Daughter of God! Audacity divine--
  Of clowns the terror and of brains the sign--
  Not thou the inspirer of the rushing fool,
  Not thine of idiots the vocal drool:
  Thy bastard sister of the brow of brass,
  Presumption, actuates the charging ass.
  Sky-born Audacity! of thee who sings
  Should strike with freer hand than mine the strings;
  The notes should mount on pinions true and strong,
  For thou, the subject shouldst sustain the song,
  Till angels lean from Heaven, a breathless throng!
  Alas! with reeling heads and wavering tails,
  They (notes, not angels) drop and the hymn fails;
  The minstrel's tender fingers and his thumbs
  Are torn to rags upon the lyre he strums.
  Have done! the lofty thesis makes demand
  For stronger voices and a harder hand:
  Night-howling apes to make the notes aspire,
  And Poet Riley's fist to slug the rebel wire!




  THE GOD'S VIEW-POINT.


  Cheeta Raibama Chunder Sen,
  The wisest and the best of men,
  Betook him to the place where sat
  With folded feet upon a mat
  Of precious stones beneath a palm,
  In sweet and everlasting calm,
  That ancient and immortal gent,
  The God of Rational Content.
  As tranquil and unmoved as Fate,
  The deity reposed in state,
  With palm to palm and sole to sole,
  And beaded breast and beetling jowl,
  And belly spread upon his thighs,
  And costly diamonds for eyes.
  As Chunder Sen approached and knelt
  To show the reverence he felt;
  Then beat his head upon the sod
  To prove his fealty to the god;
  And then by gestures signified
  The other sentiments inside;
  The god's right eye (as Chunder Sen,
  The wisest and the best of men,
  Half-fancied) grew by just a thought
  More narrow than it truly ought.
  Yet still that prince of devotees,
  Persistent upon bended knees
  And elbows bored into the earth,
  Declared the god's exceeding worth,
  And begged his favor. Then at last,
  Within that cavernous and vast
  Thoracic space was heard a sound
  Like that of water underground--
  A gurgling note that found a vent
  At mouth of that Immortal Gent
  In such a chuckle as no ear
  Had e'er been privileged to hear!

  Cheeta Raibama Chunder Sen,
  The wisest, greatest, best of men,
  Heard with a natural surprise
  That mighty midriff improvise.
  And greater yet the marvel was
  When from between those massive jaws
  Fell words to make the views more plain
  The god was pleased to entertain:
  "Cheeta Raibama Chunder Sen,"
  So ran the rede in speech of men--
  "Foremost of mortals in assent
  To creed of Rational Content,
  Why come you here to impetrate
  A blessing on your scurvy pate?
  Can you not rationally be
  Content without disturbing me?
  Can you not take a hint--a wink--
  Of what of all this rot I think?
  Is laughter lost upon you quite,
  To check you in your pious rite?
  What! know you not we gods protest
  That all religion is a jest?
  You take me seriously?--you
  About me make a great ado
  (When I but wish to be alone)
  With attitudes supine and prone,
  With genuflexions and with prayers,
  And putting on of solemn airs,
  To draw my mind from the survey
  Of Rational Content away!
  Learn once for all, if learn you can,
  This truth, significant to man:
  A pious person is by odds
  The one most hateful to the gods."
  Then stretching forth his great right hand,
  Which shadowed all that sunny land,
  That deity bestowed a touch
  Which Chunder Sen not overmuch
  Enjoyed--a touch divine that made
  The sufferer hear stars! They played
  And sang as on Creation's morn
  When spheric harmony was born.

  Cheeta Raibama Chunder Sen,
  The most astonished man of men,
  Fell straight asleep, and when he woke
  The deity nor moved nor spoke,
  But sat beneath that ancient palm
  In sweet and everlasting calm.




  THE AESTHETES.


  The lily cranks, the lily cranks,
    The loppy, loony lasses!
  They multiply in rising ranks
  To execute their solemn pranks,
    They moon along in masses.
  Blow, sweet lily, in the shade! O,
  Sunflower decorate the dado!

  The maiden ass, the maiden ass,
    The tall and tailless jenny!
  In limp attire as green as grass,
  She stands, a monumental brass,
    The one of one too many.
  Blow, sweet lily, in the shade! O,
  Sunflower decorate the dado!




  JULY FOURTH.


  God said: "Let there be noise." The dawning fire
  Of Independence gilded every spire.




  WITH MINE OWN PETARD.


  Time was the local poets sang their songs
  Beneath their breath in terror of the thongs
  I snapped about their shins. Though mild the stroke
  Bards, like the conies, are "a feeble folk,"
  Fearing all noises but the one they make
  Themselves--at which all other mortals quake.
  Now from their cracked and disobedient throats,
  Like rats from sewers scampering, their notes
  Pour forth to move, where'er the season serves,
  If not our legs to dance, at least our nerves;
  As once a ram's-horn solo maddened all
  The sober-minded stones in Jerich's wall.
  A year's exemption from the critic's curse
  Mends the bard's courage but impairs his verse.
  Thus poolside frogs, when croaking in the night,
  Are frayed to silence by a meteor's flight,
  Or by the sudden plashing of a stone
  From some adjacent cottage garden thrown,
  But straight renew the song with double din
  Whene'er the light goes out or man goes in.
  Shall I with arms unbraced (my casque unlatched,
  My falchion pawned, my buckler, too, attached)
  Resume the cuishes and the broad cuirass,
  Accomplishing my body all in brass,
  And arm in battle royal to oppose
  A village poet singing through the nose,
  Or strolling troubadour his lyre who strums
  With clumsy hand whose fingers all are thumbs?
  No, let them rhyme; I fought them once before
  And stilled their songs--but, Satan! how they swore!--
  Cuffed them upon the mouth whene'er their throats
  They cleared for action with their sweetest notes;
  Twisted their ears (they'd oft tormented mine)
  And damned them roundly all along the line;
  Clubbed the whole crew from the Parnassian slopes,
  A wreck of broken heads and broken hopes!
  What gained I so? I feathered every curse
  Launched at the village bards with lilting verse.
  The town approved and christened me (to show its
  High admiration) Chief of Local Poets!




  CONSTANCY.


  Dull were the days and sober,
    The mountains were brown and bare,
  For the season was sad October
    And a dirge was in the air.

  The mated starlings flew over
    To the isles of the southern sea.
  She wept for her warrior lover--
    Wept and exclaimed: "Ah, me!

  "Long years have I mourned my darling
    In his battle-bed at rest;
  And it's O, to be a starling,
    With a mate to share my nest!"

  The angels pitied her sorrow,
    Restoring her warrior's life;
  And he came to her arms on the morrow
    To claim her and take her to wife.

  An aged lover--a portly,
    Bald lover, a trifle too stiff,
  With manners that would have been courtly,
    And would have been graceful, if--

  If the angels had only restored him
    Without the additional years
  That had passed since the enemy bored him
    To death with their long, sharp spears.

  As it was, he bored her, and she rambled
    Away with her father's young groom,
  And the old lover smiled as he ambled
    Contentedly back to the tomb.




  SIRES AND SONS.


  Wild wanton Luxury lays waste the land
  With difficulty tilled by Thrift's hard hand!
  Then dies the State!--and, in its carcass found,
  The millionaires, all maggot-like, abound.
  Alas! was it for this that Warren died,
  And Arnold sold himself to t' other side,
  Stark piled at Bennington his British dead,
  And Gates at Camden, Lee at Monmouth, fled?--
  For this that Perry did the foeman fleece,
  And Hull surrender to preserve the peace?
  Degenerate countrymen, renounce, I pray,
  The slothful ease, the luxury, the gay
  And gallant trappings of this idle life,
  And be more fit for one another's wife.




  A CHALLENGE.


  A bull imprisoned in a stall
  Broke boldly the confining wall,
  And found himself, when out of bounds,
  Within a washerwoman's grounds.
  Where, hanging on a line to dry,
  A crimson skirt inflamed his eye.
  With bellowings that woke the dead,
  He bent his formidable head,
  With pointed horns and gnarly forehead;
  Then, planting firm his shoulders horrid,
  Began, with rage made half insane,
  To paw the arid earth amain,
  Flinging the dust upon his flanks
  In desolating clouds and banks,
  The while his eyes' uneasy white
  Betrayed his doubt what foe the bright
  Red tent concealed, perchance, from sight.
  The garment, which, all undismayed,
  Had never paled a single shade,
  Now found a tongue--a dangling sock,
  Left carelessly inside the smock:
  "I must insist, my gracious liege,
  That you'll be pleased to raise the siege:
  My colors I will never strike.
  I know your sex--you're all alike.
  Some small experience I've had--
  You're not the first I've driven mad."




  TWO SHOWS.


  The showman (blessing in a thousand shapes!)
  Parades a "School of Educated Apes!"
  Small education's needed, I opine,
  Or native wit, to make a monkey shine;
  The brute exhibited has naught to do
  But ape the larger apes who come to view--
  The hoodlum with his horrible grimace,
  Long upper lip and furtive, shuffling pace,
  Significant reminders of the time
  When hunters, not policemen, made him climb;
  The lady loafer with her draggling "trail,"
  That free translation of an ancient tail;
  The sand-lot quadrumane in hairy suit,
  Whose heels are thumbs perverted by the boot;
  The painted actress throwing down the gage
  To elder artists of the sylvan stage,
  Proving that in the time of Noah's flood
  Two ape-skins held her whole profession's blood;
  The critic waiting, like a hungry pup,
  To write the school--perhaps to eat it--up,
  As chance or luck occasion may reveal
  To earn a dollar or maraud a meal.
  To view the school of apes these creatures go,
  Unconscious that themselves are half the show.
  These, if the simian his course but trim
  To copy them as they have copied him,
  Will call him "educated." Of a verity
  There's much to learn by study of posterity.




  A POET'S HOPE.


  'Twas a weary-looking mortal, and he wandered near the portal
    Of the melancholy City of the Discontented Dead.
  He was pale and worn exceeding and his manner was unheeding,
    As if it could not matter what he did nor what he said.

  "Sacred stranger"--I addressed him with a reverence befitting
    The austere, unintermitting, dread solemnity he wore;
  'Tis the custom, too, prevailing in that vicinage when hailing
    One who possibly may be a person lately "gone before"--

  "Sacred stranger, much I ponder on your evident dejection,
    But my carefulest reflection leaves the riddle still unread.
  How do you yourself explain your dismal tendency to wander
    By the melancholy City of the Discontented Dead?"

  Then that solemn person, pausing in the march that he was making,
    Roused himself as if awaking, fixed his dull and stony eye
  On my countenance and, slowly, like a priest devout and holy,
    Chanted in a mournful monotone the following reply:

  "O my brother, do not fear it; I'm no disembodied spirit--
    I am Lampton, the Slang Poet, with a price upon my head.
  I am watching by this portal for some late lamented mortal
    To arise in his disquietude and leave his earthy bed.

  "Then I hope to take possession and pull in the earth above me
    And, renouncing my profession, ne'er be heard of any more.
  For there's not a soul to love me and no living thing respects me,
    Which so painfully affects me that I fain would 'go before.'"

  Then I felt a deep compassion for the gentleman's dejection,
    For privation of affection would refrigerate a frog.
  So I said: "If nothing human, and if neither man nor woman
    Can appreciate the fashion of your merit--buy a dog."




  THE WOMAN AND THE DEVIL.


  When Man and Woman had been made,
    All but the disposition,
  The Devil to the workshop strayed,
    And somehow gained admission.

  The Master rested from his work,
    For this was on a Sunday,
  The man was snoring like a Turk,
    Content to wait till Monday.

  "Too bad!" the Woman cried; "Oh, why,
    Does slumber not benumb me?
  A disposition! Oh, I die
    To know if 'twill become me!"

  The Adversary said: "No doubt
    'Twill be extremely fine, ma'am,
  Though sure 'tis long to be without--
    I beg to lend you mine, ma'am."

  The Devil's disposition when
    She'd got, of course she wore it,
  For she'd no disposition then,
    Nor now has, to restore it.




  TWO ROGUES.


  Dim, grim, and silent as a ghost,
  The sentry occupied his post,
  To all the stirrings of the night
  Alert of ear and sharp of sight.
  A sudden something--sight or sound,
  About, above, or underground,
  He knew not what, nor where--ensued,
  Thrilling the sleeping solitude.
  The soldier cried: "Halt! Who goes there?"
  The answer came: "Death--in the air."
  "Advance, Death--give the countersign,
  Or perish if you cross that line!"
  To change his tone Death thought it wise--
  Reminded him they 'd been allies
  Against the Russ, the Frank, the Turk,
  In many a bloody bit of work.
  "In short," said he, "in every weather
  We've soldiered, you and I, together."
  The sentry would not let him pass.
  "Go back," he growled, "you tiresome ass--
  Go back and rest till the next war,
  Nor kill by methods all abhor:
  Miasma, famine, filth and vice,
  With plagues of locusts, plagues of lice,
  Foul food, foul water, and foul gases,
  Rank exhalations from morasses.
  If you employ such low allies
  This business you will vulgarize.
  Renouncing then the field of fame
  To wallow in a waste of shame,
  I'll prostitute my strength and lurk
  About the country doing work--
  These hands to labor I'll devote,
  Nor cut, by Heaven, another throat!"




  BEECHER.


  So, Beecher's dead. His was a great soul, too--
    Great as a giant organ is, whose reeds
    Hold in them all the souls of all the creeds
  That man has ever taught and never knew.

  When on this mighty instrument He laid
    His hand Who fashioned it, our common moan
    Was suppliant in its thundering. The tone
  Grew more vivacious when the Devil played.

  No more those luring harmonies we hear,
    And lo! already men forget the sound.
    They turn, retracing all the dubious ground
  O'er which it led them, pigwise, by the ear.




  NOT GUILTY.


  "I saw your charms in another's arms,"
    Said a Grecian swain with his blood a-boil;
  "And he kissed you fair as he held you there,
    A willing bird in a serpent's coil!"

  The maid looked up from the cinctured cup
    Wherein she was crushing the berries red,
  Pain and surprise in her honest eyes--
    "It was only one o' those gods," she said.




  PRESENTIMENT.


  With saintly grace and reverent tread,
    She walked among the graves with me;
    Her every foot-fall seemed to be
  A benediction on the dead.

  The guardian spirit of the place
    She seemed, and I some ghost forlorn
    Surprised in the untimely morn
  She made with her resplendent face.

  Moved by some waywardness of will,
    Three paces from the path apart
    She stepped and stood--my prescient heart
  Was stricken with a passing chill.

  The folk-lore of the years agone
    Remembering, I smiled and thought:
    "Who shudders suddenly at naught,
  His grave is being trod upon."

  But now I know that it was more
    Than idle fancy. O, my sweet,
    I did not think such little feet
  Could make a buried heart so sore!




  A STUDY IN GRAY.


  I step from the door with a shiver
    (This fog is uncommonly cold)
  And ask myself: What did I give her?--
    The maiden a trifle gone-old,
    With the head of gray hair that was gold.

  Ah, well, I suppose 'twas a dollar,
    And doubtless the change is correct,
  Though it's odd that it seems so much smaller
    Than what I'd a right to expect.
    But you pay when you dine, I reflect.

  So I walk up the street--'twas a saunter
    A score of years back, when I strolled
  From this door; and our talk was all banter
    Those days when her hair was of gold,
    And the sea-fog less searching and cold.

  I button my coat (for I'm shaken,
    And fevered a trifle, and flushed
  With the wine that I ought to have taken,)
    Time was, at this coat I'd have blushed,
    Though truly, 'tis cleverly brushed.

  A score? Why, that isn't so very
    Much time to have lost from a life.
  There's reason enough to be merry:
    I've not fallen down in the strife,
    But marched with the drum and the fife.

  If Hope, when she lured me and beckoned,
    Had pushed at my shoulders instead,
  And Fame, on whose favors I reckoned,
    Had laureled the worthiest head,
    I could garland the years that are dead.

  Believe me, I've held my own, mostly
    Through all of this wild masquerade;
  But somehow the fog is more ghostly
    To-night, and the skies are more grayed,
    Like the locks of the restaurant maid.

  If ever I'd fainted and faltered
    I'd fancy this did but appear;
  But the climate, I'm certain, has altered--
    Grown colder and more austere
    Than it was in that earlier year.

  The lights, too, are strangely unsteady,
    That lead from the street to the quay.
  I think they'll go out--and I'm ready
    To follow. Out there in the sea
    The fog-bell is calling to me.




  A PARADOX.


  "If life were not worth having," said the preacher,
  "'T would have in suicide one pleasant feature."
  "An error," said the pessimist, "you're making:
  What's not worth having cannot be worth taking."




  FOR MERIT.


  To Parmentier Parisians raise
    A statue fine and large:
  He cooked potatoes fifty ways,
    Nor ever led a charge.

  "_Palmam qui meruit"_--the rest
    You knew as well as I;
  And best of all to him that best
    Of sayings will apply.

  Let meaner men the poet's bays
    Or warrior's medal wear;
  Who cooks potatoes fifty ways
    Shall bear the palm--de terre.




  A BIT OF SCIENCE.


  What! photograph in colors? 'Tis a dream
    And he who dreams it is not overwise,
  If colors are vibration they but seem,
    And have no being. But if Tyndall lies,
    Why, come, then--photograph my lady's eyes.
  Nay, friend, you can't; the splendor of their blue,
    As on my own beclouded orbs they rest,
  To naught but vibratory motion's due,
    As heart, head, limbs and all I am attest.
  How could her eyes, at rest themselves, be making
  In me so uncontrollable a shaking?



  THE TABLES TURNED.


  Over the man the street car ran,
    And the driver did never grin.
  "O killer of men, pray tell me when
    Your laughter means to begin.

  "Ten years to a day I've observed you slay,
    And I never have missed before
  Your jubilant peals as your crunching wheels
    Were spattered with human gore.

  "Why is it, my boy, that you smother your joy,
    And why do you make no sign
  Of the merry mind that is dancing behind
    A solemner face than mine?"

  The driver replied: "I would laugh till I cried
    If I had bisected you;
  But I'd like to explain, if I can for the pain,
    'T is myself that I've cut in two."




  TO A DEJECTED POET.


  Thy gift, if that it be of God,
    Thou hast no warrant to appraise,
    Nor say: "Here part, O Muse, our ways,
  The road too stony to be trod."

  Not thine to call the labor hard
    And the reward inadequate.
    Who haggles o'er his hire with Fate
  Is better bargainer than bard.

  What! count the effort labor lost
    When thy good angel holds the reed?
    It were a sorry thing indeed
  To stay him till thy palm be crossed.

  "The laborer is worthy"--nay,
    The sacred ministry of song
    Is rapture!--'t were a grievous wrong
  To fix a wages-rate for play.




  A FOOL.


  Says Anderson, Theosophist:
  "Among the many that exist
         In modern halls,
  Some lived in ancient Egypt's clime
  And in their childhood saw the prime
         Of Karnak's walls."

  Ah, Anderson, if that is true
  'T is my conviction, sir, that you
         Are one of those
  That once resided by the Nile,
  Peer to the sacred Crocodile,
         Heir to his woes.

  My judgment is, the holy Cat
  Mews through your larynx (and your hat)
         These many years.
  Through you the godlike Onion brings
  Its melancholy sense of things,
         And moves to tears.

  In you the Bull divine again
  Bellows and paws the dusty plain,
      To nature true.
  I challenge not his ancient hate
  But, lowering my knurly pate,
      Lock horns with you.

  And though Reincarnation prove
  A creed too stubborn to remove,
      And all your school
  Of Theosophs I cannot scare--
  All the more earnestly I swear
      That you're a fool.

  You'll say that this is mere abuse
  Without, in fraying you, a use.
      That's plain to see
  With only half an eye. Come, now,
  Be fair, be fair,--consider how
      It eases _me_!




  THE HUMORIST.


  "What is that, mother?"
                           "The funny man, child.
  His hands are black, but his heart is mild."

  "May I touch him, mother?"
                           "'T were foolishly done:
  He is slightly touched already, my son."

  "O, why does he wear such a ghastly grin?"
  "That's the outward sign of a joke within."

  "Will he crack it, mother?"
                            "Not so, my saint;
  'T is meant for the _Saturday Livercomplaint."_

  "Does he suffer, mother?"
                          "God help him, yes!--
  A thousand and fifty kinds of distress."

  "What makes him sweat so?"
                           "The demons that lurk
  In the fear of having to go to work."

  "Why doesn't he end, then, his life with a rope?"
  "Abolition of Hell has deprived him of hope."




  MONTEFIORE.


  I saw--'twas in a dream, the other night--
  A man whose hair with age was thin and white:
    One hundred years had bettered by his birth,
  And still his step was firm, his eye was bright.

  Before him and about him pressed a crowd.
  Each head in reverence was bared and bowed,
    And Jews and Gentiles in a hundred tongues
  Extolled his deeds and spoke his fame aloud.

  I joined the throng and, pushing forward, cried,
  "Montefiore!" with the rest, and vied
    In efforts to caress the hand that ne'er
  To want and worth had charity denied.

  So closely round him swarmed our shouting clan
  He scarce could breathe, and taking from a pan
    A gleaming coin he tossed it o'er our heads,
  And in a moment was a lonely man!




  A WARNING.


  Cried Age to Youth: "Abate your speed!--
  The distance hither's brief indeed."
  But Youth pressed on without delay--
  The shout had reached but half the way.




  DISCRETION.


          SHE:

  I'm told that men have sometimes got
    Too confidential, and
  Have said to one another what
    They--well, you understand.
  I hope I don't offend you, sweet,
  But are you sure that _you're_ discreet?

          HE:

  'Tis true, sometimes my friends in wine
    Their conquests _do_ recall,
  But none can truly say that mine
    Are known to him at all.
  I never, never talk you o'er--
  In truth, I never get the floor.




  AN EXILE.


  'Tis the census enumerator
    A-singing all forlorn:
  It's ho! for the tall potater,
    And ho! for the clustered corn.
  The whiffle-tree bends in the breeze and the fine
  Large eggs are a-ripening on the vine.

  "Some there must be to till the soil
    And the widow's weeds keep down.
  I wasn't cut out for rural toil
    But they _won't_ let me live in town!
  They 're not so many by two or three,
    As they think, but ah! they 're too many for me."

  Thus the census man, bowed down with care,
    Warbled his wood-note high.
  There was blood on his brow and blood in his hair,
    But he had no blood in his eye.




  THE DIVISION SUPERINTENDENT.


  Baffled he stands upon the track--
  The automatic switches clack.

  Where'er he turns his solemn eyes
  The interlocking signals rise.

  The trains, before his visage pale,
  Glide smoothly by, nor leave the rail.

  No splinter-spitted victim he
  Hears uttering the note high C.

  In sorrow deep he hangs his head,
  A-weary--would that he were dead.

  Now suddenly his spirits rise--
  A great thought kindles in his eyes.

  Hope, like a headlight's vivid glare,
  Splendors the path of his despair.

  His genius shines, the clouds roll back--
  "I'll place obstructions on the track!"




  PSYCHOGRAPHS.


  Says Gerald Massey: "When I write, a band
  Of souls of the departed guides my hand."
  How strange that poems cumbering our shelves,
  Penned by immortal parts, have none themselves!




  TO A PROFESSIONAL EULOGIST.


  Newman, in you two parasites combine:
  As tapeworm and as graveworm too you shine.
  When on the virtues of the quick you've dwelt,
  The pride of residence was all you felt
  (What vain vulgarian the wish ne'er knew
  To paint his lodging a flamboyant hue?)
  And when the praises of the dead you've sung,
  'Twas appetite, not truth, inspired your tongue;
  As ill-bred men when warming to their wine
  Boast of its merit though it be but brine.
  Nor gratitude incites your song, nor should--
  Even charity would shun you if she could.
  You share, 'tis true, the rich man's daily dole,
  But what you get you take by way of toll.
  Vain to resist you--vermifuge alone
  Has power to push you from your robber throne.
  When to escape you he's compelled to die
  Hey! presto!--in the twinkling of an eye
  You vanish as a tapeworm, reappear
  As graveworm and resume your curst career.
  As host no more, to satisfy your need
  He serves as dinner your unaltered greed.
  O thrifty sycophant of wealth and fame,
  Son of servility and priest of shame,
  While naught your mad ambition can abate
  To lick the spittle of the rich and great;
  While still like smoke your eulogies arise
  To soot your heroes and inflame our eyes;
  While still with holy oil, like that which ran
  Down Aaron's beard, you smear each famous man,
  I cannot choose but think it very odd
  It ne'er occurs to you to fawn on God.




  FOR WOUNDS.


  O bear me, gods, to some enchanted isle
  Where woman's tears can antidote her smile.




  ELECTION DAY.


  Despots effete upon tottering thrones
  Unsteadily poised upon dead men's bones,
  Walk up! walk up! the circus is free,
  And this wonderful spectacle you shall see:
  Millions of voters who mostly are fools--
  Demagogues' dupes and candidates' tools,
  Armies of uniformed mountebanks,
  And braying disciples of brainless cranks.
  Many a week they've bellowed like beeves,
  Bitterly blackguarding, lying like thieves,
  Libeling freely the quick and the dead
  And painting the New Jerusalem red.
  Tyrants monarchical--emperors, kings,
  Princes and nobles and all such things--
  Noblemen, gentlemen, step this way:
  There's nothing, the Devil excepted, to pay,
  And the freaks and curios here to be seen
  Are very uncommonly grand and serene.

  No more with vivacity they debate,
  Nor cheerfully crack the illogical pate;
  No longer, the dull understanding to aid,
  The stomach accepts the instructive blade,
  Nor the stubborn heart learns what is what
  From a revelation of rabbit-shot;
  And vilification's flames--behold!
  Burn with a bickering faint and cold.

  Magnificent spectacle!--every tongue
  Suddenly civil that yesterday rung
  (Like a clapper beating a brazen bell)
  Each fair reputation's eternal knell;
  Hands no longer delivering blows,
  And noses, for counting, arrayed in rows.

  Walk up, gentlemen--nothing to pay--
  The Devil goes back to Hell to-day.




  THE MILITIAMAN.


  "O warrior with the burnished arms--
    With bullion cord and tassel--
  Pray tell me of the lurid charms
  Of service and the fierce alarms:
    The storming of the castle,
  The charge across the smoking field,
    The rifles' busy rattle--
  What thoughts inspire the men who wield
  The blade--their gallant souls how steeled
    And fortified in battle."

  "Nay, man of peace, seek not to know
    War's baleful fascination--
  The soldier's hunger for the foe,
  His dread of safety, joy to go
    To court annihilation.
  Though calling bugles blow not now,
    Nor drums begin to beat yet,
  One fear unmans me, I'll allow,
  And poisons all my pleasure: How
    If I should get my feet wet!"




  "A LITERARY METHOD."


  His poems Riley says that he indites
    Upon an empty stomach. Heavenly Powers,
  Feed him throat-full: for what the beggar writes
    Upon his empty stomach empties ours!




  A WELCOME.


  Because you call yourself Knights Templar, and
  There's neither Knight nor Temple in the land,--
    Because you thus by vain pretense degrade
  To paltry purposes traditions grand,--

  Because to cheat the ignorant you say
  The thing that's not, elated still to sway
    The crass credulity of gaping fools
  And women by fantastical display,--

  Because no sacred fires did ever warm
  Your hearts, high knightly service to perform--
    A woman's breast or coffer of a man
  The only citadel you dare to storm,--

  Because while railing still at lord and peer,
  At pomp and fuss-and-feathers while you jeer,
    Each member of your order tries to graft
  A peacock's tail upon his barren rear,--

  Because that all these things are thus and so,
  I bid you welcome to our city. Lo!
    You're free to come, and free to stay, and free
  As soon as it shall please you, sirs--to go.




  A SERENADE.


  "Sas agapo sas agapo,"
    He sang beneath her lattice.
  "'Sas agapo'?" she murmured--"O,
    I wonder, now, what _that_ is!"

  Was she less fair that she did bear
    So light a load of knowledge?
  Are loving looks got out of books,
    Or kisses taught in college?

  Of woman's lore give me no more
    Than how to love,--in many
  A tongue men brawl: she speaks them all
    Who says "I love," in any.




  THE WISE AND GOOD.


  "O father, I saw at the church as I passed
  The populace gathered in numbers so vast
  That they couldn't get in; and their voices were low,
  And they looked as if suffering terrible woe."

  "'Twas the funeral, child, of a gentleman dead
  For whom the great heart of humanity bled."

  "What made it bleed, father, for every day
  Somebody passes forever away?
  Do the newspaper men print a column or more
  Of every person whose troubles are o'er?"

  "O, no; they could never do that--and indeed,
  Though printers might print it, no reader would read.
  To the sepulcher all, soon or late, must be borne,
  But 'tis only the Wise and the Good that all mourn."

  "That's right, father dear, but how can our eyes
  Distinguish in dead men the Good and the Wise?"

  "That's easy enough to the stupidest mind:
  They're poor, and in dying leave nothing behind."

  "Seest thou in mine eye, father, anything green?
  And takest thy son for a gaping marine?
  Go tell thy fine tale of the Wise and the Good
  Who are poor and lamented to babes in the wood."

  And that horrible youth as I hastened away
  Was building a wink that affronted the day.




  THE LOST COLONEL.


  "'Tis a woeful yarn," said the sailor man bold
    Who had sailed the northern-lakes--
  "No woefuler one has ever been told
    Exceptin' them called 'fakes.'"

  "Go on, thou son of the wind and fog,
    For I burn to know the worst!"
  But his silent lip in a glass of grog
    Was dreamily immersed.

  Then he wiped it on his sleeve and said:
    "It's never like that I drinks
  But what of the gallant gent that's dead
    I truly mournful thinks.

  "He was a soldier chap--leastways
    As 'Colonel' he was knew;
  An' he hailed from some'rs where they raise
    A grass that's heavenly blue.

  "He sailed as a passenger aboard
    The schooner 'Henery Jo.'
  O wild the waves and galeses roared,
    Like taggers in a show!

  "But he sat at table that calm an' mild
    As if he never had let
  His sperit know that the waves was wild
    An' everlastin' wet!--

  "Jest set with a bottle afore his nose,
    As was labeled 'Total Eclipse'
  (The bottle was) an' he frequent rose
    A glass o' the same to his lips.

  "An' he says to me (for the steward slick
    Of the 'Henery Jo' was I):
  'This sailor life's the very old Nick--
    On the lakes it's powerful dry!'

  "I says: 'Aye, aye, sir, it beats the Dutch.
    I hopes you'll outlast the trip.'
  But if I'd been him--an' I said as much--
    I'd 'a' took a faster ship.

  "His laughture, loud an' long an' free,
    Rang out o'er the tempest's roar.
  'You're an elegant reasoner,' says he,
    'But it's powerful dry ashore!'"

  "O mariner man, why pause and don
    A look of so deep concern?
  Have another glass--go on, go on,
    For to know the worst I burn."

  "One day he was leanin' over the rail,
    When his footing some way slipped,
  An' (this is the woefulest part o' my tale),
    He was accidental unshipped!

  "The empty boats was overboard hove,
    As he swum in the 'Henery's wake';
  But 'fore we had 'bouted ship he had drove
    From sight on the ragin' lake!"

  "And so the poor gentleman was drowned--
    And now I'm apprised of the worst."
  "What! him? 'Twas an hour afore he was found--
  In the yawl--stone dead o' thirst!"




  FOR TAT.


  O, heavenly powers! will wonders never cease?--
  Hair upon dogs and feathers upon geese!
  The boys in mischief and the pigs in mire!
  The drinking water wet! the coal on fire!
  In meadows, rivulets surpassing fair,
  Forever running, yet forever there!
  A tail appended to the gray baboon!
  A person coming out of a saloon!
  Last, and of all most marvelous to see,
  A female Yahoo flinging filth at me!
  If 'twould but stick I'd bear upon my coat
  May Little's proof that she is fit to vote.




  A DILEMMA.


  Filled with a zeal to serve my fellow men,
    For years I criticised their prose and verges:
  Pointed out all their blunders of the pen,
  Their shallowness of thought and feeling; then
    Damned them up hill and down with hearty curses!

  They said: "That's all that he can do--just sneer,
    And pull to pieces and be analytic.
  Why doesn't he himself, eschewing fear,
  Publish a book or two, and so appear
    As one who has the right to be a critic?

  "Let him who knows it all forbear to tell
    How little others know, but show his learning."
  The public added: "Who has written well
  May censure freely"--quoting Pope. I fell
    Into the trap and books began out-turning,--

  Books by the score--fine prose and poems fair,
    And not a book of them but was a terror,
  They were so great and perfect; though I swear
  I tried right hard to work in, here and there,
    (My nature still forbade) a fault or error.

  'Tis true, some wretches, whom I'd scratched, no doubt,
    Professed to find--but that's a trifling matter.
  Now, when the flood of noble books was out
  I raised o'er all that land a joyous shout,
    Till I was thought as mad as any hatter!

  (Why hatters all are mad, I cannot say.
    'T were wrong in their affliction to revile 'em,
  But truly, you'll confess 'tis very sad
  We wear the ugly things they make. Begad,
    They'd be less mischievous in an asylum!)

  "Consistency, thou art a"--well, you're _paste_!
    When next I felt my demon in possession,
  And made the field of authorship a waste,
  All said of me:  "What execrable taste,
    To rail at others of his own profession!"

  Good Lord! where do the critic's rights begin
    Who has of literature some clear-cut notion,
  And hears a voice from Heaven say: "Pitch in"?
  He finds himself--alas, poor son of sin--
    Between the devil and the deep blue ocean!




  METEMPSYCHOSIS.


  Once with Christ he entered Salem,
  Once in Moab bullied Balaam,
  Once by Apuleius staged
  He the pious much enraged.
  And, again, his head, as beaver,
  Topped the neck of Nick the Weaver.
  Omar saw him (minus tether--
  Free and wanton as the weather:
  Knowing naught of bit or spur)
  Stamping over Bahram-Gur.
  Now, as Altgeld, see him joy
  As Governor of Illinois!




  THE SAINT AND THE MONK.


    Saint Peter at the gate of Heaven displayed
    The tools and terrors of his awful trade;
    The key, the frown as pitiless as night,
    That slays intending trespassers at sight,
    And, at his side in easy reach, the curled
  Interrogation points all ready to be hurled.

    Straight up the shining cloudway (it so chanced
    No others were about) a soul advanced--
    A fat, orbicular and jolly soul
    With laughter-lines upon each rosy jowl--
    A monk so prepossessing that the saint
    Admired him, breathless, until weak and faint,
    Forgot his frown and all his questions too,
    Forgoing even the customary "Who?"--
    Threw wide the gate and, with a friendly grin,
  Said, "'Tis a very humble home, but pray walk in."

    The soul smiled pleasantly. "Excuse me, please--
    Who's in there?" By insensible degrees
    The impudence dispelled the saint's esteem,
    As growing snores annihilate a dream.
    The frown began to blacken on his brow,
    His hand to reach for "Whence?" and "Why?" and "How?"
    "O, no offense, I hope," the soul explained;
    "I'm rather--well, particular. I've strained
    A point in coming here at all; 'tis said
    That Susan Anthony (I hear she's dead
    At last) and all her followers are here.
  As company, they'd be--confess it--rather queer."

    The saint replied, his rising anger past:
    "What can I do?--the law is hard-and-fast,
    Albeit unwritten and on earth unknown--
    An oral order issued from the Throne.
    By but one sin has Woman e'er incurred
  God's wrath. To accuse Them Loud of that would be absurd."

  That friar sighed, but, calling up a smile,
  Said, slowly turning on his heel the while:
  "Farewell, my friend. Put up the chain and bar--
  I'm going, so please you, where the pretty women are."

  1895.




  THE OPPOSING SEX.


  The Widows of Ashur
    Are loud in their wailing:
  "No longer the 'masher'
  Sees Widows of Ashur!"
  So each is a lasher
    Of Man's smallest failing.
  The Widows of Ashur
    Are loud in their wailing.

  The Cave of Adullam,
    That home of reviling--
  No wooing can gull 'em
  In Cave of Adullam.
  No angel can lull 'em
    To cease their defiling
  The Cave of Adullam,
    That home of reviling.

  At men they are cursing--
    The Widows of Ashur;
  Themselves, too, for nursing
  The men they are cursing.
  The praise they're rehearsing
    Of every slasher
  At men. _They_ are cursing
    The Widows of Ashur.




A WHIPPER-IN.

[Commissioner of Pensions Dudley has established a Sunday-school and
declares he will remove any clerk in his department who does not
regularly attend.--_N.Y. World.]_


  Dudley, great placeman, man of mark and note,
    Worthy of honor from a feeble pen
    Blunted in service of all true, good men,
  You serve the Lord--in courses, _table d'hôte:
  Au, naturel,_ as well as _à la Nick_--
    "Eat and be thankful, though it make you sick."

  O, truly pious caterer, forbear
    To push the Saviour and Him crucified
    _(Brochette_ you'd call it) into their inside
  Who're all unused to such ambrosial fare.
  The stomach of the soul makes quick revulsion
  Of aught that it has taken on compulsion.

  I search the Scriptures, but I do not find
    That e'er the Spirit beats with angry wings
    For entrance to the heart, but sits and sings
  To charm away the scruples of the mind.
  It says: "Receive me, please; I'll not compel"--
  Though if you don't you will go straight to Hell!

  Well, that's compulsion, you will say. 'T is true:
    We cower timidly beneath the rod
    Lifted in menace by an angry God,
  But won't endure it from an ape like you.
  Detested simian with thumb prehensile,
  Switch _me_ and I would brain you with my pencil!

  Face you the Throne, nor dare to turn your back
    On its transplendency to flog some wight
    Who gropes and stumbles in the infernal night
  Your ugly shadow lays along his track.
  O, Thou who from the Temple scourged the sin,
  Behold what rascals try to scourge it in!




  JUDGMENT.


  I drew aside the Future's veil
    And saw upon his bier
  The poet Whitman. Loud the wail
    And damp the falling tear.

  "He's dead--he is no more!" one cried,
    With sobs of sorrow crammed;
  "No more? He's this much more," replied
    Another: "he is damned!"

  1885.




  THE FALL OF MISS LARKIN.


  Hear me sing of Sally Larkin who, I'd have you understand,
  Played accordions as well as any lady in the land;
  And I've often heard it stated that her fingering was such
  That Professor Schweinenhauer was enchanted with her touch;
  And that beasts were so affected when her apparatus rang
  That they dropped upon their haunches and deliriously sang.
  This I know from testimony, though a critic, I opine,
  Needs an ear that is dissimilar in some respects to mine.
  She could sing, too, like a jaybird, and they say all eyes were wet
  When Sally and the ranch-dog were performing a duet--
  Which I take it is a song that has to be so loudly sung
  As to overtax the strength of any single human lung.
  That, at least, would seem to follow from the tale I have to tell,
  Which (I've told you how she flourished) is how Sally Larkin fell.

  One day there came to visit Sally's dad as sleek and smart
  A chap as ever wandered there from any foreign part.
  Though his gentle birth and breeding he did not at all obtrude
  It was somehow whispered round he was a simon-pure Dude.
  Howsoe'er that may have been, it was conspicuous to see
  That he _was_ a real Gent of an uncommon high degree.
  That Sally cast her tender and affectionate regards
  On this exquisite creation was, of course, upon the cards;
  But he didn't seem to notice, and was variously blind
  To her many charms of person and the merits of her mind,
  And preferred, I grieve to say it, to play poker with her dad,
  And acted in a manner that in general was bad.

  One evening--'twas in summer--she was holding in her lap
  Her accordion, and near her stood that melancholy chap,
  Leaning up against a pillar with his lip in grog imbrued,
  Thinking, maybe, of that ancient land in which he was a Dude.

  Then Sally, who was melancholy too, began to hum
  And elongate the accordion with a preluding thumb.
  Then sighs of amorosity from Sally L. exhaled,
  And her music apparatus sympathetically wailed.
  "In the gloaming, O my darling!" rose that wild impassioned strain,
  And her eyes were fixed on his with an intensity of pain,
  Till the ranch-dog from his kennel at the postern gate came round,
  And going into session strove to magnify the sound.
  He lifted up his spirit till the gloaming rang and rang
  With the song that to _his_ darling he impetuously sang!
  Then that musing youth, recalling all his soul from other scenes,
  Where his fathers all were Dudes and his mothers all Dudines,
  From his lips removed the beaker and politely, o'er the grog,
  Said: "Miss Larkin, please be quiet: you will interrupt the dog."




  IN HIGH LIFE.


  Sir Impycu Lackland, from over the sea,
  Has led to the altar Miss Bloatie Bondee.
  The wedding took place at the Church of St. Blare;
  The fashion, the rank and the wealth were all there--
  No person was absent of all whom one meets.
  Lord Mammon himself bowed them into their seats,
  While good Sir John Satan attended the door
  And Sexton Beelzebub managed the floor,
  Respectfully keeping each dog to its rug,
  Preserving the peace between poodle and pug.
  Twelve bridesmaids escorted the bride up the aisle
  To blush in her blush and to smile in her smile;
  Twelve groomsmen supported the eminent groom
  To scowl in his scowl and to gloom in his gloom.
  The rites were performed by the hand and the lip
  Of his Grace the Diocesan, Billingham Pip,
  Assisted by three able-bodied divines.
  He prayed and they grunted, he read, they made signs.
  Such fashion, such beauty, such dressing, such grace
  Were ne'er before seen in that heavenly place!
  That night, full of gin, and all blazing inside,
  Sir Impycu blackened the eyes of his bride.




  A BUBBLE.


  Mrs. Mehitable Marcia Moore
    Was a dame of superior mind,
  With a gown which, modestly fitting before,
    Was greatly puffed up behind.

  The bustle she wore was ingeniously planned
    With an inspiration bright:
  It magnified seven diameters and
    Was remarkably nice and light.

  It was made of rubber and edged with lace
    And riveted all with brass,
  And the whole immense interior space
    Inflated with hydrogen gas.

  The ladies all said when she hove in view
    Like the round and rising moon:
  "She's a stuck up thing!" which was partly true,
    And men called her the Captive Balloon.

  To Manhattan Beach for a bath one day
    She went and she said: "O dear!
  If I leave off _this_ what will people say?
    I shall look so uncommonly queer!"

  So a costume she had accordingly made
    To take it all nicely in,
  And when she appeared in that suit arrayed,
    She was greeted with many a grin.

  Proudly and happily looking around,
    She waded out into the wet,
  But the water was very, very profound,
    And her feet and her forehead met!

  As her bubble drifted away from the shore,
    On the glassy billows borne,
  All cried: "Why, where is Mehitable Moore?
  I saw her go in, I'll be sworn!"

  Then the bulb it swelled as the sun grew hot,
    Till it burst with a sullen roar,
  And the sea like oil closed over the spot--
    Farewell, O Mehitable Moore!




  A RENDEZVOUS.


  Nightly I put up this humble petition:
    "Forgive me, O Father of Glories,
  My sins of commission, my sins of omission,
    My sins of the Mission Dolores."




  FRANCINE.


  Did I believe the angels soon would call
    You, my beloved, to the other shore,
    And I should never see you any more,
  I love you so I know that I should fall
  Into dejection utterly, and all
    Love's pretty pageantry, wherein we bore
    Twin banners bravely in the tumult's fore,
  Would seem as shadows idling on a wall.
  So daintily I love you that my love
    Endures no rumor of the winter's breath,
      And only blossoms for it thinks the sky
  Forever gracious, and the stars above
    Forever friendly. Even the fear of death
      Were frost wherein its roses all would die.




  AN EXAMPLE.


  They were two deaf mutes, and they loved and they
    Resolved to be groom and bride;
  And they listened to nothing that any could say,
    Nor ever a word replied.

  From wedlock when warned by the married men,
    Maintain an invincible mind:
  Be deaf and dumb until wedded--and then
    Be deaf and dumb and blind.




  REVENGE.


  A spitcat sate on a garden gate
    And a snapdog fared beneath;
  Careless and free was his mien, and he
    Held a fiddle-string in his teeth.

  She marked his march, she wrought an arch
    Of her back and blew up her tail;
  And her eyes were green as ever were seen,
    And she uttered a woful wail.

  The spitcat's plaint was as follows: "It ain't
    That I am to music a foe;
  For fiddle-strings bide in my own inside,
    And I twang them soft and low.

  "But that dog has trifled with art and rifled
    A kitten of mine, ah me!
  That catgut slim was marauded from him:
    'Tis the string that men call E."


  Then she sounded high, in the key of Y,
    A note that cracked the tombs;
  And the missiles through the firmament flew
    From adjacent sleeping-rooms.

  As her gruesome yell from the gate-post fell
    She followed it down to earth;
  And that snapdog wears a placard that bears
    The inscription: "Blind from birth."




  THE GENESIS OF EMBARRASSMENT.


  When Adam first saw Eve he said:
  "O lovely creature, share my bed."
  Before consenting, she her gaze
  Fixed on the greensward to appraise,
  As well as vision could avouch,
  The value of the proffered couch.
  And seeing that the grass was green
  And neatly clipped with a machine--
  Observing that the flow'rs were rare
  Varieties, and some were fair,
  The posts of precious woods, besprent
  With fragrant balsams, diffluent,
  And all things suited to her worth,
  She raised her angel eyes from earth
  To his and, blushing to confess,
  Murmured: "I love you, Adam--yes."
  Since then her daughters, it is said,
  Look always down when asked to wed.




  IN CONTUMACIAM.


    Och! Father McGlynn,
    Ye appear to be in
  Fer a bit of a bout wid the Pope;
    An' there's divil a doubt
    But he's knockin' ye out
  While ye're hangin' onto the rope.

    An' soon ye'll lave home
    To thravel to Rome,
  For its bound to Canossa ye are.
    Persistin' to shtay
    When ye're ordered away--
  Bedad! that is goin' too far!




  RE-EDIFIED.


  Lord of the tempest, pray refrain
  From leveling this church again.
  Now in its doom, as so you've willed it,
  We acquiesce. But _you'll_ rebuild it.




  A BULLETIN.


    "Lothario is very low,"
    So all the doctors tell.
  Nay, nay, not _so_--he will be, though,
    If ever he get well.




  FROM THE MINUTES.


  When, with the force of a ram that discharges its ponderous body
  Straight at the rear elevation of the luckless culler of simples,
  The foot of Herculean Kilgore--statesman of surname suggestive
  Or carnage unspeakable!--lit like a missile prodigious
  Upon the Congressional door with a monstrous and mighty momentum,
  Causing that vain ineffective bar to political freedom
  To fly from its hinges, effacing the nasal excrescence of Dingley,
  That luckless one, decently veiling the ruin with ready bandanna,
  Lamented the loss of his eminence, sadly with sobs as follows:
  "Ah, why was I ever elected to the halls of legislation,
  So soon to be shown the door with pitiless emphasis? Truly,
  I've leaned on a broken Reed, and the same has gone back on me meanly.
  Where now is my prominence, erstwhile in council conspicuous, patent?
  Alas, I did never before understand what I now see clearly,
  To wit, that Democracy tends to level all human distinctions!"
  His fate so untoward and sad the Pine-tree statesman, bewailing,
  Stood in the corridor there while Democrats freed from confinement
  Came trooping forth from the chamber, dissembling all, as they passed him,
  Hilarious sentiments painful indeed to observe, and remarking:
  "O friend and colleague of the Speaker, what ails the unjoyous proboscis?"




  WOMAN IN POLITICS.


  What, madam, run for School Director? You?
    And want my vote and influence? Well, well,
  That beats me! Gad! where _are_ we drifting to?
    In all my life I never have heard tell
    Of such sublime presumption, and I smell
  A nigger in the fence! Excuse me, madam;
  We statesmen sometimes speak like the old Adam.

  But now you mention it--well, well, who knows?
    We might, that's certain, give the sex a show.
  I have a cousin--teacher. I suppose
    If I stand in and you 're elected--no?
    You'll make no bargains? That's a pretty go!
  But understand that school administration
  Belongs to Politics, not Education.

  We'll pass the teacher deal; but it were wise
    To understand each other at the start.
  You know my business--books and school supplies;
    You'd hardly, if elected, have the heart
    Some small advantage to deny me--part
  Of all my profits to be yours. What? Stealing?
  Please don't express yourself with so much feeling.

  You pain me, truly. Now one question more.
    Suppose a fair young man should ask a place
  As teacher--would you (pardon) shut the door
    Of the Department in his handsome face
    Until--I know not how to put the case--
  Would you extort a kiss to pay your favor?
  Good Lord! you laugh? I thought the matter graver.

  Well, well, we can't do business, I suspect:
    A woman has no head for useful tricks.
  My profitable offers you reject
    And will not promise anything to fix
    The opposition. That's not politics.
  Good morning. Stay--I'm chaffing you, conceitedly.
  Madam, I mean to vote for you--repeatedly.




  TO AN ASPIRANT.


  What! you a Senator--you, Mike de Young?
  Still reeking of the gutter whence you sprung?
  Sir, if all Senators were such as you,
  Their hands so crimson and so slender, too,--
  (Shaped to the pocket for commercial work,
  For literary, fitted to the dirk)--
  So black their hearts, so lily-white their livers,
  The toga's touch would give a man the shivers.




  A BALLAD OF PIKEVILLE.


  Down in Southern Arizona where the Gila monster thrives,
  And the "Mescalero," gifted with a hundred thousand lives,
  Every hour renounces one of them by drinking liquid flame--
  The assassinating wassail that has given him his name;
  Where the enterprising dealer in Caucasian hair is seen
  To hold his harvest festival upon his village-green,
  While the late lamented tenderfoot upon the plain is spread
  With a sanguinary circle on the summit of his head;
  Where the cactuses (or cacti) lift their lances in the sun,
  And incautious jackass-rabbits come to sorrow as they run,
  Lived a colony of settlers--old Missouri was the State
  Where they formerly resided at a prehistoric date.

  Now, the spot that had been chosen for this colonizing scheme
  Was as waterless, believe me, as an Arizona stream.

  The soil was naught but ashes, by the breezes driven free,
  And an acre and a quarter were required to sprout a pea.
  So agriculture languished,  for the land would not produce,
  And for lack of water, whisky was the beverage in use--
  Costly whisky, hauled in wagons many a weary, weary day,
  Mostly needed by the drivers to sustain them on their way.
  Wicked whisky! King of Evils! Why, O, why did God create
  Such a curse and thrust it on us in our inoffensive state?

  Once a parson came among them, and a holy man was he;
  With his ailing stomach whisky wouldn't anywise agree;
  So he knelt upon the _mesa_ and he prayed with all his chin
  That the Lord would send them water or incline their hearts to gin.

  Scarcely was the prayer concluded ere an earthquake shook the land,
  And with copious effusion springs burst out on every hand!
  Merrily the waters gurgled, and the shock which gave them birth
  Fitly was by some declared a temperance movement of the earth.
  Astounded by the miracle, the people met that night
  To celebrate it properly by some religious rite;
  And 'tis truthfully recorded that before the moon had sunk
  Every man and every woman was devotionally drunk.
  A half a standard gallon (says history) per head
  Of the best Kentucky prime was at that ceremony shed.
  O, the glory of that country! O, the happy, happy folk.
  By the might of prayer delivered from Nature's broken yoke!
  Lo! the plains to the horizon all are yellowing with rye,
  And the corn upon the hill-top lifts its banners to the sky!
  Gone the wagons, gone the drivers, and the road is grown to grass,
  Over which the incalescent Bourbon did aforetime pass.
  Pikeville (that's the name they've given, in their wild, romantic way,
  To that irrigation district) now distills, statistics say,
  Something like a hundred gallons, out of each recurrent crop,
  To the head of population--and consumes it, every drop!




  A BUILDER.


  I saw the devil--he was working free:
  A customs-house he builded by the sea.
  "Why do you this?" The devil raised his head;
  "Churches and courts I've built enough," he said.




  AN AUGURY.


  Upon my desk a single spray,
    With starry blossoms fraught.
  I write in many an idle way,
    Thinking one serious thought.

  "O flowers, a fine Greek name ye bear,
    And with a fine Greek grace."
  Be still, O heart, that turns to share
    The sunshine of a face.

  "Have ye no messages--no brief,
    Still sign: 'Despair', or 'Hope'?"
  A sudden stir of stem and leaf--
    A breath of heliotrope!




  LUSUS POLITICUS.


  Come in, old gentleman. How do you do?
    Delighted, I'm sure, that you've called.
  I'm a sociable sort of a chap and you
  Are a pleasant-appearing person, too,
    With a head agreeably bald.
  That's right--sit down in the scuttle of coal
    And put up your feet in a chair.
    It is better to have them there:
  And I've always said that a hat of lead,
    Such as I see you wear,
  Was a better hat than a hat of glass.
  And your boots of brass
    Are a natural kind of boots, I swear.
    "May you blow your nose on a paper of pins?"
        Why, certainly, man, why not?
    I rather expected you'd do it before,
    When I saw you poking it in at the door.
        It's dev'lish hot--
  The weather, I mean. "You are twins"?
  Why, that was evident at the start,
    From the way that you paint your head
  In stripes of purple and red,
      With dots of yellow.
      That proves you a fellow
  With a love of legitimate art.
  "You've bitten a snake and are feeling bad"?
      That's very sad,
  But Longfellow's words I beg to recall:
  Your lot is the common lot of all.
  "Horses are trees and the moon is a sneeze"?
  That, I fancy, is just as you please.
  Some think that way and others hold
      The opposite view;
      I never quite knew,
      For the matter o' that,
  When everything's been said--
      May I offer this mat
  If you _will_ stand on your head?
  I suppose I look to be upside down
    From your present point of view.
  It's a giddy old world, from king to clown,
    And a topsy-turvy, too.
  But, worthy and now uninverted old man,
  _You're_ built, at least, on a normal plan
      If ever a truth I spoke.
          Smoke?
      Your air and conversation
      Are a liberal education,
  And your clothes, including the metal hat
    And the brazen boots--what's that?

    "You never could stomach a Democrat
    Since General Jackson ran?
  You're another sort, but you predict
    That your party'll get consummately licked?"
    Good God! what a queer old man!




  BEREAVEMENT.


  A Countess (so they tell the tale)
  Who dwelt of old in Arno's vale,
  Where ladies, even of high degree,
  Know more of love than of A.B.C,
  Came once with a prodigious bribe
  Unto the learned village scribe,
  That most discreet and honest man
  Who wrote for all the lover clan,
  Nor e'er a secret had betrayed--
  Save when inadequately paid.
  "Write me," she sobbed--"I pray thee do--
  A book about the Prince di Giu--
  A book of poetry in praise
  Of all his works and all his ways;
  The godlike grace of his address,
  His more than woman's tenderness,
  His courage stern and lack of guile,
  The loves that wantoned in his smile.
  So great he was, so rich and kind,
  I'll not within a fortnight find
  His equal as a lover. O,
  My God! I shall be drowned in woe!"

  "What! Prince di Giu has died!" exclaimed
  The honest man for letters famed,
  The while he pocketed her gold;
  "Of what'?--if I may be so bold."
  Fresh storms of tears the lady shed:
  "I stabbed him fifty times," she said.




  AN INSCRIPTION

  FOR A STATUE OF NAPOLEON, AT WEST POINT.


  A famous conqueror, in battle brave,
  Who robbed the cradle to supply the grave.
  His reign laid quantities of human dust:
  He fell upon the just and the unjust.




  A PICKBRAIN.


  What! imitate me, friend? Suppose that you
  With agony and difficulty do
  What I do easily--what then? You've got
  A style I heartily wish _I_ had not.
  If I from lack of sense and you from choice
  Grieve the judicious and the unwise rejoice,
  No equal censure our deserts will suit--
  We both are fools, but you're an ape to boot!




  CONVALESCENT.


    "By good men's prayers see Grant restored!"
    Shouts Talmage, pious creature!
  Yes, God, by supplication bored
    From every droning preacher,
  Exclaimed: "So be it, tiresome crew--
  But I've a crow to pick with _you_."




  THE NAVAL CONSTRUCTOR.


  He looked upon the ships as they
    All idly lay at anchor,
  Their sides with gorgeous workmen gay--
    The riveter and planker--

  Republicans and Democrats,
    Statesmen and politicians.
  He saw the swarm of prudent rats
    Swimming for land positions.

  He marked each "belted cruiser" fine,
    Her poddy life-belts floating
  In tether where the hungry brine
    Impinged upon her coating.

  He noted with a proud regard,
    As any of his class would,
  The poplar mast and poplar yard
    Above the hull of bass-wood.

  He saw the Eastlake frigate tall,
    With quaintly carven gable,
  Hip-roof and dormer-window--all
    With ivy formidable.

  In short, he saw our country's hope
    In best of all conditions--
  Equipped, to the last spar and rope,
    By working politicians.

  He boarded then the noblest ship
    And from the harbor glided.
  "Adieu, adieu!" fell from his lip.
    Verdict: "He suicided."

  1881.




  DETECTED.


  In Congress once great Mowther shone,
    Debating weighty matters;
  Now into an asylum thrown,
    He vacuously chatters.

  If in that legislative hall
    His wisdom still he 'd vented,
  It never had been known at all
    That Mowther was demented.




  BIMETALISM.


  Ben Bulger was a silver man,
    Though not a mine had he:
  He thought it were a noble plan
    To make the coinage free.

  "There hain't for years been sech a time,"
    Said Ben to his bull pup,
  "For biz--the country's broke and I'm
    The hardest kind of up.

  "The paper says that that's because
    The silver coins is sea'ce,
  And that the chaps which makes the laws
    Puts gold ones in their place.

  "They says them nations always be
    Most prosperatin' where
  The wolume of the currency
    Ain't so disgustin' rare."

  His dog, which hadn't breakfasted,
    Dissented from his view,
  And wished that he could swell, instead,
    The volume of cold stew.

  "Nobody'd put me up," said Ben,
    "With patriot galoots
  Which benefits their feller men
    By playin' warious roots;

  "But havin' all the tools about,
    I'm goin' to commence
  A-turnin' silver dollars out
    Wuth eighty-seven cents.

  "The feller takin' 'em can't whine:
    (No more, likewise, can I):
  They're better than the genooine,
    Which mostly satisfy.

  "It's only makin' coinage free,
    And mebby might augment
  The wolume of the currency
    A noomerous per cent."

  I don't quite see his error nor
    Malevolence prepense,
  But fifteen years they gave him for
    That technical offense.




  THE RICH TESTATOR.


  He lay on his bed and solemnly "signed,"
    Gasping--perhaps 'twas a jest he meant:
  "This of a sound and disposing mind
    Is the last ill-will and contestament."




  TWO METHODS.


  To bucks and ewes by the Good Shepherd fed
  The Priest delivers masses for the dead,
  And even from estrays outside the fold
  Death for the masses he would not withhold.
  The Parson, loth alike to free or kill,
  Forsakes the souls already on the grill,
  And, God's prerogative of mercy shamming,
  Spares living sinners for a harder damning.




  FOUNDATIONS OF THE STATE


  Observe, dear Lord, what lively pranks
  Are played by sentimental cranks!
  First this one mounts his hinder hoofs
  And brays the chimneys off the roofs;
  Then that one, with exalted voice,
  Expounds the thesis of his choice,
  Our understandings to bombard,
  Till all the window panes are starred!
  A third augments the vocal shock
  Till steeples to their bases rock,
  Confessing, as they humbly nod,
  They hear and mark the will of God.
  A fourth in oral thunder vents
  His awful penury of sense
  Till dogs with sympathetic howls,
  And lowing cows, and cackling fowls,
  Hens, geese, and all domestic birds,
  Attest the wisdom of his words.
  Cranks thus their intellects deflate
  Of theories about the State.
  This one avers 'tis built on Truth,
  And that on Temperance. This youth
  Declares that Science bears the pile;
  That graybeard, with a holy smile,
  Says Faith is the supporting stone;
  While women swear that Love alone
  Could so unflinchingly endure
  The heavy load. And some are sure
  The solemn vow of Christian Wedlock
  Is the indubitable bedrock.

  Physicians once about the bed
  Of one whose life was nearly sped
  Blew up a disputatious breeze
  About the cause of his disease:
  This, that and t' other thing they blamed.
  "Tut, tut!" the dying man exclaimed,
  "What made me ill I do not care;
  You've not an ounce of it, I'll swear.
  And if you had the skill to make it
  I'd see you hanged before I'd take it!"




  AN IMPOSTER.


  Must you, Carnegie, evermore explain
  Your worth, and all the reasons give again
  Why black and red are similarly white,
  And you and God identically right?
  Still must our ears without redress submit
  To hear you play the solemn hypocrite
  Walking in spirit some high moral level,
  Raising at once his eye-balls and the devil?
  Great King of Cant! if Nature had but made
  Your mouth without a tongue I ne'er had prayed
  To have an earless head. Since she did not,
  Bear me, ye whirlwinds, to some favored spot--
  Some mountain pinnacle that sleeps in air
  So delicately, mercifully rare
  That when the fellow climbs that giddy hill,
  As, for my sins, I know at last he will,
  To utter twaddle in that void inane
  His soundless organ he will play in vain.




  UNEXPOUNDED.


  On Evidence, on Deeds, on Bills,
  On Copyhold, on Loans, on Wills,
    Lawyers great books indite;
  The creaking of their busy quills
    I've never heard on Right.




  FRANCE.


  Unhappy State! with horrors still to strive:
  Thy Hugo dead, thy Boulanger alive;
  A Prince who'd govern where he dares not dwell,
  And who for power would his birthright sell--
  Who, anxious o'er his enemies to reign,
  Grabs at the scepter and conceals the chain;
  While pugnant factions mutually strive
  By cutting throats to keep the land alive.
  Perverse in passion, as in pride perverse--
  To all a mistress, to thyself a curse;
  Sweetheart of Europe! every sun's embrace
  Matures the charm and poison of thy grace.
  Yet time to thee nor peace nor wisdom brings:
  In blood of citizens and blood of kings
  The stones of thy stability are set,
  And the fair fabric trembles at a threat.




  THE EASTERN QUESTION.


  Looking across the line, the Grecian said:
  "This border I will stain a Turkey red."
  The Moslem smiled securely and replied:
  "No Greek has ever for his country dyed."
  While thus each patriot guarded his frontier,
  The Powers stole all the country in his rear.




  A GUEST.


  Death, are you well? I trust you have no cough
    That's painful or in any way annoying--
  No kidney trouble that may carry you off,
    Or heart disease to keep you from enjoying
  Your meals--and ours. 'T were very sad indeed
  To have to quit the busy life you lead.

  You've been quite active lately for so old
    A person, and not very strong-appearing.
  I'm apprehensive, somehow, that my bold,
    Bad brother gave you trouble in the spearing.
  And my two friends--I fear, sir, that you ran
  Quite hard for them, especially the man.

  I crave your pardon: 'twas no fault of mine;
    If you are overworked I'm sorry, very.
  Come in, old man, and have a glass of wine.
    What shall it be--Marsala, Port or Sherry?
  What! just a mug of blood? That's funny grog
  To ask a friend for, eh? Well, take it, hog!




  A FALSE PROPHECY.


  Dom Pedro, Emperor of far Brazil
    (Whence coffee comes and the three-cornered nut),
  They say that you're imperially ill,
    And threatened with paralysis. Tut-tut!
    Though Emperors are mortal, nothing but
  A nimble thunderbolt could catch and kill
  A man predestined to depart this life
  By the assassin's bullet, bomb or knife.

  Sir, once there was a President who freed
    Ten million slaves; and once there was a Czar
  Who freed five times as many serfs. Sins breed
    The means of punishment, and tyrants are
    Hurled headlong out of the triumphal car
  If faster than the law allows they speed.
  Lincoln and Alexander struck a rut;
  _You_ freed slaves too. Paralysis--tut-tut!

  1885.




  TWO TYPES.


  Courageous fool!--the peril's strength unknown.
  Courageous man!--so conscious of your own.




  SOME ANTE-MORTEM EPITAPHS.


  STEPHEN DORSEY.

  Fly, heedless stranger, from this spot accurst,
  Where rests in Satan an offender first
  In point of greatness, as in point of time,
  Of new-school rascals who proclaim their crime.
  Skilled with a frank loquacity to blab
  The dark arcana of each mighty grab,
  And famed for lying from his early youth,
  He sinned secure behind a veil of truth.
  Some lock their lips upon their deeds; some write
  A damning record and conceal from sight;
  Some, with a lust of speaking, die to quell it.
  His way to keep a secret was to tell it.


  STEPHEN J. FIELD.

  Here sleeps one of the greatest students
          Of jurisprudence.
  Nature endowed him with the gift
          Of the juristhrift.
  All points of law alike he threw
          The dice to settle.
  Those honest cubes were loaded true
          With railway metal.


  GENERAL B.F. BUTLER.

  Thy flesh to earth, thy soul to God,
    We gave, O gallant brother;
  And o'er thy grave the awkward squad
    Fired into one another!


  Beneath this monument which rears its head.
  A giant note of admiration--dead,
  His life extinguished like a taper's flame.
  John Ericsson is lying in his fame.
  Behold how massive is the lofty shaft;
  How fine the product of the sculptor's craft;
  The gold how lavishly applied; the great
  Man's statue how impressive and sedate!
  Think what the cost-was! It would ill become
  Our modesty to specify the sum;
  Suffice it that a fair per cent, we're giving
  Of what we robbed him of when he was living.


  Of Corporal Tanner the head and the trunk
  Are here in unconsecrate ground duly sunk.
  His legs in the South claim the patriot's tear,
  But, stranger, you needn't be blubbering here.


  Jay Gould lies here. When he was newly dead
  He looked so natural that round his bed

  The people stood, in silence all, to weep.
  They thought, poor souls! that he did only sleep.


  Here Ingalls, sorrowing, has laid
  The tools of his infernal trade--
  His pen and tongue. So sharp and rude
  They grew--so slack in gratitude,
  His hand was wounded as he wrote,
  And when he spoke he cut his throat.


  Within this humble mausoleum
    Poor Guiteau's flesh you'll find.
  His bones are kept in a museum,
    And Tillman has his mind.


  Stranger, uncover; here you have in view
  The monument of Chauncey M. Depew.
  Eater and orator, the whole world round
  For feats of tongue and tooth alike renowned.
  Pauper in thought but prodigal in speech,
  Nothing he knew excepting how to teach.
  But in default of something to impart
  He multiplied his words with all his heart:
  When least he had to say, instructive most--
  A clam in wisdom and in wit a ghost.

  Dining his way to eminence, he rowed
  With knife and fork up water-ways that flowed
  From lakes of favor--pulled with all his force
  And found each river sweeter than the source.
  Like rats, obscure beneath a kitchen floor,
  Gnawing and rising till obscure no more,
  He ate his way to eminence, and Fame
  Inscribes in gravy his immortal name.
  A trencher-knight, he, mounted on his belly,
  So spurred his charger that its sides were jelly.
  Grown desperate at last, it reared and threw him,
  And Indigestion, overtaking, slew him.


  Here the remains of Schuyler Colfax lie;
  Born, all the world knows when, and Heaven knows why.
  In '71 he filled the public eye,
  In '72 he bade the world good-bye,
  In God's good time, with a protesting sigh,
  He came to life just long enough to die.


  Of Morgan here lies the unspirited clay,
  Who secrets of Masonry swore to betray.
  He joined the great Order and studied with zeal
  The awful arcana he meant to reveal.
  At last in chagrin by his own hand he fell--
  There was nothing to learn, there was nothing to tell.




  A HYMN OF THE MANY.


  God's people sorely were oppressed,
    I heard their lamentations long;--
    I hear their singing, clear and strong,
  I see their banners in the West!

  The captains shout the battle-cry,
    The legions muster in their might;
    They turn their faces to the light,
  They lift their arms, they testify:

  "We sank beneath the Master's thong,
    Our chafing chains were ne'er undone;--
    Now clash your lances in the sun
  And bless your banners with a song!

  "God bides his time with patient eyes
    While tyrants build upon the land;--
    He lifts his face, he lifts his hand,
  And from the stones his temples rise.

  "Now Freedom waves her joyous wing
    Beyond the foemen's shields of gold.
    March forward, singing, for, behold,
  The right shall rule while God is king!"




  ONE MORNING.


  Because that I am weak, my love, and ill,
    I cannot follow the impatient feet
    Of my desire, but sit and watch the beat
  Of the unpitying pendulum fulfill
  The hour appointed for the air to thrill
    And brighten at your coming. O my sweet,
    The tale of moments is at last complete--
  The tryst is broken on the gusty hill!
  O lady, faithful-footed, loyal-eyed,
    The long leagues silence me; yet doubt me not;
  Think rather that the clock and sun have lied
    And all too early, you have sought the spot.
  For lo! despair has darkened all the light,
  And till I see your face it still is night.




  AN ERROR.

  Good for he's old? Ah, Youth, you do not dream
  How sweet the roses in the autumn seem!




  AT THE "NATIONAL ENCAMPMENT."


  You 're grayer than one would have thought you:
    The climate you have over there
  In the East has apparently brought you
    Disorders affecting the hair,
    Which--pardon me--seems a thought spare.

  You'll not take offence at my giving
    Expression to notions like these.
  You might have been stronger if living
    Out here in our sanative breeze.
    It's unhealthy here for disease.

  No, I'm not as plump as a pullet.
    But that's the old wound, you see.
  Remember my paunching a bullet?--
    And how that it didn't agree
    With--well, honest hardtack for me.

  Just pass me the wine--I've a helly
    And horrible kind of drouth!
  When a fellow has that in his belly
    Which didn't go in at his mouth
    He's hotter than all Down South!

  Great Scott! what a nasty day _that_ was--
    When every galoot in our crack
  Division who didn't lie flat was
    Dissuaded from further attack
    By the bullet's felicitous whack.

  'Twas there that our major slept under
    Some cannon of ours on the crest,
  Till they woke him by stilling their thunder,
    And he cursed them for breaking his rest,
  And died in the midst of his jest.

  That night--it was late in November--
    The dead seemed uncommonly chill
  To the touch; and one chap I remember
    Who took it exceedingly ill
    When I dragged myself over his bill.

  Well, comrades, I'm off now--good morning.
    Your talk is as pleasant as pie,
  But, pardon me, one word of warning:
    Speak little of self, say I.
    That's my way. God bless you. Good-bye.




  THE KING OF BORES.


  Abundant bores afflict this world, and some
    Are bores of magnitude that-come and--no,
    They're always coming, but they never go--
  Like funeral pageants, as they drone and hum
  Their lurid nonsense like a muffled drum,
    Or bagpipe's dread unnecessary flow.
    But one superb tormentor I can show--
  Prince Fiddlefaddle, Duc de Feefawfum.
  He the johndonkey is who, when I pen
    Amorous verses in an idle mood
      To nobody, or of her, reads them through
  And, smirking, says he knows the lady; then
    Calls me sly dog. I wish he understood
      This tender sonnet's application too.




  HISTORY.


  What wrecked the Roman power? One says vice,
  Another indolence, another dice.
  Emascle says polygamy. "Not so,"
  Says Impycu--"'twas luxury and show."
  The parson, lifting up a brow of brass,
  Swears superstition gave the _coup de grâce_,
  Great Allison, the statesman-chap affirms
  'Twas lack of coins (croaks Medico: "'T was worms")
  And John P. Jones the swift suggestion collars,
  Averring the no coins were silver dollars.
  Thus, through the ages, each presuming quack
  Turns the poor corpse upon its rotten back,
  Holds a new "autopsy" and finds that death
  Resulted partly from the want of breath,
  But chiefly from some visitation sad
  That points his argument or serves his fad.
  They're all in error--never human mind
  The cause of the disaster has divined.
  What slew the Roman power? Well, provided
  You'll keep the secret, I will tell you. I did.




  THE HERMIT.


  To a hunter from the city,
    Overtaken by the night,
  Spake, in tones of tender pity
    For himself, an aged wight:

  "I have found the world a fountain
    Of deceit and Life a sham.
  I have taken to the mountain
    And a Holy Hermit am.

  "Sternly bent on Contemplation,
    Far apart from human kind----
  In the hill my habitation,
    In the Infinite my mind.

  "Ten long years I've lived a dumb thing,
    Growing bald and bent with dole.
  Vainly seeking for a Something
    To engage my gloomy soul.

  "Gentle Pilgrim, while my roots you
    Eat, and quaff my simple drink,
  Please suggest whatever suits you
    As a Theme for me to Think."

  Then the hunter answered gravely:
    "From distraction free, and strife,
  You could ponder very bravely
    On the Vanity of Life."

  "O, thou wise and learned Teacher,
    You have solved the Problem well--
  You have saved a grateful creature
    From the agonies of hell.

  "Take another root, another
    Cup of water: eat and drink.
  Now I have a Subject, brother,
    Tell me What, and How, to think."




  TO A CRITIC OF TENNYSON.


  Affronting fool, subdue your transient light;
  When Wisdom's dull dares Folly to be bright:
  If Genius stumble in the path to fame,
  'Tis decency in dunces to go lame.




  THE YEARLY LIE.


  A merry Christmas? Prudent, as I live!--
  You wish me something that you need not give.

  Merry or sad, what does it signify?
  To you 't is equal if I laugh, or die.

  Your hollow greeting, like a parrot's jest,
  Finds all its meaning in the ear addressed.

  Why "merry" Christmas? Faith, I'd rather frown
  Than grin and caper like a tickled clown.

  When fools are merry the judicious weep;
  The wise are happy only when asleep.

  A present? Pray you give it to disarm
  A man more powerful to do you harm.

  'T was not your motive? Well, I cannot let
  You pay for favors that you'll never get.

  Perish the savage custom of the gift,
  Founded in terror and maintained in thrift!

  What men of honor need to aid their weal
  They purchase, or, occasion serving, steal.

  Go celebrate the day with turkeys, pies,
  Sermons and psalms, and, for the children, lies.

  Let Santa Claus descend again the flue;
  If Baby doubt it, swear that it is true.

  "A lie well stuck to is as good as truth,"
  And God's too old to legislate for youth.

  Hail Christmas! On my knees and fowl I fall:
  For greater grace and better gravy call.
  _Vive l'Humbug!_--that's to say, God bless us all!




  COOPERATION.


  No more the swindler singly seeks his prey;
  To hunt in couples is the modern way--
  A rascal, from the public to purloin,
  An honest man to hide away the coin.




  AN APOLOGUE.


  A traveler observed one day
  A loaded fruit-tree by the way.
  And reining in his horse exclaimed:
  "The man is greatly to be blamed
  Who, careless of good morals, leaves
  Temptation in the way of thieves.
  Now lest some villain pass this way
  And by this fruit be led astray
  To bag it, I will kindly pack
  It snugly in my saddle-sack."
  He did so; then that Salt o' the Earth
  Rode on, rejoicing in his worth.




  DIAGNOSIS.


  Cried Allen Forman: "Doctor, pray
    Compose my spirits' strife:
  O what may be my chances, say,
    Of living all my life?

  "For lately I have dreamed of high
    And hempen dissolution!
  O doctor, doctor, how can I
    Amend my constitution?"

  The learned leech replied: "You're young
    And beautiful and strong--
  Permit me to inspect your tongue:
    H'm, ah, ahem!--'tis long."




  FALLEN.


  O, hadst thou died when thou wert great,
    When at thy feet a nation knelt
    To sob the gratitude it felt
  And thank the Saviour of the State,
  Gods might have envied thee thy fate!

  Then was the laurel round thy brow,
    And friend and foe spoke praise of thee,
    While all our hearts sang victory.
  Alas! thou art too base to bow
  To hide the shame that brands it now.




DIES IRAE.

A recent republication of the late Gen. John A. Dix's disappointing
translation of this famous medieval hymn, together with some researches
into its history which I happened to be making at the time, induces me
to undertake a translation myself. It may seem presumption in me to
attempt that which so many eminent scholars of so many generations have
attempted before me; but the conspicuous failure of others encourages me
to hope that success, being still unachieved, is still achievable. The
fault of previous translations, from Lord Macaulay's to that of Gen.
Dix, has been, I venture to think, a too strict literalness, whereby the
delicate irony and subtle humor of the immortal poem--though doubtless
these admirable qualities were well appreciated by the translators--have
been utterly sacrificed in the result. In none of the English versions
that I have examined is more than a trace of the mocking spirit of
insincerity pervading the whole prayer,--the cool effrontery of the
suppliant in enumerating his demerits, his serenely illogical demands of
salvation in spite, or rather because, of them, his meek submission
to the punishment of others, and the many similarly pleasing
characteristics of this amusing work, being most imperfectly conveyed.
By permitting myself a reasonable freedom of rendering--in many cases
boldly supplying that "missing link" between the sublime and the
ridiculous which the author, writing for the acute monkish apprehension
of the 13th century, did not deem it necessary to insert--I have hoped
at least partially to liberate the lurking devil of humor from his
fetters, letting him caper, not, certainly, as he does in the Latin, but
as he probably would have done had his creator written in English. In
preserving the metre and double rhymes of the original, I have acted
from the same reverent regard for the music with which, in the liturgy
of the Church, the verses have become inseparably wedded that inspired
Gen. Dix; seeking rather to surmount the obstacles to success by honest
effort, than to avoid them by the adoption of an easier versification
which would have deprived my version of all utility in religious
service.

I must bespeak the reader's charitable consideration in respect of the
first stanza, the insuperable difficulties of which seem to have been
purposely contrived in order to warn off trespassers at the
very boundary of the alluring domain. I have got over the
inhibition--somehow--but David and the Sibyl must try to forgive me
if they find themselves represented merely by the names of those
conspicuous personal qualities to which they probably owed,
respectively, their powers of prophecy, as Samson's strength lay in his
hair.


  DIES IRAE.

  Dies irae! dies ilia!
  Solvet saeclum in favilla
  Teste David cum Sibylla.

  Quantus tremor est futurus,
  Quando Judex est venturus.
  Cuncta stricte discussurus.

  Tuba mirum spargens sonum
  Per sepulchra regionem,
  Coget omnes ante thronum.

  Mors stupebit, et Natura,
  Quum resurget creatura
  Judicanti responsura.

  Liber scriptus proferetur,
  In quo totum continetur,
  Unde mundus judicetur.

  Judex ergo quum sedebit,
  Quicquid latet apparebit,
  Nil inultum remanebit.

  Quid sum miser tunc dicturus,
  Quem patronem rogaturus,
  Quum vix justus sit securus?

  Rex tremendae majestatis,
  Qui salvandos salvas gratis;
  Salva me, Fons pietatis

  Recordare, Jesu pie
  Quod sum causa tuae viae;
  Ne me perdas illa die.

  Quarens me sedisti lassus
  Redimisti crucem passus,
  Tantus labor non sit cassus.

  Juste Judex ultionis,
  Donum fac remissionis
  Ante diem rationis.

  Ingemisco tanquam reus,
  Culpa rubet vultus meus;
  Supplicanti parce, Deus.

  Qui Mariam absolvisti
  Et latronem exaudisti,
  Mihi quoque spem dedisti.

  Preces meae non sunt dignae,
  Sed tu bonus fac benigne
  Ne perenni cremer igne.

  Inter oves locum praesta.
  Et ab haedis me sequestra,
  Statuens in parte dextra.

  Confutatis maledictis,
  Flammis acribus addictis,
  Voca me cum benedictis.

  Oro supplex et acclinis,
  Cor contritum quasi cinis;
  Gere curam mei finis.

  Lacrymosa dies illa
  Qua resurgent et favilla,
  Judicandus homo reus
  Huic ergo parce, Deus!


  THE DAY OF WRATH.

  Day of Satan's painful duty!
  Earth shall vanish, hot and sooty;
  So says Virtue, so says Beauty.

  Ah! what terror shall be shaping
  When the Judge the truth's undraping!
  Cats from every bag escaping!

  Now the trumpet's invocation
  Calls the dead to condemnation;
  All receive an invitation.

  Death and Nature now are quaking,
  And the late lamented, waking,
  In their breezy shrouds are shaking.

  Lo! the Ledger's leaves are stirring,
  And the Clerk, to them referring,
  Makes it awkward for the erring.

  When the Judge appears in session,
  We shall all attend confession,
  Loudly preaching non-suppression.

  How shall I then make romances
  Mitigating circumstances?
  Even the just must take their chances.

  King whose majesty amazes.
  Save thou him who sings thy praises;
  Fountain, quench my private blazes.

  Pray remember, sacred Savior,
  Mine the playful hand that gave your
  Death-blow. Pardon such behavior.

  Seeking me fatigue assailed thee,
  Calvary's outlook naught availed thee:
  Now 't were cruel if I failed thee.

  Righteous judge and learned brother,
  Pray thy prejudices smother
  Ere we meet to try each other.

  Sighs of guilt my conscience gushes,
  And my face vermilion flushes;
  Spare me for my pretty blushes.

  Thief and harlot, when repenting,
  Thou forgav'st--be complimenting
  Me with sign of like relenting.

  If too bold is my petition
  I'll receive with due submission
  My dismissal--from perdition.

  When thy sheep thou hast selected
  From the goats, may I, respected,
  Stand amongst them undetected.

  When offenders are indicted,
  And with trial-flames ignited,
  Elsewhere I'll attend if cited.

  Ashen-hearted, prone, and prayerful,
  When of death I see the air full,
  Lest I perish, too, be careful.

  On that day of lamentation,
  When, to enjoy the conflagration.
  Men come forth, O, be not cruel.
  Spare me, Lord--make them thy fuel.




  ONE MOOD'S EXPRESSION.


  See, Lord, fanatics all arrayed
      For revolution!
  To foil their villainous crusade
  Unsheathe again the sacred blade
      Of persecution.

  What though through long disuse 't is grown
      A trifle rusty?
  'Gainst modern heresy, whose bone
  Is rotten, and the flesh fly-blown,
      It still is trusty.

  Of sterner stuff thine ancient foes,
      Unapprehensive,
  Sprang forth to meet thy biting blows;
  Our zealots chiefly to the nose
      Assume the offensive.

  Then wield the blade their necks to hack,
      Nor ever spare one.
  Thy crowns of martyrdom unpack,
  But see that every martyr lack
      The head to wear one.




  SOMETHING IN THE PAPERS.


  "What's in the paper?" Oh, it's dev'lish dull:
  There's nothing happening at all--a lull
  After the war-storm. Mr. Someone's wife
  Killed by her lover with, I think, a knife.
  A fire on Blank Street and some babies--one,
  Two, three or four, I don't remember, done
  To quite a delicate and lovely brown.
  A husband shot by woman of the town--
  The same old story. Shipwreck somewhere south.
  The crew, all saved--or lost. Uncommon drouth
  Makes hundreds homeless up the River Mud--
  Though, come to think, I guess it was a flood.
  'T is feared some bank will burst--or else it won't
  They always burst, I fancy--or they don't;
  Who cares a cent?--the banker pays his coin
  And takes his chances: bullet in the groin--
  But that's another item--suicide--
  Fool lost his money (serve him right) and died.
  Heigh-ho! there's noth--Jerusalem! what's this:
  Tom Jones has failed! My God, what an abyss
  Of ruin!--owes me seven hundred clear!
  Was ever such a damned disastrous year!




  IN THE BINNACLE.


[The Church possesses the unerring compass whose needle points directly
and persistently to the star of the eternal law of God.--_Religious
Weekly._]


  The Church's compass, if you please,
  Has two or three (or more) degrees
    Of variation;
  And many a soul has gone to grief
  On this or that or t'other reef
  Through faith unreckoning or brief
    Miscalculation.
  Misguidance is of perils chief
    To navigation.

  The obsequious thing makes, too, you'll mark,
  Obeisance through a little arc
    Of declination;
  For Satan, fearing witches, drew
  From Death's pale horse, one day, a shoe,
  And nailed it to his door to undo
    Their machination.
  Since then the needle dips to woo
    His habitation.




  HUMILITY.


  Great poets fire the world with fagots big
    That make a crackling racket,
  But I'm content with but a whispering twig
    To warm some single jacket.




  ONE PRESIDENT.


  "What are those, father?" "Statesmen, my child--
  Lacrymose, unparliamentary, wild."

  "What are they that way for, father?" "Last fall,
  'Our candidate's better,' they said, 'than all!'"

  "What did they say he was, father?" "A man
  Built on a straight incorruptible plan--
  Believing that none for an office would do
  Unless he were honest and capable too."

  "Poor gentlemen--_so_ disappointed!" "Yes, lad,
  That is the feeling that's driving them mad;
  They're weeping and wailing and gnashing because
  They find that he's all that they said that he was."




  THE BRIDE.


  "You know, my friends, with what a brave carouse
  I made a second marriage in my house--
    Divorced old barren Reason from my bed
  And took the Daughter of the Vine to spouse."

  So sang the Lord of Poets. In a gleam
  Of light that made her like an angel seem,
    The Daughter of the Vine said: "I myself
  Am Reason, and the Other was a Dream."




  STRAINED RELATIONS.


  Says England to Germany: "Africa's ours."
    Says Germany: "Ours, I opine."
  Says Africa: "Tell me, delectable Pow'rs,
    What is it that ought to be mine?"




  THE MAN BORN BLIND.


  A man born blind received his sight
    By a painful operation;
  And these are things he saw in the light
    Of an infant observation.

  He saw a merchant, good and wise.
    And greatly, too, respected,
  Who looked, to those imperfect eyes,
    Like a swindler undetected.

  He saw a patriot address
    A noisy public meeting.
  And said: "Why, that's a calf. I guess.
    That for the teat is bleating."

  A doctor stood beside a bed
    And shook his summit sadly.
  "O see that foul assassin!" said
    The man who saw so badly.

  He saw a lawyer pleading for
    A thief whom they'd been jailing,
  And said: "That's an accomplice, or
    My sight again is failing."

  Upon the Bench a Justice sat,
    With nothing to restrain him;
  "'Tis strange," said the observer, "that
    They ventured to unchain him."

  With theologic works supplied,
    He saw a solemn preacher;
  "A burglar with his kit," he cried,
    "To rob a fellow creature."

  A bluff old farmer next he saw
    Sell produce in a village,
  And said: "What, what! is there no law
    To punish men for pillage?"

  A dame, tall, fair and stately, passed,
    Who many charms united;
  He thanked his stars his lot was cast
    Where sepulchers were whited.

  He saw a soldier stiff and stern,
    "Full of strange oaths" and toddy;
  But was unable to discern
    A wound upon his body.

  Ten square leagues of rolling ground
    To one great man belonging,
  Looked like one little grassy mound
    With worms beneath it thronging.

  A palace's well-carven stones,
    Where Dives dwelt contented,
  Seemed built throughout of human bones
    With human blood cemented.

  He watched the yellow shining thread
    A silk-worm was a-spinning;
  "That creature's coining gold." he said,
    "To pay some girl for sinning."

  His eyes were so untrained and dim
    All politics, religions,
  Arts, sciences, appeared to him
    But modes of plucking pigeons.

  And so he drew his final breath,
    And thought he saw with sorrow
  Some persons weeping for his death
    Who'd be all smiles to-morrow.




  A NIGHTMARE.


  I dreamed that I was dead. The years went by:
  The world forgot that such a man as I
    Had ever lived and written: other names
  Were hailed with homage, in their turn to die.

  Out of my grave a giant beech upgrew.
  Its roots transpierced my body, through and through,
    My substance fed its growth. From many lands
  Men came in troops that giant tree to view.

  'T was sacred to my memory and fame--
  My monument. But Allen Forman came,
    Filled with the fervor of a new untruth,
  And carved upon the trunk his odious name!




  A WET SEASON.

  Horas non numero nisi serenas.


  The rain is fierce, it flogs the earth,
    And man's in danger.
  O that my mother at my birth
    Had borne a stranger!
  The flooded ground is all around.
    The depth uncommon.
  How blest I'd be if only she
    Had borne a salmon.

  If still denied the solar glow
    'T were bliss ecstatic
  To be amphibious--but O,
    To be aquatic!
  We're worms, men say, o' the dust, and they
    That faith are firm of.
  O, then, be just: show me some dust
    To be a worm of.

  The pines are chanting overhead
    A psalm uncheering.
  It's O, to have been for ages dead
      And hard of hearing!
  Restore, ye Pow'rs, the last bright hours
      The dial reckoned;
  'Twas in the time of Egypt's prime--
      Rameses II.




  THE CONFEDERATE FLAGS.


  Tut-tut! give back the flags--how can you care
    You veterans and heroes?
  Why should you at a kind intention swear
    Like twenty Neroes?

  Suppose the act was not so overwise--
    Suppose it was illegal--
  Is 't well on such a question to arise
    And pinch the Eagle?

  Nay, let's economize his breath to scold
    And terrify the alien
  Who tackles him, as Hercules of old
    The bird Stymphalian.

  Among the rebels when we made a breach
    Was it to get their banners?
  That was but incidental--'t was to teach
    Them better manners.

  They know the lesson well enough to-day;
    Now, let us try to show them
  That we 're not only stronger far than they.
    (How we did mow them!)

  But more magnanimous. You see, my lads,
      'T was an uncommon riot;
  The warlike tribes of Europe fight for "fads,"
      We fought for quiet.

  If we were victors, then we all must live
      With the same flag above us;
  'Twas all in vain unless we now forgive
      And make them love us.

  Let kings keep trophies to display above
      Their doors like any savage;
  The freeman's trophy is the foeman's love,
      Despite war's ravage.

  "Make treason odious?" My friends, you'll find
      You can't, in right and reason,
  While "Washington" and "treason" are combined--
      "Hugo" and "treason."

  All human governments must take the chance
      And hazard of sedition.
  O, wretch! to pledge your manhood in advance
      To blind submission.

  It may be wrong, it may be right, to rise
      In warlike insurrection:
  The loyalty that fools so dearly prize
      May mean subjection.

  Be loyal to your country, yes--but how
    If tyrants hold dominion?
  The South believed they did; can't you allow
    For that opinion?

  He who will never rise though rulers plods
    His liberties despising
  How is he manlier than the _sans culottes_
    Who's always rising?

  Give back the foolish flags whose bearers fell
    Too valiant to forsake them.
  Is it presumptuous, this counsel? Well,
    I helped to take them.




  HAEC FABULA DOCET.


  A rat who'd gorged a box of bane
  And suffered an internal pain,
  Came from his hole to die (the label
  Required it if the rat were able)
  And found outside his habitat
  A limpid stream. Of bane and rat
  'T was all unconscious; in the sun
  It ran and prattled just for fun.
  Keen to allay his inward throes,
  The beast immersed his filthy nose
  And drank--then, bloated by the stream,
  And filled with superheated steam,
  Exploded with a rascal smell,
  Remarking, as his fragments fell
  Astonished in the brook: "I'm thinking
  This water's damned unwholesome drinking!"




  EXONERATION.


  When men at candidacy don't connive,
    From that suspicion if their friends would free 'em,
  The teeth and nails with which they did not strive
    Should be exhibited in a museum.




  AZRAEL.


  The moon in the field of the keel-plowed main
    Was watching the growing tide:
  A luminous peasant was driving his wain,
    And he offered my soul a ride.

  But I nourished a sorrow uncommonly tall,
    And I fixed him fast with mine eye.
  "O, peasant," I sang with a dying fall,
    "Go leave me to sing and die."

  The water was weltering round my feet,
    As prone on the beach they lay.
  I chanted my death-song loud and sweet;
    "Kioodle, ioodle, iay!"

  Then I heard the swish of erecting ears
    Which caught that enchanted strain.
  The ocean was swollen with storms of tears
    That fell from the shining swain.

  "O, poet," leapt he to the soaken sand,
    "That ravishing song would make
  The devil a saint." He held out his hand
    And solemnly added: "Shake."

  We shook. "I crave a victim, you see,"
    He said--"you came hither to die."
  The Angel of Death, 't was he! 't was he!
    And the victim he crove was I!

  'T was I, Fred Emerson Brooks, the bard;
    And he knocked me on the head.
  O Lord! I thought it exceedingly hard,
    For I didn't want to be dead.

  "You'll sing no worser for that," said he,
    And he drove with my soul away,
  O, death-song singers, be warned by me,
    Kioodle, ioodle, iay!




  AGAIN.


  Well, I've met her again--at the Mission.
    She'd told me to see her no more;
  It was not a command--a petition;
    I'd granted it once before.

  Yes, granted it, hoping she'd write me.
    Repenting her virtuous freak--
  Subdued myself daily and nightly
    For the better part of a week.

  And then ('twas my duty to spare her
    The shame of recalling me) I
  Just sought her again to prepare her
    For an everlasting good-bye.

  O, that evening of bliss--shall I ever
    Forget it?--with Shakespeare and Poe!
  She said, when 'twas ended: "You're never
    To see me again. And now go."

  As we parted with kisses 'twas human
    And natural for me to smile
  As I thought, "She's in love, and a woman:
    She'll send for me after a while."

  But she didn't; and so--well, the Mission
    Is fine, picturesque and gray;
  It's an excellent place for contrition--
    And sometimes she passes that way.

  That's how it occurred that I met her,
    And that's ah there is to tell--
  Except that I'd like to forget her
    Calm way of remarking: "I'm well."

  It was hardly worth while, all this keying
    My soul to such tensions and stirs
  To learn that her food was agreeing
    With that little stomach of hers.



  HOMO PODUNKENSIS.


  As the poor ass that from his paddock strays
  Might sound abroad his field-companions' praise,
  Recounting volubly their well-bred leer,
  Their port impressive and their wealth of ear,
  Mistaking for the world's assent the clang
  Of echoes mocking his accurst harangue;
  So the dull clown, untraveled though at large,
  Visits the city on the ocean's marge,
  Expands his eyes and marvels to remark
  Each coastwise schooner and each alien bark;
  Prates of "all nations," wonders as he stares
  That native merchants sell imported wares,
  Nor comprehends how in his very view
  A foreign vessel has a foreign crew;
  Yet, faithful to the hamlet of his birth,
  Swears it superior to aught on earth,
  Sighs for the temples locally renowned--
  The village school-house and the village pound--
  And chalks upon the palaces of Rome
  The peasant sentiments of "Home, Sweet Home!"




  A SOCIAL CALL.


  Well, well, old Father Christmas, is it you,
    With your thick neck and thin pretense of virtue?
  Less redness in the nose--nay, even some blue
    Would not, I think, particularly hurt you.
  When seen close to, not mounted in your car,
    You look the drunkard and the pig you are.

  No matter, sit you down, for I am not
    In a gray study, as you sometimes find me.
  Merry? O, no, nor wish to be, God wot,
    But there's another year of pain behind me.
  That's something to be thankful for: the more
  There are behind, the fewer are before.

  I know you, Father Christmas, for a scamp,
    But Heaven endowed me at my soul's creation
  With an affinity to every tramp
    That walks the world and steals its admiration.
  For admiration is like linen left
  Upon the line--got easiest by theft.

  Good God! old man, just think of it! I've stood,
    With brains and honesty, some five-and-twenty
  Long years as champion of all that's good,
    And taken on the mazzard thwacks a-plenty.
  Yet now whose praises do the people bawl?
  Those of the fellows whom I live to maul!

  Why, this is odd!--the more I try to talk
    Of you the more my tongue grows egotistic
  To prattle of myself! I'll try to balk
    Its waywardness and be more altruistic.
  So let us speak of others--how they sin,
  And what a devil of a state they 're in!

  That's all I have to say. Good-bye, old man.
    Next year you possibly may find me scolding--
  Or miss me altogether: Nature's plan
    Includes, as I suppose, a final folding
  Of these poor empty hands. Then drop a tear
  To think they'll never box another ear.






ASHES OF THE BEACON

AN HISTORICAL MONOGRAPH WRITTEN IN 4930


Of the many causes that conspired to bring about the lamentable failure of
"self-government" in ancient America the most general and comprehensive
was, of course, the impracticable nature of the system itself. In the
light of modern culture, and instructed by history, we readily discern the
folly of those crude ideas upon which the ancient Americans based what
they knew as "republican institutions," and maintained, as long as
maintenance was possible, with something of a religious fervor, even when
the results were visibly disastrous. To us of to-day it is clear that the
word "self-government" involves a contradiction, for government means
control by something other than the thing to be controlled. When the thing
governed is the same as the thing governing there is no government, though
for a time there may be, as in the case under consideration there was, a
considerable degree of forbearance, giving a misleading appearance of
public order. This, however, soon must, as in fact it soon did, pass away
with the delusion that gave it birth. The habit of obedience to written
law, inculcated by generations of respect for actual government able to
enforce its authority, will persist for a long time, with an ever
lessening power upon the imagination of the people; but there comes a time
when the tradition is forgotten and the delusion exhausted. When men
perceive that nothing is restraining them but their consent to be
restrained, then at last there is nothing to obstruct the free play of
that selfishness which is the dominant characteristic and fundamental
motive of human nature and human action respectively. Politics, which may
have had something of the character of a contest of principles, becomes a
struggle of interests, and its methods are frankly serviceable to personal
and class advantage. Patriotism and respect for law pass like a tale that
is told. Anarchy, no longer disguised as "government by consent," reveals
his hidden hand, and in the words of our greatest living poet,

            lets the curtain fall,
  And universal darkness buries all!

The ancient Americans were a composite people; their blood was a blend of
all the strains known in their time. Their government, while they had one,
being merely a loose and mutable expression of the desires and caprices of
the majority--that is to say, of the ignorant, restless and reckless--gave
the freest rein and play to all the primal instincts and elemental
passions of the race. In so far and for so long as it had any restraining
force, it was only the restraint of the present over the power of the
past--that of a new habit over an old and insistent tendency ever seeking
expression in large liberties and indulgences impatient of control. In the
history of that unhappy people, therefore, we see unveiled the workings of
the human will in its most lawless state, without fear of authority or
care of consequence. Nothing could be more instructive.

Of the American form of government, although itself the greatest of evils
afflicting the victims of those that it entailed, but little needs to be
said here; it has perished from the earth, a system discredited by an
unbroken record of failure in all parts of the world, from the earliest
historic times to its final extinction. Of living students of political
history not one professes to see in it anything but a mischievous creation
of theorists and visionaries--persons whom our gracious sovereign has
deigned to brand for the world's contempt as "dupes of hope purveying to
sons of greed." The political philosopher of to-day is spared the trouble
of pointing out the fallacies of republican government, as the
mathematician is spared that of demonstrating the absurdity of the
convergence of parallel lines; yet the ancient Americans not only clung to
their error with a blind, unquestioning faith, even when groaning under
its most insupportable burdens, but seem to have believed it of divine
origin. It was thought by them to have been established by the god
Washington, whose worship, with that of such _dii minores_ as Gufferson,
Jaxon and Lincon (identical probably with the Hebru Abrem) runs like a
shining thread through all the warp and woof of the stuff that garmented
their moral nakedness. Some stones, very curiously inscribed in many
tongues, were found by the explorer Droyhors in the wilderness bordering
the river Bhitt (supposed by him to be the ancient Potomac) as lately as
the reign of Barukam IV. These stones appear to be fragments of a monument
or temple erected to the glory of Washington in his divine character of
Founder and Preserver of republican institutions. If this tutelary deity
of the ancient Americans really invented representative government they
were not the first by many to whom he imparted the malign secret of its
inauguration and denied that of its maintenance.

Although many of the causes which finally, in combination, brought about
the downfall of the great American republic were in operation from the
beginning--being, as has been said, inherent in the system--it was not
until the year 1995 (as the ancients for some reason not now known
reckoned time) that the collapse of the vast, formless fabric was
complete. In that year the defeat and massacre of the last army of law and
order in the lava beds of California extinguished the final fires of
enlightened patriotism and quenched in blood the monarchical revival.
Thenceforth armed opposition to anarchy was confined to desultory and
insignificant warfare waged by small gangs of mercenaries in the service
of wealthy individuals and equally feeble bands of prescripts fighting for
their lives. In that year, too, "the Three Presidents" were driven from
their capitals, Cincinnati, New Orleans and Duluth, their armies
dissolving by desertion and themselves meeting death at the hands of the
populace.

The turbulent period between 1920 and 1995, with its incalculable waste of
blood and treasure, its dreadful conflicts of armies and more dreadful
massacres by passionate mobs, its kaleidoscopic changes of government and
incessant effacement and redrawing of boundaries of states, its
interminable tale of political assassinations and proscriptions--all the
horrors incident to intestinal wars of a naturally lawless race--had so
exhausted and dispirited the surviving protagonists of legitimate
government that they could make no further head against the inevitable,
and were glad indeed and most fortunate to accept life on any terms that
they could obtain.

But the purpose of this sketch is not bald narration of historic fact, but
examination of antecedent germinal conditions; not to recount calamitous
events familiar to students of that faulty civilization, but to trace, as
well as the meager record will permit, the genesis and development of the
causes that brought them about. Historians in our time have left little
undone in the matter of narration of political and military phenomena. In
Golpek's "Decline and Fall of the American Republics," in Soseby's
"History of Political Fallacies," in Holobom's "Monarchical Renasence,"
and notably in Gunkux's immortal work, "The Rise, Progress, Failure and
Extinction of The Connected States of America" the fruits of research have
been garnered, a considerable harvest. The events are set forth with such
conscientiousness and particularity as to have exhausted the possibilities
of narration. It remains only to expound causes and point the awful moral.

To a delinquent observation it may seem needless to point out the inherent
defects of a system of government which the logic of events has swept like
political rubbish from the face of the earth, but we must not forget that
ages before the inception of the American republics and that of France and
Ireland this form of government had been discredited by emphatic failures
among the most enlightened and powerful nations of antiquity: the Greeks,
the Romans, and long before them (as we now know) the Egyptians and the
Chinese. To the lesson of these failures the founders of the eighteenth
and nineteenth century republics were blind and deaf. Have we then reason
to believe that our posterity will be wiser because instructed by a
greater number of examples? And is the number of examples which they will
have in memory really greater? Already the instances of China, Egypt,
Greece and Rome are almost lost in the mists of antiquity; they are known,
except by infrequent report, to the archæologist only, and but dimly and
uncertainly to him. The brief and imperfect record of yesterdays which we
call History is like that traveling vine of India which, taking new root
as it advances, decays at one end while it grows at the other, and so is
constantly perishing and finally lost in all the spaces which it has
over-passed.

From the few and precious writings that have descended to us from the
early period of the American republic we get a clear if fragmentary view
of the disorders and lawlessness affecting that strange and unhappy
nation. Leaving the historically famous "labor troubles" for more extended
consideration, we may summarize here a few of the results of hardly more
than a century and a quarter of "self-government" as it existed on this
continent just previously to the awful end. At the beginning of the
"twentieth century" a careful study by trustworthy contemporary
statisticians of the public records and those apparently private ones
known as "newspapers" showed that in a population of about 80,000,000 the
annual number of homicides was not less than 10,000; and this continued
year after year to increase, not only absolutely, but proportionately,
until, in the words of Dumbleshaw, who is thought to have written his
famous "Memoirs of a Survivor" in the year 1908 of their era, "it would
seem that the practice of suicide is a needless custom, for if a man but
have patience his neighbor is sure to put him out of his misery." Of the
10,000 assassins less than three per cent. were punished, further than by
incidental imprisonment if unable to give bail while awaiting trial. If
the chief end of government is the citizen's security of life and his
protection from aggression, what kind of government do these appalling
figures disclose? Yet so infatuated with their imaginary "liberty" were
these singular people that the contemplation of all this crime abated
nothing of the volume and persistence of their patriotic ululations, and
affected not their faith in the perfection of their system. They were like
a man standing on a rock already submerged by the rising tide, and calling
to his neighbors on adjacent cliffs to observe his superior security.

When three men engage in an undertaking in which they have an equal
interest, and in the direction of which they have equal power, it
necessarily results that any action approved by two of them, with or
without the assent of the third, will be taken. This is called--or was
called when it was an accepted principle in political and other
affairs--"the rule of the majority." Evidently, under the malign
conditions supposed, it is the only practicable plan of getting anything
done. A and B rule and overrule C, not because they ought, but because
they can; not because they are wiser, but because they are stronger. In
order to avoid a conflict in which he is sure to be worsted, C submits as
soon as the vote is taken. C is as likely to be right as A and B; nay,
that eminent ancient philosopher, Professor Richard A. Proctor (or
Proroctor, as the learned now spell the name), has clearly shown by the
law of probabilities that any one of the three, all being of the same
intelligence, is far likelier to be right than the other two.

It is thus that the "rule of the majority" as a political system is
established. It is in essence nothing but the discredited and
discreditable principle that "might makes right"; but early in the life of
a republic this essential character of government by majority is not seen.
The habit of submitting all questions of policy to the arbitrament of
counting noses and assenting without question to the result invests the
ordeal with a seeming sanctity, and what was at first obeyed as the
command of power comes to be revered as the oracle of wisdom. The
innumerable instances--such as the famous ones of Galileo and Keeley--in
which one man has been right and all the rest of the race wrong, are
overlooked, or their significance missed, and "public opinion" is followed
as a divine and infallible guide through every bog into which it blindly
stumbles and over every precipice in its fortuitous path. Clearly, sooner
or later will be encountered a bog that will smother or a precipice that
will crush. Thoroughly to apprehend the absurdity of the ancient faith in
the wisdom of majorities let the loyal reader try to fancy our gracious
Sovereign by any possibility wrong, or his unanimous Ministry by any
possibility right!

During the latter half of the "nineteenth century" there arose in the
Connected States a political element opposed to all government, which
frankly declared its object to be anarchy. This astonishing heresy was not
of indigenous growth: its seeds were imported from Europe by the
emigration or banishment thence of criminals congenitally incapable of
understanding and valuing the blessings of monarchical institutions, and
whose method of protest was murder. The governments against which they
conspired in their native lands were too strong in authority and too
enlightened in policy for them to overthrow. Hundreds of them were put to
death, thousands imprisoned and sent into exile. But in America, whither
those who escaped fled for safety, they found conditions entirely
favorable to the prosecution of their designs.

A revered fetish of the Americans was "freedom of speech": it was believed
that if bad men were permitted to proclaim their evil wishes they would go
no further in the direction of executing them--that if they might say what
they would like to do they would not care to do it. The close relation
between speech and action was not understood. Because the Americans
themselves had long been accustomed, in their own political debates and
discussions, to the use of unmeaning declamations and threats which they
had no intention of executing, they reasoned that others were like them,
and attributed to the menaces of these desperate and earnest outcasts no
greater importance than to their own. They thought also that the foreign
anarchists, having exchanged the tyranny of kings for that of majorities,
would be content with their new and better lot and become in time good and
law-abiding citizens.

The anarchist of that far day (thanks to the firm hands of our gracious
sovereigns the species is now extinct) was a very different person from
what our infatuated ancestors imagined him. He struck at government, not
because it was bad, but because it was government. He hated authority, not
for its tyranny, but for its power. And in order to make this plain to
observation he frequently chose his victim from amongst those whose rule
was most conspicuously benign.

Of the seven early Presidents of the American republic who perished by
assassination no fewer than four were slain by anarchists with no personal
wrongs to impel them to the deed--nothing but an implacable hostility to
law and authority. The fifth victim, indeed, was a notorious demagogue who
had pardoned the assassin of the fourth.

The field of the anarchist's greatest activity was always a republic, not
only to emphasize his impartial hatred of all government, but because of
the inherent feebleness of that form of government, its inability to
protect itself against any kind of aggression by any considerable number
of its people having a common malevolent purpose. In a republic the crust
that confined the fires of violence and sedition was thinnest.

No improvement in the fortunes of the original anarchists through
immigration to what was then called the New World would have made them
good citizens. From centuries of secret war against particular forms of
authority in their own countries they had inherited a bitter antagonism to
all authority, even the most beneficent. In their new home they were worse
than in their old. In the sunshine of opportunity the rank and sickly
growth of their perverted natures became hardy, vigorous, bore fruit. They
surrounded themselves with proselytes from the ranks of the idle, the
vicious, the unsuccessful. They stimulated and organized discontent. Every
one of them became a center of moral and political contagion. To those as
yet unprepared to accept anarchy was offered the milder dogma of
Socialism, and to those even weaker in the faith something vaguely called
Reform. Each was initiated into that degree to which the induration of his
conscience and the character of his discontent made him eligible, and in
which he could be most serviceable, the body of the people still cheating
themselves with the false sense of security begotten of the belief that
they were somehow exempt from the operation of all agencies inimical to
their national welfare and integrity. Human nature, they thought, was
different in the West from what it was in the East: in the New World the
old causes would not have the old effects: a republic had some inherent
vitality of its own, entirely independent of any action intended to keep
it alive. They felt that words and phrases had some talismanic power, and
charmed themselves asleep by repeating "liberty," "all men equal before
the law," "dictates of conscience," "free speech" and all manner of such
incantation to exorcise the spirits of the night. And when they could no
longer close their eyes to the dangers environing them; when they saw at
last that what they had mistaken for the magic power of their form of
government and its assured security was really its radical weakness and
subjective peril--they found their laws inadequate to repression of the
enemy, the enemy too strong to permit the enactment of adequate laws. The
belief that a malcontent armed with freedom of speech, a newspaper, a vote
and a rifle is less dangerous than a malcontent with a still tongue in his
head, empty hands and under police surveillance was abandoned, but all too
late. From its fatuous dream the nation was awakened by the noise of arms,
the shrieks of women and the red glare of burning cities.

Beginning with the slaughter at St. Louis on a night in the year 1920,
when no fewer than twenty-two thousand citizens were slain in the streets
and half the city destroyed, massacre followed massacre with frightful
rapidity. New York fell in the month following, many thousands of its
inhabitants escaping fire and sword only to be driven into the bay and
drowned, "the roaring of the water in their ears," says Bardeal,
"augmented by the hoarse clamor of their red-handed pursuers, whose
blood-thirst was unsated by the sea." A week later Washington was
destroyed, with all its public buildings and archives; the President and
his Ministry were slain, Congress was dispersed, and an unknown number of
officials and private citizens perished. Of all the principal cities only
Chicago and San Francisco escaped. The people of the former were all
anarchists and the latter was valorously and successfully defended by the
Chinese.

The urban anarchists were eventually subdued and some semblance of order
was restored, but greater woes and sharper shames awaited this unhappy
nation, as we shall see.

In turning from this branch of our subject to consider the causes of the
failure and bloody disruption of the great American republic other than
those inherent in the form of government, it may not be altogether
unprofitable to glance briefly at what seems to a superficial view the
inconsistent phenomenon of great material prosperity. It is not to be
denied that this unfortunate people was at one time singularly prosperous,
in so far as national wealth is a measure and proof of prosperity. Among
nations it was the richest nation. But at how great a sacrifice of better
things was its wealth obtained! By the neglect of all education except
that crude, elementary sort which fits men for the coarse delights of
business and affairs but confers no capacity of rational enjoyment; by
exalting the worth of wealth and making it the test and touchstone of
merit; by ignoring art, scorning literature and despising science, except
as these might contribute to the glutting of the purse; by setting up and
maintaining an artificial standard of morals which condoned all offenses
against the property and peace of every one but the condoner; by
pitilessly crushing out of their natures every sentiment and aspiration
unconnected with accumulation of property, these civilized savages and
commercial barbarians attained their sordid end. Before they had rounded
the first half-century of their existence as a nation they had sunk so low
in the scale of morality that it was considered nothing discreditable to
take the hand and even visit the house of a man who had grown rich by
means notoriously corrupt and dishonorable; and Harley declares that even
the editors and writers of newspapers, after fiercely assailing such men
in their journals, would be seen "hobnobbing" with them in public places.
(The nature of the social ceremony named the "hobnob" is not now
understood, but it is known that it was a sign of amity and favor.) When
men or nations devote all the powers of their minds and bodies to the
heaping up of wealth, wealth is heaped up. But what avails it? It may not
be amiss to quote here the words of one of the greatest of the ancients
whose works--fragmentary, alas--have come down to us.

"Wealth has accumulated itself into masses; and poverty, also in
accumulation enough, lies impassably separated from it; opposed,
uncommunicating, like forces in positive and negative poles. The gods of
this lower world sit aloft on glittering thrones, less happy than
Epicurus's gods, but as indolent, as impotent; while the boundless living
chaos of ignorance and hunger welters, terrific in its dark fury, under
their feet. How much among us might be likened to a whited sepulcher:
outwardly all pomp and strength, but inwardly full of horror and despair
and dead men's bones! Iron highways, with their wains fire-winged, are
uniting all the ends of the land; quays and moles, with their innumerable
stately fleets, tame the ocean into one pliant bearer of burdens; labor's
thousand arms, of sinew and of metal, all-conquering everywhere, from the
tops of the mount down to the depths of the mine and the caverns of the
sea, ply unweariedly for the service of man; yet man remains unserved. He
has subdued this planet, his habitation and inheritance, yet reaps no
profit from the victory. Sad to look upon: in the highest stage of
civilization nine-tenths of mankind have to struggle in the lowest battle
of savage or even animal man--the battle against famine. Countries are
rich, prosperous in all manner of increase, beyond example; but the men of
these countries are poor, needier than ever of all sustenance, outward and
inward; of belief, of knowledge, of money, of food."

To this somber picture of American "prosperity" in the nineteenth century
nothing of worth can be added by the most inspired artist. Let us simply
inscribe upon the gloomy canvas the memorable words of an illustrious poet
of the period:

  That country speeds to an untoward fate,
  Where men are trivial and gold is great.

One of the most "sacred" rights of the ancient American was the trial of
an accused person by "a jury of his peers." This, in America, was a right
secured to him by a written constitution. It was almost universally
believed to have had its origin in Magna Carta, a famous document which
certain rebellious noblemen of another country had compelled their
sovereign to sign under a threat of death. That celebrated "bill of
rights" has not all come down to us, but researches of the learned have
made it certain that it contained no mention of trial by jury, which,
indeed, was unknown to its authors. The words _judicium parium_ meant to
them something entirely different--the judgment of the entire community of
freemen. The words and the practice they represented antedated Magna Carta
by many centuries and were common to the Franks and other Germanic
nations, amongst whom a trial "jury" consisted of persons having a
knowledge of the matter to be determined--persons who in later times were
called "witnesses" and rigorously excluded from the seats of judgment.

It is difficult to conceive a more clumsy and ineffective machinery for
ascertaining truth and doing justice than a jury of twelve men of the
average intelligence, even among ourselves. What, then, must this device
have been among the half-civilized tribes of the Connected States of
America! Nay, the case is worse than that, for it was the practice to
prevent men of even the average intelligence from serving as jurors.
Jurors had to be residents of the locality of the crime charged, and every
crime was made a matter of public notoriety long before the accused was
brought to trial; yet, as a rule, he who had read or talked about the
trial was held disqualified to serve. This in a country where, when a man
who could read was not reading about local crimes he was talking about
them, or if doing neither was doing something worse!

To the twelve men so chosen the opposing lawyers addressed their
disingenuous pleas and for their consideration the witnesses presented
their carefully rehearsed testimony, most of it false. So unintelligent
were these juries that a great part of the time in every trial was
consumed in keeping from them certain kinds of evidence with which they
could not be trusted; yet the lawyers were permitted to submit to them any
kind of misleading argument that they pleased and fortify it with
innuendoes without relevancy and logic without sense. Appeals to their
passions, their sympathies, their prejudices, were regarded as legitimate
influences and tolerated by the judges on the theory that each side's
offenses would about offset those of the other. In a criminal case it was
expected that the prosecutor would declare repeatedly and in the most
solemn manner his belief in the guilt of the person accused, and that the
attorney for the defense would affirm with equal gravity his conviction of
his client's innocence. How could they impress the jury with a belief
which they did not themselves venture to affirm? It is not recorded that
any lawyer ever rebelled against the iron authority of these conditions
and stood for truth and conscience. They were, indeed, the conditions of
his existence as a lawyer, a fact which they easily persuaded themselves
mitigated the baseness of their obedience to them, or justified it
altogether.

The judges, as a rule, were no better, for before they could become judges
they must have been advocates, with an advocate's fatal disabilities of
judgment. Most of them depended for their office upon the favor of the
people, which, also, was fatal to the independence, the dignity and the
impartiality to which they laid so solemn claim. In their decisions they
favored, so far as they dared, every interest, class or person powerful
enough to help or hurt them in an election. Holding their high office by
so precarious a tenure, they were under strong temptation to enrich
themselves from the serviceable purses of wealthy litigants, and in
disregard of justice to cultivate the favor of the attorneys practicing
before them, and before whom they might soon be compelled themselves to
practice.

In the higher courts of the land, where juries were unknown and appointed
judges held their seats for life, these awful conditions did not obtain,
and there Justice might have been content to dwell, and there she actually
did sometimes set her foot. Unfortunately, the great judges had the
consciences of their education. They had crept to place through the slime
of the lower courts and their robes of office bore the damnatory evidence.
Unfortunately, too, the attorneys, the jury habit strong upon them,
brought into the superior tribunals the moral characteristics and
professional methods acquired in the lower. Instead of assisting the
judges to ascertain the truth and the law, they cheated in argument and
took liberties with fact, deceiving the court whenever they deemed it to
the interest of their cause to do so, and as willingly won by a
technicality or a trick as by the justice of their contention and their
ability in supporting it. Altogether, the entire judicial system of the
Connected States of America was inefficient, disreputable, corrupt.

The result might easily have been foreseen and doubtless was predicted by
patriots whose admonitions have not come down to us. Denied protection of
the law, neither property nor life was safe. Greed filled his coffers from
the meager hoards of Thrift, private vengeance took the place of legal
redress, mad multitudes rioted and slew with virtual immunity from
punishment or blame, and the land was red with crime.

A singular phenomenon of the time was the immunity of criminal women.
Among the Americans woman held a place unique in the history of nations.
If not actually worshiped as a deity, as some historians, among them the
great Sagab-Joffoy, have affirmed, she was at least regarded with feelings
of veneration which the modern mind has a difficulty in comprehending.
Some degree of compassion for her mental inferiority, some degree of
forbearance toward her infirmities of temper, some degree of immunity for
the offenses which these peculiarities entail--these are common to all
peoples above the grade of barbarians. In ancient America these chivalrous
sentiments found open and lawful expression only in relieving woman of the
burden of participation in political and military service; the laws gave
her no express exemption from responsibility for crime. When she murdered,
she was arrested; when arrested, brought to trial--though the origin and
meaning of those observances are not now known. Gunkux, whose researches
into the jurisprudence of antiquity enable him to speak with commanding
authority of many things, gives us here nothing better than the conjecture
that the trial of women for murder, in the nineteenth century and a part
of the twentieth, was the survival of an earlier custom of actually
convicting and punishing them, but it seems extremely improbable that a
people that once put its female assassins to death would ever have
relinquished the obvious advantages of the practice while retaining with
purposeless tenacity some of its costly preliminary forms. Whatever may
have been the reason, the custom was observed with all the gravity of a
serious intention. Gunkux professes knowledge of one or two instances (he
does not name his authorities) where matters went so far as conviction and
sentence, and adds that the mischievous sentimentalists who had always
lent themselves to the solemn jest by protestations of great
_vraisemblance_ against "the judicial killing of women," became really
alarmed and filled the land with their lamentations. Among the phenomena
of brazen effrontery he classes the fact that some of these loud
protagonists of the right of women to assassinate unpunished were
themselves women! Howbeit, the sentences, if ever pronounced, were never
executed, and during the first quarter of the twentieth century the
meaningless custom of bringing female assassins to trial was abandoned.
What the effect was of their exemption from this considerable
inconvenience we have not the data to conjecture, unless we understand as
an allusion to it some otherwise obscure words of the famous Edward Bok,
the only writer of the period whose work has survived. In his monumental
essay on barbarous penology, entitled "Slapping the Wrist," he couples
"woman's emancipation from the trammels of law" and "man's better prospect
of death" in a way that some have construed as meaning that he regarded
them as cause and effect. It must be said, however, that this
interpretation finds no support in the general character of his writing,
which is exceedingly humane, refined and womanly.

It has been said that the writings of this great man are the only
surviving work of his period, but of that we are not altogether sure.
There exists a fragment of an anonymous essay on woman's legal
responsibility which many Americologists think belongs to the beginning of
the twentieth century. Certainly it could not have been written later than
the middle of it, for at that time woman had been definitely released from
any responsibility to any law but that of her own will. The essay is an
argument against even such imperfect exemption as she had in its author's
time.

"It has been urged," the writer says, "that women, being less rational and
more emotional than men, should not be held accountable in the same
degree. To this it may be answered that punishment for crime is not
intended to be retaliatory, but admonitory and deterrent. It is,
therefore, peculiarly necessary to those not easily reached by other forms
of warning and dissuasion. Control of the wayward is not to be sought in
reduction of restraints, but in their multiplication. One who cannot be
curbed by reason may be curbed by fear, a familiar truth which lies at the
foundation of all penological systems. The argument for exemption of women
is equally cogent for exemption of habitual criminals, for they too are
abnormally inaccessible to reason, abnormally disposed to obedience to the
suasion of their unregulated impulses and passions. To free them from the
restraints of the fear of punishment would be a bold innovation which has
as yet found no respectable proponent outside their own class.

"Very recently this dangerous enlargement of the meaning of the phrase
'emancipation of woman' has been fortified with a strange advocacy by the
female 'champions of their sex.' Their argument runs this way: 'We are
denied a voice in the making of the laws relating to infliction of the
death penalty; it is unjust to hold us to an accountability to which we
have not assented.' Of course this argument is as broad as the entire body
of law; it amounts to nothing less than a demand for general immunity from
all laws, for to none of them has woman's assent been asked or given. But
let us consider this amazing claim with reference only to the proposal in
the service and promotion of which it is now urged: exemption of women
from the death penalty for murder. In the last analysis it is seen to be a
simple demand for compensation. It says: 'You owe us a _solatium_. Since
you deny us the right to vote, you should give us the right to
assassinate. We do not appraise it at so high a valuation as the other
franchise, but we do value it.'

"Apparently they do: without legal, but with virtual, immunity from
punishment, the women of this country take an average of one thousand
lives annually, nine in ten being the lives of men. Juries of men, incited
and sustained by public opinion, have actually deprived every adult male
American of the right to live. If the death of any man is desired by any
woman for any reason he is without protection. She has only to kill him
and say that he wronged or insulted her. Certain almost incredible recent
instances prove that no woman is too base for immunity, no crime against
life sufficiently rich in all the elements of depravity to compel a
conviction of the assassin, or, if she is convicted and sentenced, her
punishment by the public executioner."

In this interesting fragment, quoted by Bogul in his "History of an
Extinct Civilization," we learn something of the shame and peril of
American citizenship under institutions which, not having run their
foreordained course to the unhappy end, were still in some degree
supportable. What these institutions became afterward is a familiar story.
It is true that the law of trial by jury was repealed. It had broken down,
but not until it had sapped the whole nation's respect for all law, for
all forms of authority, for order and private virtues. The people whose
rude forefathers in another land it had served roughly to protect against
their tyrants, it had lamentably failed to protect against themselves, and
when in madness they swept it away, it was not as one renouncing an error,
but as one impatient of the truth which the error is still believed to
contain. They flung it away, not as an ineffectual restraint, but as a
restraint; not because it was no longer an instrument of justice for the
determination of truth, but because they feared that it might again become
such. In brief, trial by jury was abolished only when it had provoked
anarchy.

Before turning to another phase of this ancient civilization I cannot
forbear to relate, after the learned and ingenious Gunkux, the only known
instance of a public irony expressing itself in the sculptor's noble art.
In the ancient city of Hohokus once stood a monument of colossal size and
impressive dignity. It was erected by public subscription to the memory of
a man whose only distinction consisted in a single term of service as a
juror in a famous murder trial, the details of which have not come down to
us. This occupied the court and held public attention for many weeks,
being bitterly contested by both prosecution and defense. When at last it
was given to the jury by the judge in the most celebrated charge that had
ever been delivered from the bench, a ballot was taken at once. The jury
stood eleven for acquittal to one for conviction. And so it stood at every
ballot of the more than fifty that were taken during the fortnight that
the jury was locked up for deliberation. Moreover, the dissenting juror
would not argue the matter; he would listen with patient attention while
his eleven indignant opponents thundered their opinions into his ears,
even when they supported them with threats of personal violence; but not a
word would he say. At last a disagreement was formally entered, the jury
discharged and the obstinate juror chased from the city by the maddened
populace. Despairing of success in another trial and privately admitting
his belief in the prisoner's innocence, the public prosecutor moved for
his release, which the judge ordered with remarks plainly implying his own
belief that the wrong man had been tried.

Years afterward the accused person died confessing his guilt, and a little
later one of the jurors who had been sworn to try the case admitted that
he had attended the trial on the first day only, having been personated
during the rest of the proceedings by a twin brother, the obstinate
member, who was a deaf-mute.

The monument to this eminent public servant was overthrown and destroyed
by an earthquake in the year 2342.

One of the causes of that popular discontent which brought about the
stupendous events resulting in the disruption of the great republic,
historians and archæologists are agreed in reckoning "insurance." Of the
exact nature of that factor in the problem of the national life of that
distant day we are imperfectly informed; many of its details have perished
from the record, yet its outlines loom large through the mist of ages and
can be traced with greater precision than is possible in many more
important matters.

In the monumental work of Professor Golunk-Dorsto ("Some Account of the
Insurance Delusion in Ancient America") we have its most considerable
modern exposition; and Gakler's well-known volume, "The Follies of
Antiquity," contains much interesting matter relating to it. From these
and other sources the student of human unreason can reconstruct that
astounding fallacy of insurance as, from three joints of its tail, the
great naturalist Bogramus restored the ancient elephant, from hoof to
horn.

The game of insurance, as practiced by the ancient Americans (and, as
Gakler conjectures, by some of the tribesmen of Europe), was gambling,
pure and simple, despite the sentimental character that its proponents
sought to impress upon some forms of it for the greater prosperity of
their dealings with its dupes. Essentially, it was a bet between the
insurer and the insured. The number of ways in which the wager was
made--all devised by the insurer--was almost infinite, but in none of them
was there a departure from the intrinsic nature of the transaction as seen
in its simplest, frankest form, which we shall here expound.

To those unlearned in the economical institutions of antiquity it is
necessary to explain that in ancient America, long prior to the disastrous
Japanese war, individual ownership of property was unrestricted; every
person was permitted to get as much as he was able, and to hold it as his
own without regard to his needs, or whether he made any good use of it or
not. By some plan of distribution not now understood even the habitable
surface of the earth, with the minerals beneath, was parceled out among
the favored few, and there was really no place except at sea where
children of the others could lawfully be born. Upon a part of the dry land
that he had been able to acquire, or had leased from another for the
purpose, a man would build a house worth, say, ten thousand _drusoes_.
(The ancient unit of value was the "dollar," but nothing is now known as
to its actual worth.) Long before the building was complete the owner was
beset by "touts" and "cappers" of the insurance game, who poured into his
ears the most ingenious expositions of the advantages of betting that it
would burn down--for with incredible fatuity the people of that time
continued, generation after generation, to build inflammable habitations.
The persons whom the capper represented--they called themselves an
"insurance company"--stood ready to accept the bet, a fact which seems to
have generated no suspicion in the mind of the house-owner. Theoretically,
of course, if the house did burn payment of the wager would partly or
wholly recoup the winner of the bet for the loss of his house, but in fact
the result of the transaction was commonly very different. For the
privilege of betting that his property would be destroyed by fire the
owner had to pay to the gentleman betting that it would not be, a certain
percentage of its value every year, called a "premium." The amount of this
was determined by the company, which employed statisticians and actuaries
to fix it at such a sum that, according to the law of probabilities, long
before the house was "due to burn," the company would have received more
than the value of it in premiums. In other words, the owner of the house
would himself supply the money to pay his bet, and a good deal more.

But how, it may be asked, could the company's actuary know that the man's
house would last until he had paid in more than its insured value in
premiums--more, that is to say, than the company would have to pay back?
He could not, but from his statistics he could know how many houses in ten
thousand of that kind burned in their first year, how many in their
second, their third, and so on. That was all that he needed to know, the
house-owners knowing nothing about it. He fixed his rates according to the
facts, and the occasional loss of a bet in an individual instance did not
affect the certainty of a general winning. Like other professional
gamblers, the company expected to lose sometimes, yet knew that in the
long run it _must_ win; which meant that in any special case it would
_probably_ win. With a thousand gambling games open to him in which the
chances were equal, the infatuated dupe chose to "sit into" one where they
were against him! Deceived by the cappers' fairy tales, dazed by the
complex and incomprehensible "calculations" put forth for his undoing, and
having ever in the ear of his imagination the crackle and roar of the
impoverishing flames, he grasped at the hope of beating--in an unwelcome
way, it is true--"the man that kept the table." He must have known for a
certainty that if the company could afford to insure him he could not
afford to let it. He must have known that the whole body of the insured
paid to the insurers more than the insurers paid to them; otherwise the
business could not have been conducted. This they cheerfully admitted;
indeed, they proudly affirmed it. In fact, insurance companies were the
only professional gamblers that had the incredible hardihood to parade
their enormous winnings as an inducement to play against their game. These
winnings ("assets," they called them) proved their ability, they said, to
pay when they lost; and that was indubitably true. What they did not
prove, unfortunately, was the _will_ to pay, which from the imperfect
court records of the period that have come down to us, appears frequently
to have been lacking. Gakler relates that in the instance of the city of
San Francisco (somewhat doubtfully identified by Macronus as the modern
fishing-village of Gharoo) the disinclination of the insurance companies
to pay their bets had the most momentous consequences.

In the year 1906 San Francisco was totally destroyed by fire. The
conflagration was caused by the friction of a pig scratching itself
against an angle of a wooden building. More than one hundred thousand
persons perished, and the loss of property is estimated by Kobo-Dogarque
at one and a half million _drusoes_. On more than two-thirds of this
enormous sum the insurance companies had laid bets, and the greater part
of it they refused to pay. In justification they pointed out that the deed
performed by the pig was "an act of God," who in the analogous instance of
the express companies had been specifically forbidden to take any action
affecting the interests of parties to a contract, or the result of an
agreed undertaking.

In the ensuing litigation their attorneys cited two notable precedents. A
few years before the San Francisco disaster, another American city had
experienced a similar one through the upsetting of a lamp by the kick of a
cow. In that case, also, the insurance companies had successfully denied
their liability on the ground that the cow, manifestly incited by some
supernatural power, had unlawfully influenced the result of a wager to
which she was not a party. The companies defendant had contended that the
recourse of the property-owners was against, not them, but the owner of
the cow. In his decision sustaining that view and dismissing the case, a
learned judge (afterward president of one of the defendant companies) had
in the legal phraseology of the period pronounced the action of the cow an
obvious and flagrant instance of unwarrantable intervention. Kobo-Dogarque
believes that this decision was afterward reversed by an appellate court
of contrary political complexion and the companies were compelled to
compromise, but of this there is no record. It is certain that in the San
Francisco case the precedent was urged.

Another precedent which the companies cited with particular emphasis
related to an unfortunate occurrence at a famous millionaires' club in
London, the capital of the renowned king, John Bui. A gentleman passing in
the street fell in a fit and was carried into the club in convulsions. Two
members promptly made a bet upon his life. A physician who chanced to be
present set to work upon the patient, when one of the members who had laid
the wager came forward and restrained him, saying: "Sir, I beg that you
will attend to your own business. I have my money on that fit."

Doubtless these two notable precedents did not constitute the entire case
of the defendants in the San Francisco insurance litigation, but the
additional pleas are lost to us.

Of the many forms of gambling known as insurance that called life
insurance appears to have been the most vicious. In essence it was the
same as fire insurance, marine insurance, accident insurance and so forth,
with an added offensiveness in that it was a betting on human
lives--commonly by the policy-holder on lives that should have been held
most sacred and altogether immune from the taint of traffic. In point of
practical operation this ghastly business was characterized by a more
fierce and flagrant dishonesty than any of its kindred pursuits. To such
lengths of robbery did the managers go that at last the patience of the
public was exhausted and a comparatively trivial occurrence fired the
combustible elements of popular indignation to a white heat in which the
entire insurance business of the country was burned out of existence,
together with all the gamblers who had invented and conducted it. The
president of one of the companies was walking one morning in a street of
New York, when he had the bad luck to step on the tail of a dog and was
bitten in retaliation. Frenzied by the pain of the wound, he gave the
creature a savage kick and it ran howling toward a group of idlers in
front of a grocery store. In ancient America the dog was a sacred animal,
worshiped by all sorts and conditions of tribesmen. The idlers at once
raised a great cry, and setting upon the offender beat him so that he
died.

Their act was infectious: men, women and children trooped out of their
dwellings by thousands to join them, brandishing whatever weapons they
could snatch, and uttering wild cries of vengeance. This formidable mob
overpowered the police, and marching from one insurance office to another,
successively demolished them all, slew such officers as they could lay
hands on, and chased the fugitive survivors into the sea, "where," says a
quaint chronicle of the time, "they were eaten by their kindred, the
sharks." This carnival of violence continued all the day, and at set of
sun not one person connected with any form of insurance remained alive.

Ferocious and bloody as was the massacre, it was only the beginning. As
the news of it went blazing and coruscating along the wires by which
intelligence was then conveyed across the country, city after city caught
the contagion. Everywhere, even in the small hamlets and the agricultural
districts, the dupes rose against their dupers. The smoldering resentment
of years burst into flame, and within a week all that was left of
insurance in America was the record of a monstrous and cruel delusion
written in the blood of its promoters.

A remarkable feature of the crude and primitive civilization of the
Americans was their religion. This was polytheistic, as is that of all
backward peoples, and among their minor deities were their own women. This
has been disputed by respectable authorities, among them Gunkux and the
younger Kekler, but the weight of archæological testimony is against them,
for, as Sagab-Joffy ingeniously points out, none of less than divine rank
would by even the lowest tribes be given unrestricted license to kill.
Among the Americans woman, as already pointed out, indubitably had that
freedom, and exercised it with terrible effect, a fact which makes the
matter of their religion pertinent to the purpose of this monograph. If
ever an American woman was punished by law for murder of a man no record
of the fact is found; whereas, such American literature as we possess is
full of the most enthusiastic adulation of the impossible virtues and
imaginary graces of the human female. One writer even goes to the length
of affirming that respect for the sex is the foundation of political
stability, the cornerstone of civil and religious liberty! After the
break-up of the republic and the savage intertribal wars that followed,
Gyneolatry was an exhausted cult and woman was relegated to her old state
of benign subjection.

Unfortunately, we know little of the means of travel in ancient America,
other than the names. It seems to have been done mainly by what were
called "railroads," upon which wealthy associations of men transported
their fellow-citizens in some kind of vehicle at a low speed, seldom
exceeding fifty or sixty miles an hour, as distance and time were then
reckoned--about equal to seven _kaltabs_ a _grillog_. Notwithstanding this
slow movement of the vehicles, the number and fatality of accidents were
incredible. In the Zopetroq Museum of Archæology is preserved an official
report (found in the excavations made by Droyhors on the supposed site of
Washington) of a Government Commission of the Connected States. From that
document we learn that in the year 1907 of their era the railroads of the
country killed 5,000 persons and wounded 72,286--a mortality which is said
by the commissioners to be twice that of the battle of Gettysburg,
concerning which we know nothing but the name. This was about the annual
average of railroad casualties of the period, and if it provoked comment
it at least led to no reform, for at a later period we find the mortality
even greater. That it was preventable is shown by the fact that in the
same year the railroads of Great Britain, where the speed was greater and
the intervals between vehicles less, killed only one passenger. It was a
difference of government: Great Britain had a government that governed;
America had not. Happily for humanity, the kind of government that does
not govern, self-government, "government of the people, by the people and
for the people" (to use a meaningless paradox of that time) has perished
from the face of the earth.

An inherent weakness in republican government was that it assumed the
honesty and intelligence of the majority, "the masses," who were neither
honest nor intelligent. It would doubtless have been an excellent
government for a people so good and wise as to need none. In a country
having such a system the leaders, the politicians, must necessarily all be
demagogues, for they can attain to place and power by no other method than
flattery of the people and subserviency to the will of the majority. In
all the ancient American political literature we look in vain for a single
utterance of truth and reason regarding these matters. In none of it is a
hint that the multitude was ignorant and vicious, as we know it to have
been, and as it must necessarily be in any country, to whatever high
average of intelligence and morality the people attain; for "intelligence"
and "morality" are comparative terms, the standard of comparison being the
intelligence and morality of the wisest and best, who must always be the
few. Whatever general advance is made, those not at the head are
behind--are ignorant and immoral according to the new standard, and unfit
to control in the higher and broader policies demanded by the progress
made. Where there is true and general progress the philosopher of
yesterday would be the ignoramus of to-day, the honorable of one
generation the vicious of another. The peasant of our time is incomparably
superior to the statesman of ancient America, yet he is unfit to govern,
for there are others more fit.

That a body of men can be wiser than its wisest member seems to the modern
understanding so obvious and puerile an error that it is inconceivable
that any people, even the most primitive, could ever have entertained it;
yet we know that in America it was a fixed and steadfast political faith.
The people of that day did not, apparently, attempt to explain how the
additional wisdom was acquired by merely assembling in council, as in
their "legislatures"; they seem to have assumed that it was so, and to
have based their entire governmental system upon that assumption, with
never a suspicion of its fallacy. It is like assuming that a mountain
range is higher than its highest peak. In the words of Golpek, "The early
Americans believed that units of intelligence were addable quantities," or
as Soseby more wittily puts it, "They thought that in a combination of
idiocies they had the secret of sanity."

The Americans, as has been said, never learned that even among themselves
majorities ruled, not because they ought, but because they could--not
because they were wise, but because they were strong. The count of noses
determined, not the better policy, but the more powerful party. The weaker
submitted, as a rule, for it had to or risk a war in which it would be at
a disadvantage. Yet in all the early years of the republic they seem
honestly to have dignified their submission as "respect for the popular
verdict." They even quoted from the Latin language the sentiment that "the
voice of the people is the voice of God." And this hideous blasphemy was
as glib upon the lips of those who, without change of mind, were defeated
at the polls year after year as upon those of the victors.

Of course, their government was powerless to restrain any aggression or
encroachment upon the general welfare as soon as a considerable body of
voters had banded together to undertake it. A notable instance has been
recorded by Bamscot in his great work, "Some Evil Civilizations." After
the first of America's great intestinal wars the surviving victors formed
themselves into an organization which seems at first to have been purely
social and benevolent, but afterward fell into the hands of rapacious
politicians who in order to preserve their power corrupted their followers
by distributing among them enormous sums of money exacted from the
government by threats of overturning it. In less than a half century after
the war in which they had served, so great was the fear which they
inspired in whatever party controlled the national treasury that the total
sum of their exactions was no less annually than seventeen million
_prastams_! As Dumbleshaw naïvely puts it, "having saved their country,
these gallant gentlemen naturally took it for themselves." The eventual
massacre of the remnant of this hardy and impenitent organization by the
labor unions more accustomed to the use of arms is beyond the province of
this monograph to relate. The matter is mentioned at all only because it
is a typical example of the open robbery that marked that period of the
republic's brief and inglorious existence; the Grand Army, as it called
itself, was no worse and no better than scores of other organizations
having no purpose but plunder and no method but menace. A little later
nearly all classes and callings became organized conspiracies, each
seeking an unfair advantage through laws which the party in power had not
the firmness to withhold, nor the party hoping for power the courage to
oppose. The climax of absurdity in this direction was reached in 1918,
when an association of barbers, known as Noblemen of the Razor, procured
from the parliament of the country a law giving it a representative in the
President's Cabinet, and making it a misdemeanor to wear a beard.

In Soseby's "History of Popular Government" he mentions "a monstrous
political practice known as 'Protection to American Industries.'" Modern
research has not ascertained precisely what it was; it is known rather
from its effects than in its true character, but from what we can learn of
it to-day I am disposed to number it among those malefic agencies
concerned in the destruction of the American republics, particularly the
Connected States, although it appears not to have been peculiar to
"popular government." Some of the contemporary monarchies of Europe were
afflicted with it, but by the divine favor which ever guards a throne its
disastrous effects were averted. "Protection" consisted in a number of
extraordinary expedients, the purposes of which and their relations to one
another cannot with certainty be determined in the present state of our
knowledge. Debrethin and others agree that one feature of it was the
support, by general taxation, of a few favored citizens in public palaces,
where they passed their time in song and dance and all kinds of revelry.
They were not, however, altogether idle, being required out of the sums
bestowed upon them, to employ a certain number of men each in erecting
great piles of stone and pulling them down again, digging holes in the
ground and then filling them with earth, pouring water into casks and then
drawing it off, and so forth. The unhappy laborers were subject to the
most cruel oppressions, but the knowledge that their wages came from the
pockets of those whom their work nowise benefited was so gratifying to
them that nothing could induce them to leave the service of their
heartless employers to engage in lighter and more useful labor.

Another characteristic of "Protection" was the maintenance at the
principal seaports of "customs-houses," which were strong fortifications
armed with heavy guns for the purpose of destroying or driving away the
trading ships of foreign nations. It was this that caused the Connected
States to be known abroad as the "Hermit Republic," a name of which its
infatuated citizens were strangely proud, although they had themselves
sent armed ships to open the ports of Japan and other Oriental countries
to their own commerce. In their own case, if a foreign ship came empty and
succeeded in evading the fire of the "customs-house," as sometimes
occurred, she was permitted to take away a cargo.

It is obvious that such a system was distinctly evil, but it must be
confessed our uncertainty regarding the whole matter of "Protection" does
not justify us in assigning it a definite place among the causes of
national decay. That in some way it produced an enormous revenue is
certain, and that the method was dishonest is no less so; for this
revenue--known as a "surplus"--was so abhorred while it lay in the
treasury that all were agreed upon the expediency of getting rid of it,
two great political parties existing for apparently no other purpose than
the patriotic one of taking it out.

But how, it may be asked, could people so misgoverned get on, even as well
as they did?

From the records that have come down to us it does not appear that they
got on very well. They were preyed upon by all sorts of political
adventurers, whose power in most instances was limited only by the
contemporaneous power of other political adventurers equally unscrupulous.
A full half of the taxes wrung from them was stolen. Their public lands,
millions of square miles, were parceled out among banded conspirators.
Their roads and the streets of their cities were nearly impassable. Their
public buildings, conceived in abominable taste and representing enormous
sums of money, which never were used in their construction, began to
tumble about the ears of the workmen before they were completed. The most
delicate and important functions of government were intrusted to men with
neither knowledge, heart nor experience, who by their corruption imperiled
the public interest and by their blundering disgraced the national name.
In short, all the train of evils inseparable from government of any kind
beset this unhappy people with tenfold power, together with hundreds of
worse ones peculiar to their own faulty and unnatural system. It was
thought that their institutions would give them peace, yet in the first
three-quarters of a century of their existence they fought three important
wars: one of revenge, one of aggression and one--the bloodiest and most
wasteful known up to that time--among themselves. And before a century and
a half had passed they had the humiliation to see many of their seaport
cities destroyed by the Emperor of Japan in a quarrel which they had
themselves provoked by their greed of Oriental dominion.

By far the most important factor concerned in bringing about the
dissolution of the republic and the incredible horrors that followed it
was what was known as "the contest between capital and labor." This
momentous struggle began in a rather singular way through an agitation set
afoot by certain ambitious women who preached at first to inattentive and
inhospitable ears, but with ever increasing acceptance, the doctrine of
equality of the sexes, and demanded the "emancipation" of woman. True,
woman was already an object of worship and had, as noted before, the right
to kill. She was treated with profound and sincere deference, because of
certain humble virtues, the product of her secluded life. Men of that time
appear to have felt for women, in addition to religious reverence, a
certain sentiment known as "love." The nature of this feeling is not
clearly known to us, and has been for ages a matter of controversy
evolving more heat than light. This much is plain: it was largely composed
of good will, and had its root in woman's dependence. Perhaps it had
something of the character of the benevolence with which we regard our
slaves, our children and our domestic animals--everything, in fact, that
is weak, helpless and inoffensive.

Woman was not satisfied; her superserviceable advocates taught her to
demand the right to vote, to hold office, to own property, to enter into
employment in competition with man. Whatever she demanded she eventually
got. With the effect upon her we are not here concerned; the predicted
gain to political purity did not ensue, nor did commercial integrity
receive any stimulus from her participation in commercial pursuits. What
indubitably did ensue was a more sharp and bitter competition in the
industrial world through this increase of more than thirty per cent, in
its wage-earning population. In no age nor country has there ever been
sufficient employment for those requiring it. The effect of so enormously
increasing the already disproportionate number of workers in a single
generation could be no other than disastrous. Every woman employed
displaced or excluded some man, who, compelled to seek a lower employment,
displaced another, and so on, until the least capable or most unlucky of
the series became a tramp--a nomadic mendicant criminal! The number of
these dangerous vagrants in the beginning of the twentieth century of
their era has been estimated by Holobom at no less than seven and a half
_blukuks_! Of course, they were as tow to the fires of sedition, anarchy
and insurrection. It does not very nearly relate to our present purpose,
but it is impossible not to note in passing that this unhappy result,
directly flowing from woman's invasion of the industrial field, was
unaccompanied by any material advantage to herself. Individual women, here
and there one, may themselves have earned the support that they would
otherwise not have received, but the sex as a whole was not benefited.
They provided for themselves no better than they had previously been
provided for, and would still have been provided for, by the men whom they
displaced. The whole somber incident is unrelieved by a single gleam of
light.

Previously to this invasion of the industrial field by woman there had
arisen conditions that were in themselves peculiarly menacing to the
social fabric. Some of the philosophers of the period, rummaging amongst
the dubious and misunderstood facts of commercial and industrial history,
had discovered what they were pleased to term "the law of supply and
demand"; and this they expounded with so ingenious a sophistry, and so
copious a wealth of illustration and example that what is at best but a
faulty and imperfectly applicable principle, limited and cut into by all
manner of other considerations, came to be accepted as the sole
explanation and basis of material prosperity and an infallible rule for
the proper conduct of industrial affairs. In obedience to this "law"--for,
interpreting it in its straitest sense they understood it to be
mandatory--employers and employees alike regulated by its iron authority
all their dealings with one another, throwing off the immemorial relations
of mutual dependence and mutual esteem as tending to interfere with
beneficent operation. The employer came to believe conscientiously that it
was not only profitable and expedient, but under all circumstances his
duty, to obtain his labor for as little money as possible, even as he sold
its product for as much. Considerations of humanity were not banished from
his heart, but most sternly excluded from his business. Many of these
misguided men would give large sums to various charities; would found
universities, hospitals, libraries; would even stop on their way to
relieve beggars in the street; but for their own work-people they had no
care. Straman relates in his "Memoirs" that a wealthy manufacturer once
said to one of his mill-hands who had asked for an increase of his wages
because unable to support his family on the pay that he was getting: "Your
family is nothing to me. I cannot afford to mix benevolence with my
business." Yet this man, the author adds, had just given a thousand
_drusoes_ to a "sea-man's home." He could afford to care for other men's
employees, but not for his own. He could not see that the act which he
performed as truly, and to the same degree, cut down his margin of profit
in his business as the act which he refused to perform would have done,
and had not the advantage of securing him better service from a grateful
workman.

On their part the laborers were no better. Their relations to their
employers being "purely commercial," as it was called, they put no heart
into their work, seeking ever to do as little as possible for their money,
precisely as their employers sought to pay as little as possible for the
work they got. The interests of the two classes being thus antagonized,
they grew to distrust and hate each other, and each accession of ill
feeling produced acts which tended to broaden the breach more and more.
There was neither cheerful service on the one side nor ungrudging payment
on the other.

The harder industrial conditions generated by woman's irruption into a new
domain of activity produced among laboring men a feeling of blind
discontent and concern. Like all men in apprehension, they drew together
for mutual protection, they knew not clearly against what. They formed
"labor unions," and believed them to be something new and effective in the
betterment of their condition; whereas, from the earliest historical
times, in Rome, in Greece, in Egypt, in Assyria, labor unions with their
accepted methods of "striking" and rioting had been discredited by an
almost unbroken record of failure. One of the oldest manuscripts then in
existence, preserved in a museum at Turin, but now lost, related how the
workmen employed in the necropolis at Thebes, dissatisfied with their
allowance of corn and oil, had refused to work, broken out of their
quarters and, after much rioting, been subdued by the arrows of the
military. And such, despite the sympathies and assistance of brutal mobs
of the populace, was sometimes the end of the American "strike."
Originally organized for self-protection, and for a time partly
successful, these leagues became great tyrannies, so reasonless in their
demands and so unscrupulous in their methods of enforcing them that the
laws were unable to deal with them, and frequently the military forces of
the several States were ordered out for the protection of life and
property; but in most cases the soldiers fraternized with the leagues, ran
away, or were easily defeated. The cruel and mindless mobs had always the
hypocritical sympathy and encouragement of the newspapers and the
politicians, for both feared their power and courted their favor. The
judges, dependent for their offices not only on "the labor vote," but, to
obtain it, on the approval of the press and the politicians, boldly set
aside the laws against conspiracy and strained to the utmost tension those
relating to riot, arson and murder. To such a pass did all this come that
in the year 1931 an inn-keeper's denial of a half-holiday to an under-cook
resulted in the peremptory closing of half the factories in the country,
the stoppage of all railroad travel and movement of freight by land and
water and a general paralysis of the industries of the land. Many
thousands of families, including those of the "strikers" and their
friends, suffered from famine; armed conflicts occurred in every State;
hundreds were slain and incalculable amounts of property wrecked and
destroyed.

Failure, however, was inherent in the method, for success depended upon
unanimity, and the greater the membership of the unions and the more
serious their menace to the industries of the country, the higher was the
premium for defection; and at last strike-breaking became a regular
employment, organized, officered and equipped for the service required by
the wealth and intelligence that directed it. From that moment the doom of
labor unionism was decreed and inevitable. But labor unionism did not live
long enough to die that way.

Naturally combinations of labor entailed combinations of capital. These
were at first purely protective. They were brought into being by the
necessity of resisting the aggressions of the others. But the trick of
combination once learned, it was seen to have possibilities of profit in
directions not dreamed of by its early promoters; its activities were not
long confined to fighting the labor unions with their own weapons and with
superior cunning and address. The shrewd and energetic men whose capacity
and commercial experience had made them rich while the laborers remained
poor were not slow to discern the advantages of coöperation over their own
former method of competition among themselves. They continued to fight the
labor unions, but ceased to fight one another. The result was that in the
brief period of two generations almost the entire business of the country
fell into the hands of a few gigantic corporations controlled by bold and
unscrupulous men, who, by daring and ingenious methods, made the body of
the people pay tribute to their greed.

In a country where money was all-powerful the power of money was used
without stint and without scruple. Judges were bribed to do their duty,
juries to convict, newspapers to support and legislators to betray their
constituents and pass the most oppressive laws. By these corrupt means,
and with the natural advantage of greater skill in affairs and larger
experience in concerted action, the capitalists soon restored their
ancient reign and the state of the laborer was worse than it had ever been
before. Straman says that in his time two millions of unoffending workmen
in the various industries were once discharged without warning and
promptly arrested as vagrants and deprived of their ears because a sulking
canal-boatman had kicked his captain's dog into the water. And the dog was
a retriever.

Had the people been honest and intelligent, as the politicians affirmed
them to be, the combination of capital could have worked no public
injury--would, in truth, have been a great public benefit. It enormously
reduced the expense of production and distribution, assured greater
permanency of employment, opened better opportunities to general and
special aptitude, gave an improved product, and at first supplied it at a
reduced price. Its crowning merit was that the industries of the country,
being controlled by a few men from a central source, could themselves be
easily controlled by law if law had been honestly administered. Under the
old order of scattered jurisdictions, requiring a multitude of actions at
law, little could be done, and little was done, to put a check on
commercial greed; under the new, much was possible, and at times something
was accomplished. But not for long; the essential dishonesty of the
American character enabled these capable and conscienceless
managers--"captains of industry" and "kings of finance"--to buy with money
advantages and immunities superior to those that the labor unions could
obtain by menaces and the promise of votes. The legislatures, the courts,
the executive officers, all the sources of authority and springs of
control, were defiled and impested until right and justice fled affrighted
from the land, and the name of the country became a stench in the nostrils
of the world.

Let us pause in our narrative to say here that much of the abuse of the
so-called "trusts" by their victims took no account of the folly,
stupidity and greed of the victims themselves. A favorite method by which
the great corporations crushed out the competition of the smaller ones and
of the "individual dealers" was by underselling them--a method made
possible by nothing but the selfishness of the purchasing consumers who
loudly complained of it. These could have stood by their neighbor, the
"small dealer," if they had wanted to, and no underselling could, have
been done. When the trust lowered the price of its product they eagerly
took the advantage offered, then cursed the trust for ruining the small
dealer. When it raised the price they cursed it for ruining themselves. It
is not easy to see what the trust could have done that would have been
acceptable, nor is it surprising that it soon learned to ignore their
clamor altogether and impenitently plunder those whom it could not hope to
appease.

Another of the many sins justly charged against the "kings of finance" was
this: They would buy properties worth, say, ten millions of "dollars" (the
value of the dollar is now unknown) and issue stock upon it to the face
value of, say, fifty millions. This their clamorous critics called
"creating" for themselves forty millions of dollars. They created nothing;
the stock had no dishonest value unless sold, and even at the most corrupt
period of the government nobody was compelled by law to buy. In nine cases
in ten the person who bought did so in the hope and expectation of getting
much for little and something for nothing. The buyer was no better than
the seller. He was a gambler. He "played against the game of the man who
kept the table" (as the phrase went), and naturally he lost. Naturally,
too, he cried out, but his lamentations, though echoed shrilly by the
demagogues, seem to have been unavailing. Even the rudimentary
intelligence of that primitive people discerned the impracticability of
laws forbidding the seller to set his own price on the thing he would sell
and declare it worth that price. Then, as now, nobody had to believe him.
Of the few who bought these "watered" stocks in good faith as an
investment in the honest hope of dividends it seems sufficient to say, in
the words of an ancient Roman, "Against stupidity the gods themselves are
powerless." Laws that would adequately protect the foolish from the
consequence of their folly would put an end to all commerce. The sin of
"over-capitalization" differed in magnitude only, not in kind, from the
daily practice of every salesman in every shop. Nevertheless, the popular
fury that it aroused must be reckoned among the main causes contributory
to the savage insurrections that accomplished the downfall of the
republic.

With the formation of powerful and unscrupulous trusts of both labor and
capital to subdue each other the possibilities of combination were not
exhausted; there remained the daring plan of combining the two
belligerents! And this was actually effected. The laborer's demand for an
increased wage was always based upon an increased cost of living, which
was itself chiefly due to increased cost of production from reluctant
concessions of his former demands. But in the first years of the twentieth
century observers noticed on the part of capital a lessening reluctance.
More frequent and more extortionate and reasonless demands encountered a
less bitter and stubborn resistance; capital was apparently weakening just
at the time when, with its strong organizations of trained and willing
strike-breakers, it was most secure. Not so; an ingenious malefactor,
whose name has perished from history, had thought out a plan for bringing
the belligerent forces together to plunder the rest of the population. In
the accounts that have come down to us details are wanting, but we know
that, little by little, this amazing project was accomplished. Wages rose
to incredible rates. The cost of living rose with them, for
employers--their new allies wielding in their service the weapons
previously used against them, intimidation, the boycott, and so
forth--more than recouped themselves from the general public. Their
employees got rebates on the prices of products, but for consumers who
were neither laborers nor capitalists there was no mercy. Strikes were a
thing of the past; strike-breakers threw themselves gratefully into the
arms of the unions; "industrial discontent" vanished, in the words of a
contemporary poet, "as by the stroke of an enchanter's wand." All was
peace, tranquillity and order! Then the storm broke.

A man in St. Louis purchased a sheep's kidney for seven-and-a-half
dollars. In his rage at the price he exclaimed: "As a public man I have
given twenty of the best years of my life to bringing about a friendly
understanding between capital and labor. I have succeeded, and may God
have mercy on my meddlesome soul!"

The remark was resented, a riot ensued, and when the sun went down that
evening his last beams fell upon a city reeking with the blood of a
hundred millionaires and twenty thousand citizens and sons of toil!

Students of the history of those troublous times need not to be told what
other and more awful events followed that bloody reprisal. Within
forty-eight hours the country was ablaze with insurrection, followed by
intestinal wars which lasted three hundred and seventy years and were
marked by such hideous barbarities as the modern historian can hardly
bring himself to relate. The entire stupendous edifice of popular
government, temple and citadel of fallacies and abuses, had crashed to
ruin. For centuries its fallen columns and scattered stones sheltered an
ever diminishing number of skulking anarchists, succeeded by hordes of
skin-clad savages subsisting on offal and raw flesh--the race-remnant of
an extinct civilization. All finally vanished from history into a darkness
impenetrable to conjecture.

       *       *       *       *       *

In concluding this hasty and imperfect sketch I cannot forbear to relate
an episode of the destructive and unnatural contest between labor and
capital, which I find recorded in the almost forgotten work of Antrolius,
who was an eye-witness to the incident.

At a time when the passions of both parties were most inflamed and scenes
of violence most frequent it was somehow noised about that at a certain
hour of a certain day some one--none could say who--would stand upon the
steps of the Capitol and speak to the people, expounding a plan for
reconciliation of all conflicting interests and pacification of the
quarrel. At the appointed hour thousands had assembled to hear--glowering
capitalists attended by hireling body-guards with firearms, sullen
laborers with dynamite bombs concealed in their clothing. All eyes were
directed to the specified spot, where suddenly appeared (none saw
whence--it seemed as if he had been there all the time, such his
tranquillity) a tall, pale man clad in a long robe, bare-headed, his hair
falling lightly upon his shoulders, his eyes full of compassion, and with
such majesty of face and mien that all were awed to silence ere he spoke.
Stepping slowly forward toward the throng and raising his right hand from
the elbow, the index finger extended upward, he said, in a voice ineffably
sweet and serious: "Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even
so do ye also unto them."

These strange words he repeated in the same solemn tones three times;
then, as the expectant multitude waited breathless for his discourse,
stepped quietly down into the midst of them, every one afterward declaring
that he passed within a pace of where himself had stood. For a moment the
crowd was speechless with surprise and disappointment, then broke into
wild, fierce cries: "Lynch him, lynch him!" and some have testified that
they heard the word "crucify." Struggling into looser order, the
infuriated mob started in mad pursuit; but each man ran a different way
and the stranger was seen again by none of them.




THE LAND BEYOND THE BLOW

(After the method of Swift, who followed Lucian, and was himself followed
by Voltaire and many others.)


THITHER

A crowd of men were assisting at a dog-fight. The scene was one of
indescribable confusion. In the center of the tumult the dogs, obscure in
a cloud of dust, rolled over and over, howling, yarring, tearing each
other with sickening ferocity. About them the hardly less ferocious men
shouted, cursed and struck, encouraged the animals with sibilant
utterances and threatened with awful forms of death and perdition all who
tried to put an end to the combat. Caught in the thick of this pitiless
mob I endeavored to make my way to a place of peace, when a burly
blackguard, needlessly obstructing me, said derisively:

"I guess you are working pockets."

"You are a liar!" I retorted hotly.

That is all the provocation that I remember to have given.


SONS OF THE FAIR STAR

When consciousness returned the sun was high in the heavens, yet the light
was dim, and had that indefinable ghastly quality that is observed during
a partial eclipse. The sun itself appeared singularly small, as if it were
at an immensely greater distance than usual. Rising with some difficulty
to my feet, I looked about me. I was in an open space among some trees
growing on the slope of a mountain range whose summit on the one hand was
obscured by a mist of a strange pinkish hue, and on the other rose into
peaks glittering with snow. Skirting the base at a distance of two or
three miles flowed a wide river, and beyond it a nearly level plain
stretched away to the horizon, dotted with villages and farmhouses and
apparently in a high state of cultivation. All was unfamiliar in its every
aspect. The trees were unlike any that I had ever seen or even imagined,
the trunks being mostly square and the foliage consisting of slender
filaments resembling hair, in many instances long enough to reach the
earth. It was of many colors, and I could not perceive that there was any
prevailing one, as green is in the vegetation to which I was accustomed.
As far as I could see there were no grass, no weeds, no flowers; the earth
was covered with a kind of lichen, uniformly blue. Instead of rocks, great
masses of metals protruded here and there, and above me on the mountain
were high cliffs of what seemed to be bronze veined with brass. No animals
were visible, but a few birds as uncommon in appearance as their
surroundings glided through the air or perched upon the rocks. I say
glided, for their motion was not true flight, their wings being mere
membranes extended parallel to their sides, and having no movement
independent of the body. The bird was, so to say, suspended between them
and moved forward by quick strokes of a pair of enormously large webbed
feet, precisely as a duck propels itself in water. All these things
excited in me no surprise, nor even curiosity; they were merely
unfamiliar. That which most interested me was what appeared to be a bridge
several miles away, up the river, and to this I directed my steps,
crossing over from the barren and desolate hills to the populous plain.

For a full history of my life and adventures in Mogon-Zwair, and a
detailed description of the country, its people, their manners and
customs, I must ask the reader to await the publication of a book, now in
the press, entitled _A Blackened Eye_; in this brief account I can give
only a few of such particulars as seem instructive by contrast with our
own civilization.

The inhabitants of Mogon-Zwair call themselves Golampis, a word signifying
Sons of the Fair Star. Physically they closely resemble ourselves, being
in all respects the equals of the highest Caucasian type. Their hair,
however, has a broader scheme of color, hair of every hue known to us, and
even of some imperceptible to my eyes but brilliant to theirs, being too
common to excite remark. A Golampian assemblage with uncovered heads
resembles, indeed, a garden of flowers, vivid and deep in color, no two
alike. They wear no clothing of any kind, excepting for adornment and
protection from the weather, resembling in this the ancient Greeks and the
Japanese of yesterday; nor was I ever able to make them comprehend that
clothing could be worn for those reasons for which it is chiefly worn
among ourselves. They are destitute of those feelings of delicacy and
refinement which distinguish us from the lower animals, and which, in the
opinion of our acutest and most pious thinkers, are evidences of our close
relation to the Power that made us.

Among this people certain ideas which are current among ourselves as mere
barren faiths expressed in disregarded platitudes receive a practical
application to the affairs of life. For example, they hold, with the best,
wisest and most experienced of our own race, and one other hereafter to be
described, that wealth does not bring happiness and is a misfortune and an
evil. None but the most ignorant and depraved, therefore, take the trouble
to acquire or preserve it. A rich Golampi is naturally regarded with
contempt and suspicion, is shunned by the good and respectable and
subjected to police surveillance. Accustomed to a world where the rich man
is profoundly and justly respected for his goodness and wisdom (manifested
in part by his own deprecatory protests against the wealth of which,
nevertheless, he is apparently unable to rid himself) I was at first
greatly pained to observe the contumelious manner of the Golampis toward
this class of men, carried in some instances to the length of personal
violence; a popular amusement being the pelting them with coins. These the
victims would carefully gather from the ground and carry away with them,
thus increasing their hoard and making themselves all the more liable to
popular indignities.

When the cultivated and intelligent Golampi finds himself growing too
wealthy he proceeds to get rid of his surplus riches by some one of many
easy expedients. One of these I have just described; another is to give
his excess to those of his own class who have not sufficient to buy
employment and so escape leisure, which is considered the greatest evil of
all. "Idleness," says one of their famous authors, "is the child of
poverty and the parent of discontent"; and another great writer says: "No
one is without employment; the indolent man works for his enemies."

In conformity to these ideas the Golampis--all but the ignorant and
vicious rich--look upon labor as the highest good, and the man who is so
unfortunate as not to have enough money to purchase employment in some
useful industry will rather engage in a useless one than not labor at all.
It is not unusual to see hundreds of men carrying water from a river and
pouring it into a natural ravine or artificial channel, through which it
runs back into the stream. Frequently a man is seen conveying stones--or
the masses of metal which there correspond to stones--from one pile to
another. When all have been heaped in a single place he will convey them
back again, or to a new place, and so proceed until darkness puts an end
to the work. This kind of labor, however, does not confer the satisfaction
derived from the consciousness of being useful, and is never performed by
any person having the means to hire another to employ him in some
beneficial industry. The wages usually paid to employers are from three to
six _balukan_ a day. This statement may seem incredible, but I solemnly
assure the reader that I have known a bad workman or a feeble woman to pay
as high as eight; and there have been instances of men whose incomes had
outgrown their desires paying even more.

Labor being a luxury which only those in easy circumstances can afford,
the poor are the more eager for it, not only because it is denied them,
but because it is a sign of respectability. Many of them, therefore,
indulge in it on credit and soon find themselves deprived of what little
property they had to satisfy their hardfisted employers. A poor woman once
complained to me that her husband spent every _rylat_ that he could get in
the purchase of the most expensive kinds of employment, while she and the
children were compelled to content themselves with such cheap and coarse
activity as dragging an old wagon round and round in a small field which a
kind-hearted neighbor permitted them to use for the purpose. I afterward
saw this improvident husband and unnatural father. He had just squandered
all the money he had been able to beg or borrow in buying six tickets,
which entitled the holder to that many days' employment in pitching hay
into a barn. A week later I met him again. He was broken in health, his
limbs trembled, his walk was an uncertain shuffle. Clearly he was
suffering from overwork. As I paused by the wayside to speak to him a
wagon loaded with hay was passing. He fixed his eyes upon it with a
hungry, wolfish glare, clutched a pitchfork and leaned eagerly forward,
watching the vanishing wagon with breathless attention and heedless of my
salutation. That night he was arrested, streaming with perspiration, in
the unlawful act of unloading that hay and putting it into its owner's
barn. He was tried, convicted and sentenced to six months' detention in
the House of Indolence.

The whole country is infested by a class of criminal vagrants known as
_strambaltis_, or, as we should say, "tramps." These persons prowl about
among the farms and villages begging for work in the name of charity.
Sometimes they travel in groups, as many as a dozen together, and then the
farmer dares not refuse them; and before he can notify the constabulary
they will have performed a great deal of the most useful labor that they
can find to do and escaped without paying a _rylat_. One trustworthy
agriculturist assured me that his losses in one year from these
depredations amounted to no less a sum than seven hundred _balukan_! On
nearly all the larger and more isolated farms a strong force of guards is
maintained during the greater part of the year to prevent these outrages,
but they are frequently overpowered, and sometimes prove unfaithful to
their trust by themselves working secretly by night.

The Golampi priesthood has always denounced overwork as a deadly sin, and
declared useless and apparently harmless work, such as carrying water from
the river and letting it flow in again, a distinct violation of the divine
law, in which, however, I could never find any reference to the matter;
but there has recently risen a sect which holds that all labor being
pleasurable, each kind in its degree is immoral and wicked. This sect,
which embraces many of the most holy and learned men, is rapidly spreading
and becoming a power in the state. It has, of course, no churches, for
these cannot be built without labor, and its members commonly dwell in
caves and live upon such roots and berries as can be easily gathered, of
which the country produces a great abundance though all are exceedingly
unpalatable. These _Gropoppsu_ (as the members of this sect call
themselves) pass most of their waking hours sitting in the sunshine with
folded hands, contemplating their navels; by the practice of which
austerity they hope to obtain as reward an eternity of hard labor after
death.

The Golampis are an essentially pious and religious race. There are few,
indeed, who do not profess at least one religion. They are nearly all, in
a certain sense, polytheists: they worship a supreme and beneficent deity
by one name or another, but all believe in the existence of a subordinate
and malevolent one, whom also, while solemnly execrating him in public
rites, they hold at heart in such reverence that needlessly to mention his
name or that of his dwelling is considered sin of a rank hardly inferior
to blasphemy. I am persuaded that this singular tenderness toward a being
whom their theology represents as an abominable monster, the origin of all
evil and the foe to souls, is a survival of an ancient propitiatory
adoration. Doubtless this wicked deity was once so feared that his
conciliation was one of the serious concerns of life. He is probably as
greatly feared now as at any former time, but is apparently less hated,
and is by some honestly admired.

It is interesting to observe the important place held in Golampian affairs
by religious persecution. The Government is a pure theocracy, all the
Ministers of State and the principal functionaries in every department of
control belonging to the priesthood of the dominant church. It is
popularly believed in Mogon-Zwair that persecution, even to the extent of
taking life, is in the long run beneficial to the cause enduring it. This
belief has, indeed, been crystallized into a popular proverb, not capable
of accurate translation into our tongue, but to the effect that martyrs
fertilize religion by pouring out their blood about its roots. Acting upon
this belief with their characteristically logical and conscientious
directness, the sacerdotal rulers of the country mercilessly afflict the
sect to which themselves belong. They arrest its leading members on false
charges, throw them into loathsome and unwholesome dungeons, subject them
to the crudest tortures and sometimes put them to death. The provinces in
which the state religion is especially strong are occasionally raided and
pillaged by government soldiery, recruited for the purpose by conscription
among the dissenting sects, and are sometimes actually devastated with
fire and sword. The result is not altogether confirmatory of the popular
belief and does not fulfil the pious hope of the governing powers who are
cruel to be kind. The vitalizing efficacy of persecution is not to be
doubted, but the persecuted of too feeble faith frequently thwart its
beneficent intent and happy operation by apostasy.

Having in mind the horrible torments which a Golampian general had
inflicted upon the population of a certain town I once ventured to protest
to him that so dreadful a sum of suffering, seeing that it did not
accomplish its purpose, was needless and unwise.

"Needless and unwise it may be," said he, "and I am disposed to admit that
the result which I expected from it has not followed; but why do you speak
of the _sum_ of suffering? I tortured those people in but a single, simple
way--by skinning their legs."

"Ah, that is very true," said I, "but you skinned the legs of one
thousand."

"And what of that?" he asked. "Can one thousand, or ten thousand, or any
number of persons suffer more agony than one? A man may have his leg
broken, then his nails pulled out, then be seared with a hot iron. Here is
suffering added to suffering, and the effect is really cumulative. In the
true mathematical sense it is a _sum_ of suffering. A single person can
experience it. But consider, my dear sir. How can you add one man's agony
to another's? They are not addable quantities. Each is an individual pain,
unaffected by the other. The limit of anguish which ingenuity can inflict
is that utmost pang which one man has the vitality to endure."

I was convinced but not silenced.

The Golampians all believe, singularly enough, that truth possesses some
inherent vitality and power that give it an assured prevalence over
falsehood; that a good name cannot be permanently defiled and irreparably
ruined by detraction, but, like a star, shines all the brighter for the
shadow through which it is seen; that justice cannot be stayed by
injustice; that vice is powerless against virtue. I could quote from their
great writers hundreds of utterances affirmative of these propositions.
One of their poets, for example, has some striking and original lines, of
which the following is a literal but unmetrical translation:

  A man who is in the right has three arms,
  But he whose conscience is rotten with wrong
  Is stripped and confined in a metal cell.

Imbued with these beliefs, the Golampis think it hardly worth while to be
truthful, to abstain from slander, to do justice and to avoid vicious
actions. "The practice," they say, "of deceit, calumniation, oppression
and immorality cannot have any sensible and lasting injurious effect, and
it is most agreeable to the mind and heart. Why should there be personal
self-denial without commensurate general advantage?"

In consequence of these false views, affirmed by those whom they regard as
great and wise, the people of Mogon-Zwair are, as far as I have observed
them, the most conscienceless liars, cheats, thieves, rakes and all-round,
many-sided sinners that ever were created to be damned. It was, therefore,
with inexpressible joy that I received one day legal notification that I
had been tried in the High Court of Conviction and sentenced to banishment
to Lalugnan. My offense was that I had said that I regarded consistency as
the most detestable of all vices.


AN INTERVIEW WITH GNARMAG-ZOTE

Mogon-Zwair and Lalugnan, having the misfortune to lie on opposite sides
of a line, naturally hate each other; so each country sends its dangerous
political criminals into the other, where they usually enjoy high honors
and are sometimes elevated to important office under the crown. I was
therefore received in Lalugnan with hospitality and given every
encouragement in prosecuting my researches into the history and
intellectual life of the people. They are so extraordinary a people,
inhabiting so marvelous a country, that everything which the traveler
sees, hears or experiences makes a lively and lasting impression upon his
mind, and the labor of a lifetime would be required to relate the
observation of a single year. I shall notice here only one or two points
of national character--those which differ most conspicuously from ours,
and in which, consequently, they are least worthy.

With a fatuity hardly more credible than creditable, the Lalugwumps, as
they call themselves, deny the immortality of the soul. In all my stay in
their country I found only one person who believed in a life "beyond the
grave," as we should say, though as the Lalugwumps are cannibals they
would say "beyond the stomach." In testimony to the consolatory value of
the doctrine of another life, I may say that this one true believer had in
this life a comparatively unsatisfactory lot, for in early youth he had
been struck by a flying stone from a volcano and had lost a considerable
part of his brain.

I cannot better set forth the nature and extent of the Lalugwumpian error
regarding this matter than by relating a conversation that occurred
between me and one of the high officers of the King's household--a man
whose proficiency in all the vices of antiquity, together with his service
to the realm in determining the normal radius of curvature in cats' claws,
had elevated him to the highest plane of political preferment. His name
was Gnarmag-Zote.

"You tell me," said he, "that the soul is immaterial. Now, matter is that
of which we can have knowledge through one or more of our senses. Of what
is immaterial--not matter--we can gain no knowledge in that way. How,
then, can we know anything about it?"

Perceiving that he did not rightly apprehend my position I abandoned it
and shifted the argument to another ground. "Consider," I said, "the
analogous case of a thought. You will hardly call thought material, yet we
know there are thoughts."

"I beg your pardon, but we do not know that. Thought is not a thing,
therefore cannot _be_ in any such sense, for example, as the hand _is_. We
use the word 'thought' to designate the result of an action of the brain,
precisely as we use the word 'speed' to designate the result of an action
of a horse's legs. But can it be said that speed _exists_ in the same way
as the legs which produce it exist, or in any way? Is it a thing?"

I was about to disdain to reply, when I saw an old man approaching, with
bowed head, apparently in deep distress. As he drew near he saluted my
distinguished interlocutor in the manner of the country, by putting out
his tongue to its full extent and moving it slowly from side to side.
Gnarmag-Zote acknowledged the civility by courteously spitting, and the
old man, advancing, seated himself at the great officer's feet, saying:
"Exalted Sir, I have just lost my wife by death, and am in a most
melancholy frame of mind. He who has mastered all the vices of the
ancients and wrested from nature the secret of the normal curvature of
cats' claws can surely spare from his wisdom a few rays of philosophy to
cheer an old man's gloom. Pray tell me what I shall do to assuage my
grief."

The reader can, perhaps, faintly conceive my astonishment when
Gnarmag-Zote gravely replied: "Kill yourself."

"Surely," I cried, "you would not have this honest fellow procure oblivion
(since you think that death is nothing else) by so rash an act!"

"An act that Gnarmag-Zote advises," he said, coldly, "is not rash."

"But death," I said, "death, whatever else it may be, is an end of life.
This old man is now in sorrow almost insupportable. But a few days and it
will be supportable; a few months and it will have become no more than a
tender melancholy. At last it will disappear, and in the society of his
friends, in the skill of his cook, the profits of avarice, the study of
how to be querulous and in the pursuit of loquacity, he will again
experience the joys of age. Why for a present grief should he deprive
himself of all future happiness?"

Gnarmag-Zote looked upon me with something like compassion. "My friend,"
said he, "guest of my sovereign and my country, know that in any
circumstances, even those upon which true happiness is based and
conditioned, death is preferable to life. The sum of miseries in any life
(here in Lalugnan at least) exceeds the sum of pleasures; but suppose that
it did not. Imagine an existence in which happiness, of whatever
intensity, is the rule, and discomfort, of whatever moderation, the
exception. Still there is some discomfort. There is none in death, for (as
it is given to us to know) that is oblivion, annihilation. True, by dying
one loses his happiness as well as his sorrows, but he is not conscious of
the loss. Surely, a loss of which one will never know, and which, if it
operate to make him less happy, at the same time takes from him the desire
and capacity and need of happiness, cannot be an evil. That is so
intelligently understood among us here in Lalugnan that suicide is common,
and our word for sufferer is the same as that for fool. If this good man
had not been an idiot he would have taken his life as soon as he was
bereaved."

"If what you say of the blessing of death is true," I said, smilingly, for
I greatly prided myself on the ingenuity of my thought, "it is unnecessary
to commit suicide through grief for the dead; for the more you love the
more glad you should be that the object of your affection has passed into
so desirable a state as death."

"So we are--those of us who have cultivated philosophy, history and logic;
but this poor fellow is still under the domination of feelings inherited
from a million ignorant and superstitious ancestors--for Lalugnan was once
as barbarous a country as your own. The most grotesque and frightful
conceptions of death, and life after death, were current; and now many of
even those whose understandings are emancipated wear upon their feelings
the heavy chain of heredity."

"But," said I, "granting for the sake of the argument which I am about to
build upon the concession" (I could not bring myself to use the idiotic
and meaningless phrase, "for the sake of argument") "that death,
especially the death of a Lalugwump, is desirable, yet the act of dying,
the transition state between living and being dead, may be accompanied by
the most painful physical, and most terrifying mental phenomena. The
moment of dissolution may seem to the exalted sensibilities of the
moribund a century of horrors."

The great man smiled again, with a more intolerable benignity than before.
"There is no such thing as dying," he said; "the 'transition state' is a
creation of your fancy and an evidence of imperfect reason. One is at any
time either alive or dead. The one condition cannot shade off into the
other. There is no gradation like that between waking and sleeping. By the
way, do you recognize a certain resemblance between death and a dreamless
sleep?"

"Yes--death as you conceive it to be."

"Well, does any one fear sleep? Do we not seek it, court it, wish that it
may be sound--that is to say, dreamless? We desire occasional
annihilation--wish to be dead for eight and ten hours at a time. True, we
expect to awake, but that expectation, while it may account for our
alacrity in embracing sleep, cannot alter the character of the state that
we cheerfully go into. Suppose we did _not_ wake in the morning, never did
wake! Would our mental and spiritual condition be in any respect different
through all eternity from what it was during the first few hours? After how
many hours does oblivion begin to be an evil? The man who loves to sleep
yet hates to die might justly be granted everlasting life with everlasting
insomnia."

Gnarmag-Zote paused and appeared to be lost in the profundity of his
thoughts, but I could easily enough see that he was only taking breath.
The old man whose grief had given this turn to the conversation had fallen
asleep and was roaring in the nose like a beast. The rush of a river near
by, as it poured up a hill from the ocean, and the shrill singing of
several kinds of brilliant quadrupeds were the only other sounds audible.
I waited deferentially for the great antiquarian, scientist and courtier
to resume, amusing myself meantime by turning over the leaves of an
official report by the Minister of War on a new and improved process of
making thunder from snail slime. Presently the oracle spoke.

"You have been born," he said, which was true. "There was, it follows, a
time when you had not been born. As we reckon time, it was probably some
millions of ages. Of this considerable period you are unable to remember
one unhappy moment, and in point of fact there was none. To a Lalugwump
that is entirely conclusive as to the relative values of consciousness and
oblivion, existence and nonexistence, life and death. This old man lying
here at my feet is now, if not dreaming, as if he had never been born.
Would not it be cruel and inhuman to wake him back to grief? Is it, then,
kind to permit him to wake by the natural action of his own physical
energies? I have given him the advice for which he asked. Believing it
good advice, and seeing him too irresolute to act, it seems my clear duty
to assist him."

Before I could interfere, even had I dared take the liberty to do so,
Gnarmag-Zote struck the old man a terrible blow upon the head with his
mace of office. The victim turned upon his back, spread his fingers,
shivered convulsively and was dead.

"You need not be shocked," said the distinguished assassin, coolly: "I
have but performed a sacred duty and religious rite. The religion
(established first in this realm by King Skanghutch, the sixty-second of
that name) consists in the worship of Death. We have sacred books, some
three thousand thick volumes, said to be written by inspiration of Death
himself, whom no mortal has ever seen, but who is described by our priests
as having the figure of a fat young man with a red face and wearing an
affable smile. In art he is commonly represented in the costume of a
husbandman sowing seeds.

"The priests and sacred books teach that death is the supreme and only
good--that the chief duties of man are, therefore, assassination and
suicide. Conviction of these cardinal truths is universal among us, but I
am sorry to say that many do not honestly live up to the faith. Most of us
are commendably zealous in assassination, but slack and lukewarm in
suicide. Some justify themselves in this half-hearted observance of the
Law and imperfect submission to the Spirit by arguing that if they destroy
themselves their usefulness in destroying others will be greatly abridged.
'I find,' says one of our most illustrious writers, not without a certain
force, it must be confessed, 'that I can slay many more of others than I
can of myself.'

"There are still others, more distinguished for faith than works, who
reason that if A kill B, B cannot kill C. So it happens that although many
Lalugwumps die, mostly by the hands of others, though some by their own,
the country is never wholly depopulated."

"In my own country," said I, "is a sect holding somewhat Lalugwumpian
views of the evil of life; and among the members it is considered a sin to
bestow it. The philosopher Schopenhauer taught the same doctrine, and many
of our rulers have shown strong sympathetic leanings toward it by
procuring the destruction of many of their own people and those of other
nations in what is called war."

"They are greatly to be commended," said Gnarmag-Zote, rising to intimate
that the conversation was at an end. I respectfully protruded my tongue
while he withdrew into his palace, spitting politely and with unusual
copiousness in acknowledgment. A few minutes later, but before I had left
the spot, two lackeys in livery emerged from the door by which he had
entered, and while one shouldered the body of the old man and carried it
into the palace kitchen the other informed me that his Highness was
graciously pleased to desire my company at dinner that evening. With many
expressions of regret I declined the invitation, unaware that to do so was
treason. With the circumstances of my escape to the island of Tamtonia the
newspapers have made the world already familiar.


THE TAMTONIANS

In all my intercourse with the Tamtonians I was treated with the most
distinguished consideration and no obstacles to a perfect understanding of
their social and political life were thrown in my way. My enforced
residence on the island was, however, too brief to enable me to master the
whole subject as I should have liked to do.

The government of Tamtonia is what is known in the language of the island
as a _gilbuper_. It differs radically from any form known in other parts
of the world and is supposed to have been invented by an ancient chief of
the race, named Natas, who was for many centuries after his death
worshiped as a god, and whose memory is still held in veneration. The
government is of infinite complexity, its various functions distributed
among as many officers as possible, multiplication of places being
regarded as of the greatest importance, and not so much a means as an end.
The Tamtonians seem to think that the highest good to which a human being
can attain is the possession of an office; and in order that as many as
possible may enjoy that advantage they have as many offices as the country
will support, and make the tenure brief and in no way dependent on good
conduct and intelligent administration of official duty. In truth, it
occurs usually that a man is turned out of his office (in favor of an
incompetent successor) before he has acquired sufficient experience to
perform his duties with credit to himself or profit to the country. Owing
to this incredible folly, the affairs of the island are badly mismanaged.
Complaints are the rule, even from those who have had their way in the
choice of officers. Of course there can be no such thing as a knowledge of
the science of government among such a people, for it is to nobody's
interest to acquire it by study of political history. There is, indeed, a
prevalent belief that nothing worth knowing is to be learned from the
history of other nations--not even from the history of their errors--such
is this extraordinary people's national vanity! One of the most notable
consequences of this universal and voluntary ignorance is that Tamtonia is
the home of all the discreditable political and fiscal heresies from which
many other nations, and especially our own, emancipated themselves
centuries ago. They are there in vigorous growth and full flower, and
believed to be of purely Tamtonian origin.

It needs hardly to be stated that in their personal affairs these people
pursue an entirely different course, for if they did not there could be no
profitable industries and professions among them, and no property to tax
for the support of their government. In his private business a Tamtonian
has as high appreciation of fitness and experience as anybody, and having
secured a good man keeps him in service as long as possible.

The ruler of the nation, whom they call a _Tnediserp_, is chosen every
five years but may be rechosen for five more. He is supposed to be
selected by the people themselves, but in reality they have nothing to do
with his selection. The method of choosing a man for _Tnediserp_ is so
strange that I doubt my ability to make it clear.

The adult male population of the island divides itself into two or more
_seitrap_[1] Commonly there are three or four, but only two ever have any
considerable numerical strength, and none is ever strong morally or
intellectually. All the members of each _ytrap_ profess the same political
opinions, which are provided for them by their leaders every five years
and written down on pieces of paper so that they will not be forgotten.
The moment that any Tamtonian has read his piece of paper, or _mroftalp_,
he unhesitatingly adopts all the opinions that he finds written on it,
sometimes as many as forty or fifty, although these may be altogether
different from, or even antagonistic to, those with which he was supplied
five years before and has been advocating ever since. It will be seen from
this that the Tamtonian mind is a thing whose processes no American can
hope to respect, or even understand. It is instantaneously convinced
without either fact or argument, and when these are afterward presented
they only confirm it in its miraculous conviction; those which make
against that conviction having an even stronger confirmatory power than
the others. I have said any Tamtonian, but that is an overstatement. A few
usually persist in thinking as they did before; or in altering their
convictions in obedience to reason instead of authority, as our own people
do; but they are at once assailed with the most opprobrious names, accused
of treason and all manner of crimes, pelted with mud and stones and in
some instances deprived of their noses and ears by the public executioner.
Yet in no country is independence of thought so vaunted as a virtue, and
in none is freedom of speech considered so obvious a natural right or so
necessary to good government.

    [1] The Tamtonian language forms its plurals most irregularly, but
        usually by an initial inflection. It has a certain crude and
        primitive grammar, but in point of orthoepy is extremely
        difficult. With our letters I can hardly hope to give an
        accurate conception of its pronunciation. As nearly as possible
        I write its words as they sounded to my ear when carefully
        spoken for my instruction by intelligent natives. It is a harsh
        tongue.

At the same time that each _ytrap_ is supplied with its political opinions
for the next five years, its leaders--who, I am told, all pursue the
vocation of sharpening axes--name a man whom they wish chosen for the
office of _Tnediserp_. He is usually an idiot from birth, the Tamtonians
having a great veneration for such, believing them to be divinely
inspired. Although few members of the _ytrap_ have ever heard of him
before, they at once believe him to have been long the very greatest idiot
in the country; and for the next few months they do little else than quote
his words and point to his actions to prove that his idiocy is of entirely
superior quality to that of his opponent--a view that he himself,
instructed by his discoverers, does and says all that he can to confirm.
His inarticulate mumblings are everywhere repeated as utterances of
profound wisdom, and the slaver that drools from his chin is carefully
collected and shown to the people, evoking the wildest enthusiasm of his
supporters. His opponents all this time are trying to blacken his
character by the foulest conceivable falsehoods, some even going so far as
to assert that he is not an idiot at all! It is generally agreed among
them that if he were chosen to office the most dreadful disasters would
ensue, and that, _therefore_, he will not be chosen.

To this last mentioned conviction, namely that the opposing candidate
(_rehtot lacsar_) cannot possibly be chosen, I wish to devote a few words
here, for it seems to me one of the most extraordinary phenomena of the
human mind. It implies, of course, a profound belief in the wisdom of
majorities and the error of minorities. This belief can and does in some
mysterious way co-exist, in the Tamtonian understanding, with the deepest
disgust and most earnest disapproval of a decision which a majority has
made. It is of record, indeed, that one political _ytrap_ sustained no
fewer than six successive defeats without at all impairing its conviction
that the right side must win. In each recurring contest this ytrap was as
sure that it would succeed as it had been in all the preceding ones--and
sure _because_ it believed itself in the right! It has been held by some
native observers that this conviction is not actually entertained, but
only professed for the purpose of influencing the action of others; but
this is disproved by the fact that even after the contest is decided,
though the result is unknown--when nobody's action can have effect--the
leaders (ax-sharpeners) continue earnestly to "claim" this province and
that, up to the very last moment of uncertainty, and the common people
murder one another in the streets for the crime of doubting that the man
is chosen whom the assassin was pleased to prefer. When the majority of a
province has chosen one candidate and a majority of the nation another,
the mental situation of the worthy Tamtonian is not over-easy of
conception, but there can be no doubt that his faith in the wisdom of
majorities remains unshaken.

One of the two antagonistic idiots having been chosen as ruler, it is
customary to speak of him as "the choice of the people," whereas it is
obvious that he is one of the few men, seldom exceeding two or three, whom
it is certainly known that nearly one-half the people regard as unfit for
the position. He is less certainly "the people's choice" than any other
man in the country excepting his unsuccessful opponents; for while it is
known that a large body of his countrymen did not want him, it cannot be
known how many of his supporters really preferred some other person, but
had no opportunity to make their preference effective.

The Tamtonians are very proud of their form of government, which gives
them so much power in selecting their rulers. This power consists in the
privilege of choosing between two men whom but a few had a voice in
selecting from among many millions, any one of whom the rest might have
preferred to either. Yet every Tamtonian is as vain of possessing this
incalculably small influence as if he were a Warwick in making kings and a
Bismarck in using them. He gives himself as many airs and graces as would
be appropriate to the display of an honest pin-feather upon the
pope's-nose of a mooley peacock.

Each congenital idiot whom the ax-grinders name for the office of
_Tnediserp_ has upon the "ticket" with him a dead man, who stands or falls
with his leader. There is no way of voting for the idiot without voting
for the corpse also, and _vice versa_. When one of these precious couples
has been chosen the idiot in due time enters upon the duties of his office
and the corpse is put into an ice-chest and carefully preserved from
decay. If the idiot should himself become a corpse he is buried at once
and the other body is then haled out of its ice to take his place. It is
propped up in the seat of authority and duly instated in power. This is
the signal for a general attack upon it. It is subjected to every kind of
sacrilegious indignity, vituperated as a usurper and an "accident," struck
with rotten eggs and dead cats, and undergoes the meanest
misrepresentation. Its attitude in the chair, its fallen jaw, glazed eyes
and degree of decomposition are caricatured and exaggerated out of all
reason. Yet such as it is it must be endured for the unexpired term for
which its predecessor was chosen. To guard against a possible interregnum,
however, a law has recently been passed providing that if it should tumble
out of the chair and be too rotten to set up again its clerks
(_seiraterces_) are eligible to its place in a stated order of succession.
Here we have the amazing anomaly of the rulers of a "free" people actually
appointing their potential successors!--a thing inexpressibly repugnant to
all our ideas of popular government, but apparently regarded in Tamtonia
as a matter of course.

During the few months intervening between the ax-men's selection of
candidates and the people's choice between those selected (a period known
as the _laitnediserp ngiapmac_) the Tamtonian character is seen at its
worst. There is no infamy too great or too little for the partisans of the
various candidates to commit and accuse their opponents of committing.
While every one of them declares, and in his heart believes, that honest
arguments have greater weight than dishonest; that falsehood reacts on the
falsifier's cause; that appeals to passion and prejudice are as
ineffectual as dishonorable, few have the strength and sense to deny
themselves the luxury of all these methods and worse ones. The laws
against bribery, made by themselves, are set at naught and those of
civility and good breeding are forgotten. The best of friends quarrel and
openly insult one another. The women, who know almost as little of the
matters at issue as the men, take part in the abominable discussions; some
even encouraging the general demoralization by showing themselves at the
public meetings, sometimes actually putting themselves into uniform and
marching in procession with banners, music and torchlights.

I feel that this last statement will be hardly understood without
explanation. Among the agencies employed by the Tamtonians to prove that
one set of candidates is better than another, or to show that one
political policy is more likely than another to promote the general
prosperity, a high place is accorded to colored rags, flames of fire,
noises made upon brass instruments, inarticulate shouts, explosions of
gunpowder and lines of men walking and riding through the streets in cheap
and tawdry costumes more or less alike. Vast sums of money are expended to
procure these strange evidences of the personal worth of candidates and
the political sanity of ideas. It is very much as if a man should paint
his nose pea-green and stand on his head to convince his neighbors that
his pigs are fed on acorns. Of course the money subscribed for these
various controversial devices is not all wasted; the greater part of it is
pocketed by the ax-grinders by whom it is solicited, and who have invented
the system. That they have invented it for their own benefit seems not to
have occurred to the dupes who pay for it. In the universal madness
everybody believes whatever monstrous and obvious falsehood is told by the
leaders of his own _ytrap_, and nobody listens for a moment to the
exposures of their rascality. Reason has flown shrieking from the scene;
Caution slumbers by the wayside with unbuttoned pocket. It is the
opportunity of thieves!

With a view to abating somewhat the horrors of this recurring season of
depravity, it has been proposed by several wise and decent Tamtonians to
extend the term of office of the _Tnediserp_ to six years instead of five,
but the sharpeners of axes are too powerful to be overthrown. They have
made the people believe that if the man whom the country chooses to rule
it because it thinks him wise and good were permitted to rule it too long
it would be impossible to displace him in punishment for his folly and
wickedness. It is, indeed, far more likely that the term of office will be
reduced to four years than extended to six. The effect can be no less than
hideous!

In Tamtonia there is a current popular saying dating from many centuries
back and running this way: "_Eht eciffo dluohs kees eht nam, ton eht nam
eht eciffo_"--which may be translated thus: "No citizen ought to try to
secure power for himself, but should be selected by others for his fitness
to exercise it." The sentiment which this wise and decent phrase expresses
has long ceased to have a place in the hearts of those who are
everlastingly repeating it, but with regard to the office of _Tnediserp_
it has still a remnant of the vitality of habit. This, however, is fast
dying out, and a few years ago one of the congenital idiots who was a
candidate for the highest dignity boldly broke the inhibition and made
speeches to the people in advocacy of himself, all over the country. Even
more recently another has uttered his preferences in much the same way,
but with this difference: he did his speechmaking at his own home, the
ax-grinders in his interest rounding up audiences for him and herding them
before his door. One of the two corpses, too, was galvanized into a kind
of ghastly activity and became a talking automaton; but the other had been
too long dead. In a few years more the decent tradition that a man should
not blow his own horn will be obsolete in its application to the high
office, as it is to all the others, but the popular saying will lose none
of its currency for that.

To the American mind nothing can be more shocking than the Tamtonian
practice of openly soliciting political preferment and even paying money
to assist in securing it. With us such immodesty would be taken as proof
of the offender's unfitness to exercise the power which he asks for, or
bear the dignity which, in soliciting it, he belittles. Yet no Tamtonian
ever refused to take the hand of a man guilty of such conduct, and there
have been instances of fathers giving these greedy vulgarians the hands of
their daughters in marriage and thereby assisting to perpetuate the
species. The kind of government given by men who go about begging for the
right to govern can be more easily imagined than endured. In short, I
cannot help thinking that when, unable longer to bear with patience the
evils entailed by the vices and follies of its inhabitants, I sailed away
from the accursed island of Tamtonia, I left behind me the most pestilent
race of rascals and ignoramuses to be found anywhere in the universe; and
I never can sufficiently thank the divine Power who spared me the
disadvantage and shame of being one of them, and cast my lot in this
favored land of goodness and right reason, the blessed abode of public
morality and private worth--of liberty, conscience and common sense.

I was not, however, to reach it without further detention in barbarous
countries. After being at sea four days I was seized by my mutinous crew,
set ashore upon an island, and having been made insensible by a blow upon
the head was basely abandoned.


MAROONED ON UG

When I regained my senses I found myself lying on the strand a short
remove from the margin of the sea. It was high noon and an insupportable
itching pervaded my entire frame, that being the effect of sunshine in
that country, as heat is in ours. Having observed that the discomfort was
abated by the passing of a light cloud between me and the sun, I dragged
myself with some difficulty to a clump of trees near by and found
permanent relief in their shade. As soon as I was comfortable enough to
examine my surroundings I saw that the trees were of metal, apparently
copper, with leaves of what resembled pure silver, but may have contained
alloy. Some of the trees bore burnished flowers shaped like bells, and in
a breeze the tinkling as they clashed together was exceedingly sweet. The
grass with which the open country was covered as far as I could see
amongst the patches of forest was of a bright scarlet hue, excepting along
the water-courses, where it was white. Lazily cropping it at some little
distance away, or lying in it, indolently chewing the cud and attended by
a man half-clad in skins and bearing a crook, was a flock of tigers. My
travels in New Jersey having made me proof against surprise, I
contemplated these several visible phenomena without emotion, and with a
merely expectant interest in what might be revealed by further
observation.

The tigerherd having perceived me, now came striding forward, brandishing
his crook and shaking his fists with great vehemence, gestures which I
soon learned were, in that country, signs of amity and good-will. But
before knowing that fact I had risen to my feet and thrown myself into a
posture of defense, and as he approached I led for his head with my left,
following with a stiff right upon his solar plexus, which sent him rolling
on the grass in great pain. After learning something of the social customs
of the country I felt extreme mortification in recollecting this breach of
etiquette, and even to this day I cannot think upon it without a blush.

Such was my first meeting with Jogogle-Zadester, Pastor-King of Ug, the
wisest and best of men. Later in our acquaintance, when I had for a long
time been an honored guest at his court, where a thousand fists were
ceremoniously shaken under my nose daily, he explained that my luke-warm
reception of his hospitable advances gave him, for the moment, an
unfavorable impression of my breeding and culture.

The island of Ug, upon which I had been marooned, lies in the Southern
Hemisphere, but has neither latitude nor longitude. It has an area of
nearly seven hundred square _samtains_ and is peculiar in shape, its width
being considerably greater than its length. Politically it is a limited
monarchy, the right of succession to the throne being vested in the
sovereign's father, if he have one; if not in his grandfather, and so on
upward in the line of ascent. (As a matter of fact there has not within
historic times been a legitimate succession, even the great and good
Jogogle-Zadester being a usurper chosen by popular vote.) To assist him in
governing, the King is given a parliament, the Uggard word for which is
_gabagab_, but its usefulness is greatly circumscribed by the _Blubosh_,
or Constitution, which requires that every measure, in order to become a
law, shall have an affirmative majority of the actual members, yet forbids
any member to vote who has not a distinct pecuniary interest in the
result. I was once greatly amused by a spirited contest over a matter of
harbor improvement, each of two proposed harbors having its advocates. One
of these gentlemen, a most eloquent patriot, held the floor for hours in
advocacy of the port where he had an interest in a projected mill for
making dead kittens into cauliflower pickles; while other members were
being vigorously persuaded by one who at the other place had a clam ranch.
In a debate in the Uggard _gabagab_ no one can have a "standing" except a
party in interest; and as a consequence of this enlightened policy every
bill that is passed is found to be most intelligently adapted to its
purpose.

The original intent of this requirement was that members having no
pecuniary interest in a proposed law at the time of its inception should
not embarrass the proceedings and pervert the result; but the inhibition
is now thought to be sufficiently observed by formal public acceptance of
a nominal bribe to vote one way or the other. It is of course understood
that behind the nominal bribe is commonly a more substantial one of which
there is no record. To an American accustomed to the incorrupt methods of
legislation in his own country the spectacle of every member of the Uggard
_gabagab_ qualifying himself to vote by marching up, each in his turn as
his name is called, to the proponent of the bill, or to its leading
antagonist, and solemnly receiving a _tonusi_ (the smallest coin of the
realm) is exceedingly novel. When I ventured to mention to the King my
lack of faith in the principle upon which this custom is founded, he
replied:

"Heart of my soul, if you and your compatriots distrust the honesty and
intelligence of an interested motive why is it that in your own courts of
law, as you describe them, no private citizen can institute a civil action
to right the wrongs of anybody but himself?"

I had nothing to say and the King proceeded: "And why is it that your
judges will listen to no argument from any one who has not acquired a
selfish concern in the matter?"

"O, your Majesty," I answered with animation, "they listen to
attorneys-general, district attorneys and salaried officers of the law
generally, whose prosperity depends in no degree upon their success; who
prosecute none but those whom they believe to be guilty; who are careful
to present no false nor misleading testimony and argument; who are
solicitous that even the humblest accused person shall be accorded every
legal right and every advantage to which he is entitled; who, in brief,
are animated by the most humane sentiments and actuated by the purest and
most unselfish motives."

The King's discomfiture was pitiful: he retired at once from the capital
and passed a whole year pasturing his flock of tigers in the solitudes
beyond the River of Wine. Seeing that I would henceforth be _persona non
grata_ at the palace, I sought obscurity in the writing and publication of
books. In this vocation I was greatly assisted by a few standard works
that had been put ashore with me in my sea-chest.

The literature of Ug is copious and of high merit, but consists altogether
of fiction--mainly history, biography, theology and novels. Authors of
exceptional excellence receive from the state marks of signal esteem,
being appointed to the positions of laborers in the Department of Highways
and Cemeteries. Having been so fortunate as to win public favor and
attract official attention by my locally famous works, "The Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire," "David Copperfield," "Pilgrim's Progress," and
"Ben Hur," I was myself that way distinguished and my future assured.
Unhappily, through ignorance of the duties and dignities of the position I
had the mischance to accept a gratuity for sweeping a street crossing and
was compelled to flee for my life.

Disguising myself as a sailor I took service on a ship that sailed due
south into the unknown Sea.

It is now many years since my marooning on Ug, but my recollection of the
country, its inhabitants and their wonderful manners and customs is
exceedingly vivid. Some small part of what most interested me I shall here
set down.

The Uggards are, or fancy themselves, a warlike race: nowhere in those
distant seas are there any islanders so vain of their military power, the
consciousness of which they acquired chiefly by fighting one another. Many
years ago, however, they had a war with the people of another island
kingdom, called Wug. The Wuggards held dominion over a third island,
Scamadumclitchclitch, whose people had tried to throw off the yoke. In
order to subdue them--at least to tears--it was decided to deprive them of
garlic, the sole article of diet known to them and the Wuggards, and in
that country dug out of the ground like coal. So the Wuggards in the
rebellious island stopped up all the garlic mines, supplying their own
needs by purchase from foreign trading proas. Having few cowrie shells,
with which to purchase, the poor Scamadumclitchclitchians suffered a great
distress, which so touched the hearts of the compassionate Uggards--a most
humane and conscientious people--that they declared war against the
Wuggards and sent a fleet of proas to the relief of the sufferers. The
fleet established a strict blockade of every port in Scamadumclitchclitch,
and not a clove of garlic could enter the island. That compelled the
Wuggard army of occupation to reopen the mines for its own subsistence.

All this was told to me by the great and good and wise Jogogle-Zadester,
King of Ug.

"But, your Majesty," I said, "what became of the poor
Scamadumclitchclitchians?"

"They all died," he answered with royal simplicity.

"Then your Majesty's humane intervention," I said, "was not
entirely--well, fattening?"

"The fortune of war," said the King, gravely, looking over my head to
signify that the interview was at an end; and I retired from the Presence
on hands and feet, as is the etiquette in that country.

As soon as I was out of hearing I threw a stone in the direction of the
palace and said: "I never in my life heard of such a cold-blooded
scoundrel!"

In conversation with the King's Prime Minister, the famous Grumsquutzy, I
asked him how it was that Ug, being a great military power, was apparently
without soldiers.

"Sir," he replied, courteously shaking his fist under my nose in sign of
amity, "know that when Ug needs soldiers she enlists them. At the end of
the war they are put to death."

"Visible embodiment of a great nation's wisdom," I said, "far be it from
me to doubt the expediency of that military method; but merely as a matter
of economy would it not be better to keep an army in time of peace than to
be compelled to create one in time of war?"

"Ug is rich," he replied; "we do not have to consider matters of economy.
There is among our people a strong and instinctive distrust of a standing
army."

"What are they afraid of," I asked--what do they fear that it will do?"

"It is not what the army may do," answered the great man, "but what it may
prevent others from doing. You must know that we have in this land a thing
known as Industrial Discontent."

"Ah, I see," I exclaimed, interrupting--"the industrial classes fear that
the army may destroy, or at least subdue, their discontent."

The Prime Minister reflected profoundly, standing the while, in order that
he might assist his faculties by scratching himself, even as we, when
thinking, scratch our heads.

"No," he said presently; "I don't think that is quite what they
apprehend--they and the writers and statesmen who speak for them. As I
said before, what is feared in a case of industrial discontent is the
army's preventive power. But I am myself uncertain what it is that these
good souls dislike to have the army prevent. I shall take the customary
means to learn."

Having occasion on the next day to enter the great audience hall of the
palace I observed in gigantic letters running across the entire side
opposite the entrance this surprising inscription:

"In a strike, what do you fear that the army will prevent which ought to
be done?"

Facing the entrance sat Grumsquutzy, in his robes of office and surrounded
by an armed guard. At a little distance stood two great black slaves, each
bearing a scourge of thongs. All about them the floor was slippery with
blood. While I wondered at all this two policemen entered, having between
them one whom I recognized as a professional Friend of the People, a great
orator, keenly concerned for the interests of Labor. Shown the inscription
and unable or unwilling to answer, he was given over to the two blacks
and, being stripped to the skin, was beaten with the whips until he bled
copiously and his cries resounded through the palace. His ears were then
shorn away and he was thrown into the street. Another Friend of the People
was brought in, and treated in the same way; and the inquiry was
continued, day after day, until all had been interrogated. But Grumsquutzy
got no answer.

A most extraordinary and interesting custom of the Uggards is called the
_Naganag_ and has existed, I was told, for centuries. Immediately after
every war, and before the returned army is put to death, the chieftains
who have held high command and their official head, the Minister of
National Displeasure, are conducted with much pomp to the public square of
Nabootka, the capital. Here all are stripped naked, deprived of their
sight with a hot iron and armed with a club each. They are then locked in
the square, which has an inclosing wall thirty _clowgebs_ high. A signal
is given and they begin to fight. At the end of three days the place is
entered and searched. If any of the dead bodies has an unbroken bone in it
the survivors are boiled in wine; if not they are smothered in butter.

Upon the advantages of this custom--which surely has not its like in the
whole world--I could get little light. One public official told me its
purpose was "peace among the victorious"; another said it was "for
gratification of the military instinct in high places," though if that is
so one is disposed to ask "What was the war for?" The Prime Minister,
profoundly learned in all things else, could not enlighten me, and the
commander-in-chief in the Wuggard war could only tell me, while on his way
to the public square, that it was "to vindicate the truth of history."

In all the wars in which Ug has engaged in historic times that with Wug
was the most destructive of life. Excepting among the comparatively few
troops that had the hygienic and preservative advantage of personal
collision with the enemy, the mortality was appalling. Regiments exposed
to the fatal conditions of camp life in their own country died like flies
in a frost. So pathetic were the pleas of the sufferers to be led against
the enemy and have a chance to live that none hearing them could forbear
to weep. Finally a considerable number of them went to the seat of war,
where they began an immediate attack upon a fortified city, for their
health; but the enemy's resistance was too brief materially to reduce the
death rate and the men were again in the hands of their officers. On their
return to Ug they were so few that the public executioners charged with
the duty of reducing the army to a peace footing were themselves made ill
by inactivity.

As to the navy, the war with Wug having shown the Uggard sailors to be
immortal, their government knows not how to get rid of them, and remains a
great sea power in spite of itself. I ventured to suggest mustering out,
but neither the King nor any Minister of State was able to form a
conception of any method of reduction and retrenchment but that of the
public headsman.

It is said--I do not know with how much truth--that the defeat of Wug was
made easy by a certain malicious prevision of the Wuggards themselves:
something of the nature of heroic self-sacrifice, the surrender of a
present advantage for a terrible revenge in the future. As an instance,
the commander of the fortified city already mentioned is reported to have
ordered his garrison to kill as few of their assailants as possible.

"It is true," he explained to his subordinates, who favored a defense to
the death--"it is true this will lose us the place, but there are other
places; you have not thought of that."

They had not thought of that.

"It is true, too, that we shall be taken prisoners, but"--and he smiled
grimly--"we have fairly good appetites, and we must be fed. That will cost
something, I take it. But that is not the best of it. Look at that vast
host of our enemies--each one of them a future pensioner on a fool people.
If there is among us one man who would willingly deprive the Uggard
treasury of a single dependent--who would spare the Uggard pigs one
_gukwam_ of expense, let the traitor stand forth."

No traitor stood forth, and in the ensuing battles the garrison, it is
said, fired only blank cartridges, and such of the assailants as were
killed incurred that mischance by falling over their own feet.

It is estimated by Wuggard statisticians that in twenty years from the
close of the war the annual appropriation for pensions in Ug will amount
to no less than one hundred and sixty _gumdums_ to every enlisted man in
the kingdom. But they know not the Uggard customs of exterminating the
army.


THE DOG IN GANEGWAG


A about the end of the thirty-seventh month of our voyage due south from
Ug we sighted land, and although the coast appeared wild and inhospitable,
the captain decided to send a boat ashore in search of fresh water and
provisions, of which we were in sore need. I was of the boat's crew and
thought myself fortunate in being able to set foot again upon the earth.
There were seven others in the landing party, including the mate, who
commanded.

Selecting a sheltered cove, which appeared to be at the mouth of a small
creek, we beached the boat, and leaving two men to guard it started inland
toward a grove of trees. Before we reached it an animal came out of it and
advanced confidently toward us, showing no signs of either fear or
hostility. It was a hideous creature, not altogether like anything that we
had ever seen, but on its close approach we recognized it as a dog, of an
unimaginably loathsome breed. As we were nearly famished one of the
sailors shot it for food. Instantly a great crowd of persons, who had
doubtless been watching us from among the trees, rushed upon us with
fierce exclamations and surrounded us, making the most threatening
gestures and brandishing unfamiliar weapons. Unable to resist such odds we
were seized, bound with cords and dragged into the forest almost before we
knew what had happened to us. Observing the nature of our reception the
ship's crew hastily weighed anchor and sailed away. We never again saw
them.

Beyond the trees concealing it from the sea was a great city, and thither
we were taken. It was Gumammam, the capital of Ganegwag, whose people are
dog-worshipers. The fate of my companions I never learned, for although I
remained in the country for seven years, much of the time as a prisoner,
and learned to speak its language, no answer was ever given to my many
inquiries about my unfortunate friends.

The Ganegwagians are an ancient race with a history covering a period of
ten thousand _supintroes_. In stature they are large, in color blue, with
crimson hair and yellow eyes. They live to a great age, sometimes as much
as twenty _supintroes_, their climate being so wholesome that even the
aged have to sail to a distant island in order to die. Whenever a
sufficient number of them reach what they call "the age of going away"
they embark on a government ship and in the midst of impressive public
rites and ceremonies set sail for "the Isle of the Happy Change." Of their
strange civilization, their laws, manners and customs, their copper
clothing and liquid houses I have written--at perhaps too great length--in
my famous book, "Ganegwag the Incredible." Here I shall confine myself to
their religion, certainly the most amazing form of superstition in the
world.

Nowhere, it is believed, but in Ganegwag has so vile a creature as the dog
obtained general recognition as a deity. There this filthy beast is
considered so divine that it is freely admitted to the domestic circle and
cherished as an honored guest. Scarcely a family that is able to support a
dog is without one, and some have as many as a half-dozen. Indeed, the dog
is the special deity of the poor, those families having most that are
least able to maintain them. In some sections of the country, particularly
the southern and southwestern provinces, the number of dogs is estimated
to be greater than that of the children, as is the cost of their
maintenance. In families of the rich they are fewer in number, but more
sacredly cherished, especially by the female members, who lavish upon them
a wealth of affection not always granted to the husband and children, and
distinguish them with indescribable attentions and endearments.

Nowhere is the dog compelled to make any other return for all this honor
and benefaction than a fawning and sycophantic demeanor toward those who
bestow them and an insulting and injurious attitude toward strangers who
have dogs of their own, and toward other dogs. In any considerable town of
the realm not a day passes but the public newsman relates in the most
matter-of-fact and unsympathetic way to his circle of listless auditors
painful instances of human beings, mostly women and children, bitten and
mangled by these ferocious animals without provocation.

In addition to these ravages of the dog in his normal state are a vastly
greater number of outrages committed by the sacred animal in the fury of
insanity, for he has an hereditary tendency to madness, and in that state
his bite is incurable, the victim awaiting in the most horrible agony the
sailing of the next ship to the Isle of the Happy Change, his suffering
imperfectly medicined by expressions of public sympathy for the dog.

A cynical citizen of Gumammam said to the writer of this narrative: "My
countrymen have three hundred kinds of dogs, and only one way to hang a
thief." Yet all the dogs are alike in this, that none is respectable.

Withal, it must be said of this extraordinary people that their horrible
religion is free from the hollow forms and meaningless ceremonies in which
so many superstitions of the lower races find expression. It is a religion
of love, practical, undemonstrative, knowing nothing of pageantry and
spectacle. It is hidden in the lives and hearts of the people; a stranger
would hardly know of its existence as a distinct faith. Indeed, other
faiths and better ones (one of them having some resemblance to a debased
form of Christianity) co-exist with it, sometimes in the same mind.
Cynolatry is tolerant so long as the dog is not denied an equal divinity
with the deities of other faiths. Nevertheless, I could not think of the
people of Ganegwag without contempt and loathing; so it was with no small
joy that I sailed for the contiguous island of Ghargaroo to consult,
according to my custom, the renowned statesman and philosopher,
Juptka-Getch, who was accounted the wisest man in all the world, and held
in so high esteem that no one dared speak to him without the sovereign's
permission, countersigned by the Minister of Morals and Manners.


A CONFLAGRATION IN GHARGAROO

Through the happy accident of having a mole on the left side of my nose,
as had also a cousin of the Prime Minister, I obtained a royal rescript
permitting me to speak to the great Juptka-Getch, and went humbly to his
dwelling, which, to my astonishment, I found to be an unfurnished cave in
the side of a mountain. Inexpressibly surprised to observe that a favorite
of the sovereign and the people was so meanly housed, I ventured, after my
salutation, to ask how this could be so. Regarding me with an indulgent
smile, the venerable man, who was about two hundred and fifty years old
and entirely bald, explained.

"In one of our Sacred Books, of which we have three thousand," said he,
"it is written, '_Golooloo ek wakwah betenka_,' and in another, '_Jebeb uq
seedroy im aboltraqu ocrux ti smelkit_.'"

Translated, these mean, respectively, "The poor are blessed," and, "Heaven
is not easily entered by those who are rich."

I asked Juptka-Getch if his countrymen really gave to these texts a
practical application in the affairs of life.

"Why, surely," he replied, "you cannot think us such fools as to disregard
the teachings of our gods! That would be madness. I cannot imagine a
people so mentally and morally depraved as that! Can you?"

Observing me blushing and stammering, he inquired the cause of my
embarrassment. "The thought of so incredible a thing confuses me," I
managed to reply. "But tell me if in your piety and wisdom you really
stripped yourself of all your property in order to obey the gods and get
the benefit of indigence."

"I did not have to do so," he replied with a smile; "my King attended to
that. When he wishes to distinguish one of his subjects by a mark of his
favor, he impoverishes him to such a degree as will attest the exact
measure of the royal approbation. I am proud to say that he took from me
all that I had."

"But, pardon me," I said; "how does it occur that among a people which
regards poverty as the greatest earthly good all are not poor? I observe
here as much wealth and 'prosperity' as in my own country."

Juptka-Getch smiled and after a few moments answered: "The only person in
this country that owns anything is the King; in the service of his people
he afflicts himself with that burden. All property, of whatsoever kind, is
his, to do with as he will. He divides it among his subjects in the ratio
of their demerit, as determined by the _waguks_--local officers--whose
duty it is to know personally every one in their jurisdiction. To the most
desperate and irreclaimable criminals is allotted the greatest wealth,
which is taken from them, little by little, as they show signs of
reformation."

"But what," said I, "is to prevent the wicked from becoming poor at any
time? How can the King and his officers keep the unworthy, suffering the
punishment and peril of wealth, from giving it away?"

"To whom, for example?" replied the illustrious man, taking the forefinger
of his right hand into his mouth, as is the fashion in Ghargaroo when
awaiting an important communication. The respectful formality of the
posture imperfectly concealed the irony of the question, but I was not of
the kind to be easily silenced.

"One might convert one's property into money," I persisted, "and throw the
money into the sea."

Juptka-Getch released the finger and gravely answered: "Every person in
Ghargaroo is compelled by law to keep minute accounts of his income and
expenditures, and must swear to them. There is an annual appraisement by
the _waguk_, and any needless decrease in the value of an estate is
punished by breaking the offender's legs. Expenditures for luxuries and
high living are, of course, approved, for it is universally known among
us, and attested by many popular proverbs, that the pleasures of the rich
are vain and disappointing. So they are considered a part of the
punishment, and not only allowed but required. A man sentenced to wealth
who lives frugally, indulging in only rational and inexpensive delights,
has his ears cut off for the first offense, and for the second is
compelled to pass six months at court, participating in all the gaieties,
extravagances and pleasures of the capital, and----"

"Most illustrious of mortals," I said, turning a somersault--the
Ghargarese manner of interrupting a discourse without offense--"I am as
the dust upon your beard, but in my own country I am esteemed no fool, and
right humbly do I perceive that you are _ecxroptug nemk puttog peleemy_."

This expression translates, literally, "giving me a fill," a phrase
without meaning in our tongue, but in Ghargarese it appears to imply
incredulity.

"The gaieties of the King's court," I continued, "must be expensive. The
courtiers of the sovereign's entourage, the great officers of the
realm--surely they are not condemned to wealth, like common criminals!"

"My son," said Juptka-Getch, tearing out a handful of his beard to signify
his tranquillity under accusation, "your doubt of my veracity is noted
with satisfaction, but it is not permitted to you to impeach my
sovereign's infallible knowledge of character. His courtiers, the great
officers of the realm, as you truly name them, are the richest men in the
country because he knows them to be the greatest rascals. After each
annual reapportionment of the national wealth he settles upon them the
unallotted surplus."

Prostrating myself before the eminent philosopher, I craved his pardon for
my doubt of his sovereign's wisdom and consistency, and begged him to cut
off my head.

"Nay," he said, "you have committed the unpardonable sin and I cannot
consent to bestow upon you the advantages of death. You shall continue to
live the thing that you are."

"What!" I cried, remembering the Lalugwumps and Gnarmag-Zote, "is it
thought in Ghargaroo that death is an advantage, a blessing?"

"Our Sacred Books," he said, "are full of texts affirming the vanity of
life."

"Then," I said, "I infer that the death penalty is unknown to your laws!"

"We have the life penalty instead. Convicted criminals are not only
enriched, as already explained, but by medical attendance kept alive as
long as possible. On the contrary, the very righteous, who have been
rewarded with poverty, are permitted to die whenever it pleases them.

"Do not the Sacred Books of your country teach the vanity of life, the
blessedness of poverty and the wickedness of wealth?"

"They do, O Most Illustrious, they do."

"And your countrymen believe?"

"Surely--none but the foolish and depraved entertain a doubt."

"Then I waste my breath in expounding laws and customs already known to
you. You have, of course, the same."

At this I averted my face and blushed so furiously that the walls of the
cave were illuminated with a wavering crimson like the light of a great
conflagration! Thinking that the capital city was ablaze, Juptka-Getch ran
from the cave's mouth, crying, "Fire, fire!" and I saw him no more.


AN EXECUTION IN BATRUGIA

My next voyage was not so prosperous. By violent storms lasting seven
weeks, during which we saw neither the sun nor the stars, our ship was
driven so far out of its course that the captain had no knowledge of where
we were. At the end of that period we were blown ashore and wrecked on a
coast so wild and desolate that I had never seen anything so terrifying.
Through a manifest interposition of Divine Providence I was spared, though
all my companions perished miserably in the waves that had crushed the
ship among the rocks.

As soon as I was sufficiently recovered from my fatigue and bruises, and
had rendered thanks to merciful Heaven for my deliverance, I set out for
the interior of the country, taking with me a cutlas for protection
against wild beasts and a bag of sea-biscuit for sustenance. I walked
vigorously, for the weather was then cool and pleasant, and after I had
gone a few miles from the inhospitable coast I found the country open and
level. The earth was covered with a thick growth of crimson grass, and at
wide intervals were groups of trees. These were very tall, their tops in
many instances invisible in a kind of golden mist, or haze, which proved
to be, not a transient phenomenon, but a permanent one, for never in that
country has the sun been seen, nor is there any night. The haze seems to
be self-luminous, giving a soft, yellow light, so diffused that shadows
are unknown. The land is abundantly supplied with pools and rivulets,
whose water is of a beautiful orange color and has a pleasing perfume
somewhat like attar of rose. I observed all this without surprise and with
little apprehension, and went forward, feeling that anything, however
novel and mysterious, was better than the familiar terrors of the sea and
the coast.

After traveling a long time, though how long I had not the means to
determine, I arrived at the city of Momgamwo, the capital of the kingdom
of Batrugia, on the mainland of the Hidden Continent, where it is always
twelve o'clock.

The Batrugians are of gigantic stature, but mild and friendly disposition.
They offered me no violence, seeming rather amused by my small stature.
One of them, who appeared to be a person of note and consequence, took me
to his house (their houses are but a single story in height and built of
brass blocks), set food before me, and by signs manifested the utmost good
will. A long time afterward, when I had learned the language of the
country, he explained that he had recognized me as an American pigmy, a
race of which he had some little knowledge through a letter from a
brother, who had been in my country. He showed me the letter, of which the
chief part is here presented in translation:

"You ask me, my dear Tgnagogu, to relate my adventures among the
Americans, as they call themselves. My adventures were very brief, lasting
altogether not more than three _gumkas_, and most of the time was passed
in taking measures for my own safety.

"My skyship, which had been driven for six moons before an irresistible
gale, passed over a great city just at daylight one morning, and rather
than continue the voyage with a lost reckoning I demanded that I be
permitted to disembark. My wish was respected, and my companions soared
away without me. Before night I had escaped from the city, by what means
you know, and with my remarkable experiences in returning to civilization
all Batrugia is familiar. The description of the strange city I have
reserved for you, by whom only could I hope to be believed. Nyork, as its
inhabitants call it, is a city of inconceivable extent--not less, I should
judge, than seven square _glepkeps_! Of the number of its inhabitants I
can only say that they are as the sands of the desert. They wear
clothing--of a hideous kind, 'tis true--speak an apparently copious though
harsh language, and seem to have a certain limited intelligence. They are
puny in stature, the tallest of them being hardly higher than my breast.

"Nevertheless, Nyork is a city of giants. The magnitude of all things
artificial there is astounding! My dear Tgnagogu, words can give you no
conception of it. Many of the buildings, I assure you, are as many as
fifty _sprugas_ in height, and shelter five thousand persons each. And
these stupendous structures are so crowded together that to the spectator
in the narrow streets below they seem utterly devoid of design and
symmetry--mere monstrous aggregations of brick, stone and metal--mountains
of masonry, cliffs and crags of architecture hanging in the sky!

"A city of giants inhabited by pigmies! For you must know, oh friend of my
liver, that the rearing of these mighty structures could not be the work
of the puny folk that swarm in ceaseless activity about their bases. These
fierce little savages invaded the island in numbers so overwhelming that
the giant builders had to flee before them. Some escaped across great
bridges which, with the help of their gods, they had suspended in the air
from bank to bank of a wide river parting the island from the mainland,
but many could do no better than mount some of the buildings that they had
reared, and there, in these inaccessible altitudes, they dwell to-day,
still piling stone upon stone. Whether they do this in obedience to their
instinct as builders, or in hope to escape by way of the heavens, I had
not the means to learn, being ignorant of the pigmy tongue and in
continual fear of the crowds that followed me.

"You can see the giants toiling away up there in the sky, laying in place
the enormous beams and stones which none but they could handle. They look
no bigger than beetles, but you know that they are many _sprugas_ in
stature, and you shudder to think what would ensue if one should lose his
footing. Fancy that great bulk whirling down to earth from so dizzy an
altitude!...

"May birds ever sing above your grave.

"JOQUOLK WAK MGAPY."

By my new friend, Tgnagogu, I was presented to the King, a most
enlightened monarch, who not only reigned over, but ruled absolutely, the
most highly civilized people in the world. He received me with gracious
hospitality, quartered me in the palace of his Prime Minister, gave me for
wives the three daughters of his Lord Chamberlain, and provided me with an
ample income from the public revenues. Within a year I had made a fair
acquaintance with the Batrugian language, and was appointed royal
interpreter, with a princely salary, although no one speaking any other
tongue, myself and two native professors of rhetoric excepted, had ever
been seen in the kingdom.

One day I heard a great tumult in the street, and going to a window saw,
in a public square opposite, a crowd of persons surrounding some high
officials who were engaged in cutting off a man's head. Just before the
executioner delivered the fatal stroke, the victim was asked if he had
anything to say. He explained with earnestness that the deed for which he
was about to suffer had been inspired and commanded by a brass-headed cow
and four bushels of nightingales' eggs!

"Hold! hold!" I shouted in Batrugian, leaping from the window and forcing
a way through the throng; "the man is obviously insane!"

"Friend," said a man in a long blue robe, gently restraining me, "it is
not proper for you to interrupt these high proceedings with irrelevant
remarks. The luckless gentleman who, in accordance with my will as Lord
Chief Justice, has just had the happiness to part with his head was so
inconsiderate as to take the life of a fellow-subject."

"But he was insane," I persisted, "clearly and indisputably _ptig nupy
uggydug_!"--a phrase imperfectly translatable, meaning, as near as may be,
having flitter-mice in his campanile.

"Am I to infer," said the Lord Chief Justice, "that in your own honorable
country a person accused of murder is permitted to plead insanity as a
reason why he should not be put to death?"

"Yes, illustrious one," I replied, respectfully, "we regard that as a good
defense."

"Well," said he slowly, but with extreme emphasis, "I'll be _Gook
swottled_!"

("_Gook_," I may explain, is the name of the Batrugian chief deity; but
for the verb "to swottle" the English tongue has no equivalent. It seems
to signify the deepest disapproval, and by a promise to be "_swottled_" a
Batrugian denotes acute astonishment.)

"Surely," I said, "so wise and learned a person as you cannot think it
just to punish with death one who does not know right from wrong. The
gentleman who has just now renounced his future believed himself to have
been commanded to do what he did by a brass-headed cow and four bushels of
nightingales' eggs--powers to which he acknowledged a spiritual
allegiance. To have disobeyed would have been, from his point of view, an
infraction of a law higher than that of man."

"Honorable but erring stranger," replied the famous jurist, "if we
permitted the prisoner in a murder trial to urge such a consideration as
that--if our laws recognized any other justification than that he believed
himself in peril of immediate death or great bodily injury--nearly all
assassins would make some such defense. They would plead insanity of some
kind and degree, and it would be almost impossible to establish their
guilt. Murder trials would be expensive and almost interminable, defiled
with perjury and sentiment. Juries would be deluded and confused, justice
baffled, and red-handed man-killers turned loose to repeat their crimes
and laugh at the law. Even as the law is, in a population of only one
hundred million we have had no fewer than three homicides in less than
twenty years! With such statutes and customs as yours we should have had
at least twice as many. Believe me, I know my people; they have not the
American respect for human life."

As blushing is deemed in Batrugia a sign of pride, I turned my back upon
the speaker--an act which, fortunately, signifies a desire to hear more.

"Law," he continued, "is for the good of the greatest number. Execution of
an actual lunatic now and then is not an evil to the community, nor, when
rightly considered, to the lunatic himself. He is better off when dead,
and society is profited by his removal. We are spared the cost of exposing
imposture, the humiliation of acquitting the guilty, the peril of their
freedom, the contagion of their evil example."

"In my country," I said, "we have a saying to the effect that it is better
that ninety-nine guilty escape than that one innocent be punished."

"It is better," said he, "for the ninety-nine guilty, but distinctly worse
for everybody else. Sir," he concluded with chilling austerity, "I infer
from their proverb that your countrymen are the most offensive blockheads
in existence."

By way of refutation I mentioned the English, indignantly withdrew from
the country and set sail for Gokeetle-guk, or, as we should translate the
name, Trustland.


THE JUMJUM OF GOKEETLE-GUK

Arriving at the capital of the country after many incredible adventures, I
was promptly arrested by the police and taken before the Jumjum. He was an
exceedingly affable person, and held office by appointment, "for life or
fitness," as their laws express it. With one necessary exception all
offices are appointive and the tenure of all except that is the same. The
Panjandrum, or, as we should call him, King, is elected for a term of ten
years, at the expiration of which he is shot. It is held that any man who
has been so long in high authority will have committed enough sins and
blunders to deserve death, even if none can be specifically proved.

Brought into the presence of the Jumjum, who graciously saluted me, I was
seated on a beautiful rug and told in broken English by an interpreter who
had escaped from Kansas that I was at liberty to ask any questions that I
chose.

"Your Highness," I said, addressing the Jumjum through the interpreting
Populist, "I fear that I do not understand; I expected, not to ask
questions, but to have to answer them. I am ready to give such an account
of myself as will satisfy you that I am an honest man--neither a criminal
nor a spy."

"The gentleman seems to regard himself with a considerable interest," said
the Jumjum, aside to an officer of his suite--a remark which the
interpreter, with characteristic intelligence, duly repeated to me. Then
addressing me the Jumjum said:

"Doubtless your personal character is an alluring topic, but it is
relevant to nothing in any proceedings that can be taken here. When a
foreigner arrives in our capital he is brought before me to be instructed
in whatever he may think it expedient for him to know of the manners,
customs, laws, and so forth, of the country that he honors with his
presence. It matters nothing to us what he is, but much to him what we
are. You are at liberty to inquire."

I was for a moment overcome with emotion by so noble an example of
official civility and thoughtfulness, then, after a little reflection, I
said: "May it please your Highness, I should greatly like to be informed
of the origin of the name of your esteemed country."

"Our country," said the Jumjum, acknowledging the compliment by a movement
of his ears, "is called Trustland because all its industries, trades and
professions are conducted by great aggregations of capital known as
'trusts.' They do the entire business of the country."

"Good God!" I exclaimed; "what a terrible state of affairs that is! I know
about trusts. Why do your people not rise and throw off the yoke?"

"You are pleased to be unintelligible," said the great man, with a smile.
"Would you mind explaining what you mean by 'the yoke'?"

"I mean," said I, surprised by his ignorance of metaphor, but reflecting
that possibly the figures of rhetoric were not used in that country--"I
mean the oppression, the slavery under which your people groan, their
bond-age to the tyrannical trusts, entailing poverty, unrequited toil and
loss of self-respect."

"Why, as to that," he replied, "our people are prosperous and happy. There
is very little poverty and what there is is obviously the result of vice
or improvidence. Our labor is light and all the necessaries of life, many
of the comforts and some of the luxuries are abundant and cheap. I hardly
know what you mean by the tyranny of the trusts; they do not seem to care
to be tyrannous, for each having the entire market for what it produces,
its prosperity is assured and there is none of the strife and competition
which, as I can imagine, might breed hardness and cruelty. Moreover, we
should not let them be tyrannous. Why should we?"

"But, your Highness, suppose, for example, the trust that manufactures
safety pins should decide to double the price of its product. What is to
prevent great injury to the consumer?"

"The courts. Having but one man--the responsible manager--to deal with,
protective legislation and its enforcement would be a very simple matter.
If there were a thousand manufacturers of safety pins, scattered all over
the country in as many jurisdictions, there would be no controlling them
at all. They would cheat, not only one another but the consumers, with
virtual immunity. But there is no disposition among our trusts to do any
such thing. Each has the whole market, as I said, and each has learned by
experience what the manager of a large business soon must learn, and what
the manager of a small one probably would not learn and could not afford
to apply if he knew it--namely, that low prices bring disproportionately
large sales and therefore profits. Prices in this country are never put up
except when some kind of scarcity increases the cost of production.
Besides, nearly all the consumers are a part of the trusts, the stock of
which is about the best kind of property for investment."

"What!" I cried,--"do not the managers so manipulate the stock by
'watering' it and otherwise as to fool and cheat the small investors?"

"We should not permit them. That would be dishonest."

"So it is in my country," I replied, rather tartly, for I believed his
apparent _naïveté_ assumed for my confusion, "but we are unable to prevent
it."

He looked at me somewhat compassionately, I thought. "Perhaps," he said,
"not enough of you really wish to prevent it. Perhaps your people
are--well, different from mine--not worse, you understand--just
different."

I felt the blood go into my cheeks and hot words were upon my tongue's
end, but I restrained them; the conditions for a quarrel were not
favorable to my side of it. When I had mastered my chagrin and resentment
I said:

"In my country when trusts are formed a great number of persons suffer,
whether the general consumer does or not--many small dealers, middle men,
drummers and general employees. The small dealer is driven out of the
business by underselling. The middle man is frequently ignored, the trust
dealing directly, or nearly so, with the consumer. The drummer is
discharged because, competition having disappeared, custom must come
without solicitation. Consolidation lets out swarms of employees of the
individual concerns consolidated, for it is nearly as easy to conduct one
large concern as a dozen smaller ones. These people get great sympathy
from the public and the newspapers and their case is obviously pitiable.
Was it not so in this country during the transition stage, and did not
these poor gentlemen have to"--the right words would not come; I hardly
knew how to finish. "Were they not compelled to go to work?" I finally
asked, rather humbly.

The great official was silent for several minutes. Then he spoke.

"I am not sure that I understand you about our transition state. So far as
our history goes matters with us have always been as they are to-day. To
suppose them to have been otherwise would be to impugn the common sense of
our ancestors. Nor do I quite know what you mean by 'small dealers,'
'middle men,' 'drummers,' and so forth."

He paused and fell into meditation, when suddenly his face was suffused
with the light of a happy thought. It so elated him that he sprang to his
feet and with his staff of office broke the heads of his Chief Admonisher
of the Inimical and his Second Assistant Audible Sycophant. Then he said:

"I think I comprehend. Some eighty-five years ago, soon after my induction
into office, there came to the court of the Panjandrum a man of this city
who had been cast upon the island of Chicago (which I believe belongs to
the American archipelago) and had passed many years there in business with
the natives. Having learned all their customs and business methods he
returned to his own country and laid before the Panjandrum a comprehensive
scheme of commercial reform. He and his scheme were referred to me, the
Panjandrum being graciously pleased to be unable to make head or tail of
it. I may best explain it in its application to a single industry--the
manufacture and sale of gootles."

"What is a gootle?" I asked.

"A metal weight for attachment to the tail of a donkey to keep him from
braying," was the answer. "It is known in this country that a donkey
cannot utter a note unless he can lift his tail. Then, as now, gootles
were made by a single concern having a great capital invested and an
immense plant, and employing an army of workmen. It dealt, as it does
to-day, directly with consumers. Afflicted with a sonant donkey a man
would write to the trust and receive his gootle by return mail, or go
personally to the factory and carry his purchase home on his
shoulder--according to where he lived. The reformer said this was
primitive, crude and injurious to the interests of the public and
especially the poor. He proposed that the members of the gootle trust
divide their capital and each member go into the business of making
gootles for himself--I do not mean for his personal use--in different
parts of the country. But none of them was to sell to consumers, but to
other men, who would sell in quantity to still other men, who would sell
single gootles for domestic use. Each manufacturer would of course require
a full complement of officers, clerks and so forth, as would the other
men--everybody but the consumer--and each would have to support them and
make a profit himself. Competition would be so sharp that solicitors would
have to be employed to make sales; and they too must have a living out of
the business. Honored stranger, am I right in my inference that the
proposed system has something in common with the one which obtains in your
own happy, enlightened and prosperous country, and which you would
approve?"

I did not care to reply.

"Of course," the Jumjum continued, "all this would greatly have enhanced
the cost of gootles, thereby lessening the sales, thereby reducing the
output, thereby throwing a number of workmen out of employment. You see
this, do you not, O guest of my country?"

"Pray tell me," I said, "what became of the reformer who proposed all this
change?"

"All this change? Why, sir, the one-thousandth part is not told: he
proposed that his system should be general: not only in the gootle trust,
but every trust in the country was to be broken up in the same way! When I
had him before me, and had stated my objections to the plan, I asked him
what were its advantages.

"'Sir,' he replied, 'I speak for millions of gentlemen in uncongenial
employments, mostly manual and fatiguing. This would give them the kind of
activity that they would like--such as their class enjoys in other
countries where my system is in full flower, and where it is deemed so
sacred that any proposal for its abolition or simplification by trusts is
regarded with horror, especially by the working men.'

"Having reported to the Panjandrum (whose vermiform appendix may good
angels have in charge) and received his orders, I called the reformer
before me and addressed him thus:

"'Illustrious economist, I have the honor to inform you that in the royal
judgment your proposal is the most absurd, impudent and audacious ever
made; that the system which you propose to set up is revolutionary and
mischievous beyond the dreams of treason; that only in a nation of rogues
and idiots could it have a moment's toleration.'

"He was about to reply, but cutting his throat to intimate that the
hearing was at an end, I withdrew from the Hall of Audience, as under
similar circumstances I am about to do now."

I withdrew first by way of a window, and after a terrible journey of six
years in the Dolorous Mountains and on the Desert of Despair came to the
western coast. Here I built a ship and after a long voyage landed on one
of the islands constituting the Kingdom of Tortirra.


THE KINGDOM OF TORTIRRA

Of this unknown country and its inhabitants I have written a large volume
which nothing but the obstinacy of publishers has kept from the world, and
which I trust will yet see the light. Naturally, I do not wish to publish
at this time anything that will sate public curiosity, and this brief
sketch will consist of such parts only of the work as I think can best be
presented in advance without abating interest in what is to follow when
Heaven shall have put it into the hearts of publishers to square their
conduct with their interests. I must, however, frankly confess that my
choice has been partly determined by other considerations. I offer here
those parts of my narrative which I conceive to be the least
credible--those which deal with the most monstrous and astounding follies
of a strange people. Their ceremony of marriage by decapitation; their
custom of facing to the rear when riding on horseback; their practice of
walking on their hands in all ceremonial processions; their selection of
the blind for military command; their pig-worship--these and many other
comparatively natural particulars of their religious, political,
intellectual and social life I reserve for treatment in the great work for
which I shall soon ask public favor and acceptance.

In Tortirran politics, as in Tamtonian, the population is always divided
into two, and sometimes three or four "parties," each having a "policy"
and each conscientiously believing the policy of the other, or others,
erroneous and destructive. In so far as these various and varying policies
can be seen to have any relation whatever to practical affairs they can be
seen also to be the result of purely selfish considerations. The
self-deluded people flatter themselves that their elections are contests
of principles, whereas they are only struggles of interests. They are very
fond of the word _slagthrit_, "principle"; and when they believe
themselves acting from some high moral motive they are capable of almost
any monstrous injustice or stupid folly. This insane devotion to principle
is craftily fostered by their political leaders who invent captivating
phrases intended to confirm them in it; and these deluding aphorisms are
diligently repeated until all the people have them in memory, with no
knowledge of the fallacies which they conceal. One of these phrases is
"Principles, not men." In the last analysis this is seen to mean that it
is better to be governed by scoundrels professing one set of principles
than by good men holding another. That a scoundrel will govern badly,
regardless of the principles which he is supposed somehow to "represent,"
is a truth which, however obvious to our own enlightened intelligence, has
never penetrated the dark understandings of the Tortirrans. It is chiefly
through the dominance of the heresy fostered by this popular phrase that
the political leaders are able to put base men into office to serve their
own nefarious ends.

I have called the political contests of Tortirra struggles of interests.
In nothing is this more clear (to the looker-on at the game) than in the
endless disputes concerning restrictions on commerce. It must be
understood that lying many leagues to the southeast of Tortirra are other
groups of islands, also wholly unknown to people of our race. They are
known by the general name of _Gropilla-Stron_ (a term signifying "the Land
of the Day-dawn"), though it is impossible to ascertain why, and are
inhabited by a powerful and hardy race, many of whom I have met in the
capital of Tanga. The Stronagu, as they are called, are bold navigators
and traders, their proas making long and hazardous voyages in all the
adjacent seas to exchange commodities with other tribes. For many years
they were welcomed in Tortirra with great hospitality and their goods
eagerly purchased. They took back with them all manner of Tortirran
products and nobody thought of questioning the mutual advantages of the
exchange. But early in the present century a powerful Tortirran demagogue
named Pragam began to persuade the people that commerce was piracy--that
true prosperity consisted in consumption of domestic products and
abstention from foreign. This extraordinary heresy soon gathered such head
that Pragam was appointed Regent and invested with almost dictatorial
powers. He at once distributed nearly the whole army among the seaport
cities, and whenever a Stronagu trading proa attempted to land, the
soldiery, assisted by the populace, rushed down to the beach, and with a
terrible din of gongs and an insupportable discharge of stink-pots--the
only offensive weapon known to Tortirran warfare--drove the laden vessels
to sea, or if they persisted in anchoring destroyed them and smothered
their crews in mud. The Tortirrans themselves not being a sea-going
people, all communication between them and the rest of their little world
soon ceased. But with it ceased the prosperity of Tortirra. Deprived of a
market for their surplus products and compelled to forego the comforts and
luxuries which they had obtained from abroad, the people began to murmur
at the effect of their own folly. A reaction set in, a powerful opposition
to Pragam and his policy was organized, and he was driven from power.

But the noxious tree that Pragam had planted in the fair garden of his
country's prosperity had struck root too deeply to be altogether
eradicated. It threw up shoots everywhere, and no sooner was one cut down
than from roots underrunning the whole domain of political thought others
sprang up with a vigorous and baleful growth. While the dictum that trade
is piracy no longer commands universal acceptance, a majority of the
populace still hold a modified form of it, and that "importation is theft"
is to-day a cardinal political "principle" of a vast body of Tortirra's
people. The chief expounders and protagonists of this doctrine are all
directly or indirectly engaged in making or growing such articles as were
formerly got by exchange with the Stronagu traders. The articles are
generally inferior in quality, but consumers, not having the benefit of
foreign competition, are compelled to pay extortionate prices for them,
thus maintaining the unscrupulous producers in needless industries and a
pernicious existence. But these active and intelligent rogues are too
powerful to be driven out. They persuade their followers, among whom are
many ignorant consumers, that this vestigial remnant of the old Pragam
policy is all that keeps the nation from being desolated by small-pox and
an epidemic of broken legs. It is impossible within these limits to give a
full history of the strange delusion whose origin I have related. It has
undergone many modifications and changes, as it is the nature of error to
do, but the present situation is about this. The trading proas of the
Stronagu are permitted to enter certain ports, but when one arrives she
must anchor at a little distance from shore. Here she is boarded by an
officer of the government, who ascertains the thickness of her keel, the
number of souls on board and the amount and character of the merchandise
she brings. From these data--the last being the main factor in the
problem--the officer computes her unworthiness and adjudges a suitable
penalty. The next day a scow manned by a certain number of soldiers pushes
out and anchors within easy throw of her, and there is a frightful beating
of gongs. When this has reached its lawful limit as to time it is hushed
and the soldiers throw a stated number of stink-pots on board the
offending craft. These, exploding as they strike, stifle the captain and
crew with an intolerable odor. In the case of a large proa having a cargo
of such commodities as the Tortirrans particularly need, this bombardment
is continued for hours. At its conclusion the vessel is permitted to land
and discharge her cargo without further molestation. Under these hard
conditions importers find it impossible to do much business, the
exorbitant wages demanded by seamen consuming most of the profit. No
restrictions are now placed on the export trade, and vessels arriving
empty are subjected to no penalties; but the Stronagu having other
markets, in which they can sell as well as buy, cannot afford to go empty
handed to Tortirra.

It will be obvious to the reader that in all this no question of
"principle" is involved. A well-informed Tortirran's mental attitude with
regard to the matter may be calculated with unfailing accuracy from a
knowledge of his interests. If he produces anything which his countrymen
want, and which in the absence of all restriction they could get more
cheaply from the Stronagu than they can from him, he is in politics a
_Gakphew_, or "Stinkpotter"; if not he is what that party derisively calls
a _Shokerbom_, which signifies "Righteous Man"--for there is nothing which
the Gakphews hold in so holy detestation as righteousness.

Nominally, Tortirra is an hereditary monarchy; virtually it is a
democracy, for under a peculiar law of succession there is seldom an
occupant of the throne, and all public affairs are conducted by a Supreme
Legislature sitting at Felduchia, the capital of Tanga, to which body each
island of the archipelago, twenty-nine in number, elects representatives
in proportion to its population, the total membership being nineteen
hundred and seventeen. Each island has a Subordinate Council for the
management of local affairs and a Head Chief charged with execution of the
laws. There is also a Great Court at Felduchia, whose function it is to
interpret the general laws of the Kingdom, passed by the Supreme Council,
and a Minor Great Court at the capital of each island, with corresponding
duties and powers. These powers are very loosely and vaguely defined, and
are the subject of endless controversy everywhere, and nowhere more than
in the courts themselves--such is the multiplicity of laws and so many are
the contradictory decisions upon them, every decision constituting what is
called a _lantrag_, or, as we might say, "precedent." The peculiarity of a
_lantrag_, or previous decision, is that it is, or is not, binding, at the
will of the honorable judge making a later one on a similar point. If he
wishes to decide in the same way he quotes the previous decision with all
the gravity that he would give to an exposition of the law itself; if not,
he either ignores it altogether, shows that it is not applicable to the
case under consideration (which, as the circumstances are never exactly
the same, he can always do), or substitutes a contradictory _lantrag_ and
fortifies himself with that. There is a precedent for any decision that a
judge may wish to make, but sometimes he is too indolent to search it out
and cite it. Frequently, when the letter and intent of the law under which
an action is brought are plainly hostile to the decision which it pleases
him to render, the judge finds it easier to look up an older law, with
which it is compatible, and which the later one, he says, does not repeal,
and to base his decision on that; and there is a law for everything, just
as there is a precedent. Failing to find, or not caring to look for,
either precedent or statute to sustain him, he can readily show that any
other decision than the one he has in will would be _tokoli impelly_; that
is to say, contrary to public morals, and this, too, is considered a
legitimate consideration, though on another occasion he may say, with
public assent and approval, that it is his duty, not to make the law
conform to justice, but to expound and enforce it as he finds it. In
short, such is the confusion of the law and the public conscience that the
courts of Tortirra do whatever they please, subject only to overruling by
higher courts in the exercise of _their_ pleasure; for great as is the
number of minor and major tribunals, a case originating in the lowest is
never really settled until it has gone through all the intermediate ones
and been passed upon by the highest, to which it might just as well have
been submitted at first. The evils of this astonishing system could not be
even baldly catalogued in a lifetime. They are infinite in number and
prodigious in magnitude. To the trained intelligence of the American
observer it is incomprehensible how any, even the most barbarous, nation
can endure them.

An important function of the Great Court and the Minor Great Court is
passing upon the validity of all laws enacted by the Supreme Council and
the Subordinate Councils, respectively. The nation as a whole, as well as
each separate island, has a fundamental law called the _Trogodal_, or, as
we should say, the Constitution; and no law whatever that may be passed by
the Council is final and determinate until the appropriate court has
declared that it conforms to the Trogodal. Nevertheless every law is put
in force the moment it is perfected and before it is submitted to the
court. Indeed, not one in a thousand ever is submitted at all, that
depending upon the possibility of some individual objecting to its action
upon his personal interests, which few, indeed, can afford to do. It not
infrequently occurs that some law which has for years been rigorously
enforced, even by fines and imprisonment, and to which the whole
commercial and social life of the nation has adjusted itself with all its
vast property interests, is brought before the tribunal having final
jurisdiction in the matter and coolly declared no law at all. The
pernicious effect may be more easily imagined than related, but those who
by loyal obedience to the statute all those years have been injured in
property, those who are ruined by its erasure and those who may have
suffered the severest penalties for its violation are alike without
redress. It seems not to have occurred to the Tortirrans to require the
court to inspect the law and determine its validity before it is put in
force. It is, indeed, the traditional practice of these strange tribunals,
when a case is forced upon them, to decide, not as many points of law as
they can, but as few as they may; and this dishonest inaction is not only
tolerated but commended as the highest wisdom. The consequence is that
only those who make a profession of the law and live by it and find their
account in having it as little understood by others as is possible can
know which acts and parts of acts are in force and which are not. The
higher courts, too, have arrogated to themselves the power of declaring
unconstitutional even parts of the Constitution, frequently annulling most
important provisions of the very instrument creating them!

A popular folly in Tortirra is the selection of representatives in the
Councils from among that class of men who live by the law, whose sole
income is derived from its uncertainties and perplexities. Obviously, it
is to the interest of these men to make laws which shall be uncertain and
perplexing--to confuse and darken legislation as much as they can. Yet in
nearly all the Councils these men are the most influential and active
element, and it is not uncommon to find them in a numerical majority. It
is evident that the only check upon their ill-doing lies in the certainty
of their disagreement as to the particular kind of confusion which they
may think it expedient to create. Some will wish to accomplish their
common object by one kind of verbal ambiguity, some by another; some by
laws clearly enough (to them) unconstitutional, others by contradictory
statutes, or statutes secretly repealing wholesome ones already existing.
A clear, simple and just code would deprive them of their means of
livelihood and compel them to seek some honest employment.

So great are the uncertainties of the law in Tortirra that an eminent
judge once confessed to me that it was his conscientious belief that if
all cases were decided by the impartial arbitrament of the _do-tusis_ (a
process similar to our "throw of the dice") substantial justice would be
done far more frequently than under the present system; and there is
reason to believe that in many instances cases at law are so decided--but
only at the close of tedious and costly trials which have impoverished the
litigants and correspondingly enriched the lawyers.

Of the interminable train of shames and brutalities entailed by this
pernicious system, I shall mention here only a single one--the sentencing
and punishment of an accused person in the midst of the proceedings
against him, and while his guilt is not finally and definitively
established. It frequently occurs that a man convicted of crime in one of
the lower courts is at once hurried off to prison while he has still the
right of appeal to a higher tribunal, and while that appeal is pending.
After months and sometimes years of punishment his case is reached in the
appellate court, his appeal found valid and a new trial granted, resulting
in his acquittal. He has been imprisoned for a crime of which he is
eventually declared not to have been properly convicted. But he has no
redress; he is simply set free to bear through all his after life the
stain of dishonor and nourish an ineffectual resentment. Imagine the storm
of popular indignation that would be evoked in America by an instance of
so foul injustice!

       *       *       *       *       *

In the great public square of Itsami, the capital of Tortirra, stands a
golden statue of Estari-Kumpro, a famous judge of the Civil Court.[2] This
great man was celebrated throughout the kingdom for the wisdom and justice
of his decisions and the virtues of his private life. So profound were the
veneration in which he was held and the awe that his presence inspired,
that none of the advocates in his court ever ventured to address him
except in formal pleas: all motions, objections, and so forth, were
addressed to the clerk and by him disposed of without dissent: the silence
of the judge, who never was heard to utter a word, was understood as
sanctioning the acts of his subordinate. For thirty years, promptly at
sunrise, the great hall of justice was thrown open, disclosing the judge
seated on a loftly dais beneath a black canopy, partly in shadow, and
quite inaccessible. At sunset all proceedings for the day terminated,
everyone left the hall and the portal closed. The decisions of this august
and learned jurist were always read aloud by the clerk, and a copy
supplied to the counsel on each side. They were brief, clear and
remarkable, not only for their unimpeachable justice, but for their
conformity to the fundamental principles of law. Not one of them was ever
set aside, and during the last fifteen years of the great judge's service
no litigant ever took an appeal, although none ever ventured before that
infallible tribunal unless conscientiously persuaded that his cause was
just.

    [2] Klikat um Delu Ovwi.

One day it happened during the progress of an important trial that a sharp
shock of earthquake occurred, throwing the whole assembly into confusion.
When order had been restored a cry of horror and dismay burst from the
multitude--the judge's head lay flattened upon the floor, a dozen feet
below the bench, and from the neck of the rapidly collapsing body, which
had pitched forward upon his desk, poured a thick stream of sawdust! For
thirty years that great and good man had been represented by a stuffed
manikin. For thirty years he had not entered his own court, nor heard a
word of evidence or argument. At the moment of the accident to his
simulacrum he was in his library at his home, writing his decision of the
case on trial, and was killed by a falling chandelier. It was afterward
learned that his clerk, twenty-five years dead, had all the time been
personated by a twin brother, who was an idiot from birth and knew no law.


HITHER

Listening to the history of the golden statue in the great square, as
related by a Tortirran storyteller, I fell asleep. On waking I found
myself lying in a cot-bed amidst unfamiliar surroundings. A bandage was
fastened obliquely about my head, covering my left eye, in which was a
dull throbbing pain. Seeing an attendant near by I beckoned him to my
bedside and asked: "Where am I?"

"Hospital," he replied, tersely but not unkindly. He added: "You have a
bad eye." "Yes," I said, "I always had; but I could name more than one
Tortirran who has a bad heart."

"What is a Tortirran?" he asked.




FOR THE AKHOOND




FOR THE AHKOOND


In the year 4591 I accepted from his gracious Majesty the Ahkoond of
Citrusia a commission to explore the unknown region lying to the eastward
of the Ultimate Hills, the range which that learned archæologist, Simeon
Tucker, affirms to be identical with the "Rocky Mountains" of the
ancients. For this proof of his Majesty's favor I was indebted, doubtless,
to a certain distinction that I had been fortunate enough to acquire by
explorations in the heart of Darkest Europe. His Majesty kindly offered to
raise and equip a large expeditionary force to accompany me, and I was
given the widest discretion in the matter of outfit; I could draw upon the
royal treasury for any sum that I might require, and upon the royal
university for all the scientific apparatus and assistance necessary to my
purpose. Declining these encumbrances, I took my electric rifle and a
portable waterproof case containing a few simple instruments and writing
materials and set out. Among the instruments was, of course, an aerial
isochronophone which I set by the one in the Ahkoond's private dining-room
at the palace. His Majesty invariably dined alone at 18 o'clock, and sat
at table six hours: it was my intention to send him all my reports at the
hour of 23, just as dessert would be served, and he would be in a proper
frame of mind to appreciate my discoveries and my services to the crown.

At 9 o'clock on the 13th of Meijh I left Sanf Rachisco and after a tedious
journey of nearly fifty minutes arrived at Bolosson, the eastern terminus
of the magnetic tube, on the summit of the Ultimate Hills. According to
Tucker this was anciently a station on the Central Peaceful Railway, and
was called "German," in honor of an illustrious dancing master. Prof.
Nupper, however, says it was the ancient Nevraska, the capital of Kikago,
and geographers generally have accepted that view.

Finding nothing at Bolosson to interest me except a fine view of the
volcano Carlema, then in active eruption, I shouldered my electric rifle
and with my case of instruments strapped upon my back plunged at once into
the wilderness, down the eastern slope. As I descended the character of
the vegetation altered. The pines of the higher altitudes gave place to
oaks, these to ash, beech and maple. To these succeeded the tamarack and
such trees as affect a moist and marshy habitat; and finally, when for
four months I had been steadily descending, I found myself in a primeval
flora consisting mainly of giant ferns, some of them as much as twenty
_surindas_ in diameter. They grew upon the margins of vast stagnant lakes
which I was compelled to navigate by means of rude rafts made from their
trunks lashed together with vines.

In the fauna of the region that I had traversed I had noted changes
corresponding to those in the flora. On the upper slope there was nothing
but the mountain sheep, but I passed successively through the habitats of
the bear, the deer and the horse. This last mentioned creature, which our
naturalists have believed long extinct, and which Dorbley declares our
ancestors domesticated, I found in vast numbers on high table lands
covered with grass upon which it feeds. The animal answers the current
description of the horse very nearly, but all that I saw were destitute of
the horns, and none had the characteristic forked tail. This member, on
the contrary, is a tassel of straight wiry hair, reaching nearly to the
ground--a surprising sight. Lower still I came upon the mastodon, the
lion, the tiger, hippopotamus and alligator, all differing very little
from those infesting Central Europe, as described in my "Travels in the
Forgotten Continent."

In the lake region where I now found myself, the waters abounded with
ichthyosauri, and along the margins the iguanodon dragged his obscene bulk
in indolent immunity. Great flocks of pterodactyls, their bodies as large
as those of oxen and their necks enormously long, clamored and fought in
the air, the broad membranes of their wings making a singular musical
humming, unlike anything that I had ever heard. Between them and the
ichthyosauri there was incessant battle, and I was constantly reminded of
the ancient poet's splendid and original comparison of man to

      dragons of the prime
  That tare each other in their slime.

When brought down with my electric rifle and properly roasted, the
pterodactyl proved very good eating, particularly the pads of the toes.

In urging my raft along the shore line of one of the stagnant lagoons one
day I was surprised to find a broad rock jutting out from the shore, its
upper surface some ten _coprets_ above the water. Disembarking, I ascended
it, and on examination recognized it as the remnant of an immense mountain
which at one time must have been 5,000 _coprets_ in height and doubtless
the dominating peak of a long range. From the striations all over it I
discovered that it had been worn away to its present trivial size by
glacial action. Opening my case of instruments, I took out my
petrochronologue and applied it to the worn and scratched surface of the
rock. The indicator at once pointed to K 59 xpc ½! At this astonishing
result I was nearly overcome by excitement: the last erosions of the
ice-masses upon this vestige of a stupendous mountain range which they had
worn away, had been made as recently as the year 1945! Hastily applying my
nymograph, I found that the name of this particular mountain at the time
when it began to be enveloped in the mass of ice moving down upon it from
the north, was "Pike's Peak." Other observations with other instruments
showed that at that time the country circumjacent to it had been inhabited
by a partly civilized race of people known as Galoots, the name of their
capital city being Denver.

That evening at the hour of 23 I set up my aerial isochronophone[3] and
reported to his gracious Majesty the Ahkoond as follows:

    [3] This satire was published in the San Francisco _Examiner_ many
        years before the invention of wireless telegraphy; so I retain
        my own name for the instrument.--A.B.

"_Sire:_ I have the honor to report that I have made a startling
discovery. The primeval region into which I have penetrated, as I informed
you yesterday--the ichthyosaurus belt--was peopled by tribes considerably
advanced in some of the arts almost within historic times: in 1920. They
were exterminated by a glacial period not exceeding one hundred and
twenty-five years in duration. Your Majesty can conceive the magnitude and
violence of the natural forces which overwhelmed their country with moving
sheets of ice not less that 5,000 _coprets_ in thickness, grinding down
every eminence, destroying (of course) all animal and vegetable life and
leaving the region a fathomless bog of detritus. Out of this vast sea of
mud Nature has had to evolve another creation, beginning _de novo_, with
her lowest forms. It has long been known, your Majesty, that the region
east of the Ultimate Hills, betwen them and the Wintry Sea, was once the
seat of an ancient civilization, some scraps and shreds of whose history,
arts and literature have been wafted to us across the gulf of time; but it
was reserved for your gracious Majesty, through me, your humble and
unworthy instrument, to ascertain the astonishing fact that these were a
pre-glacial people--that between them and us stands, as it were, a wall of
impenetrable ice. That all local records of this unfortunate race have
perished your Majesty needs not to be told: we can supplement our present
imperfect knowledge of them by instrumental observation only."

To this message I received the following extraordinary reply:

"All right--another bottle of--ice goes: push on--this cheese is
too--spare no effort to--hand me those nuts--learn all you can--damn you!"

His most gracious Majesty was being served with dessert, and served badly.

I now resolved to go directly north toward the source of the ice-flow and
investigate its cause, but examining my barometer found that I was more
than 8,000 _coprets_ below the sea-level; the moving ice had not only
ground down the face of the country, planing off the eminences and filling
the depressions, but its enormous weight had caused the earth's crust to
sag, and with the lessening of the weight from evaporation it had not
recovered.

I had no desire to continue in this depression, as I should in going
north, for I should find nothing but lakes, marshes and ferneries,
infested with the same primitive and monstrous forms of life. So I
continued my course eastward and soon had the satisfaction to find myself
meeting the sluggish current of such streams as I encountered in my way.
By vigorous use of the new double-distance telepode, which enables the
wearer to step eighty _surindas_ instead of forty, as with the instrument
in popular use, I was soon again at a considerable elevation above the
sea-level and nearly 200 _prastams_ from "Pike's Peak." A little farther
along the water courses began to flow to the eastward. The flora and fauna
had again altered in character, and now began to grow sparse; the soil was
thin and arid, and in a week I found myself in a region absolutely
destitute of organic life and without a vestige of soil. All was barren
rock. The surface for hundreds of _prastams_, as I continued my advance,
was nearly level, with a slight dip to the eastward. The rock was
singularly striated, the scratches arranged concentrically and in
helicoidal curves. This circumstance puzzled me and I resolved to take
some more instrumental observations, bitterly regretting my improvidence
in not availing myself of the Ahkoond's permission to bring with me such
apparatus and assistants as would have given me knowledge vastly more
copious and accurate than I could acquire with my simple pocket
appliances.

I need not here go into the details of my observations with such
instruments as I had, nor into the calculations of which these
observations were the basic data. Suffice it that after two months' labor
I reported the results to his Majesty in Sanf Rachisco in the words
following:

"_Sire:_ It is my high privilege to apprise you of my arrival on the
western slope of a mighty depression running through the center of the
continent north and south, formerly known as the Mississippi Valley. It
was once the seat of a thriving and prosperous population known as the
Pukes, but is now a vast expanse of bare rock, from which every particle
of soil and everything movable, including people, animals and vegetation,
have been lifted by terrific cyclones and scattered afar, falling in other
lands and at sea in the form of what was called meteoric dust! I find that
these terrible phenomena began to occur about the year 1860, and lasted,
with increasing frequency and power, through a century, culminating about
the middle of that glacial period which saw the extinction of the Galoots
and their neighboring tribes. There was, of course, a close connection
between the two malefic phenomena, both, doubtless, being due to the same
cause, which I have been unable to trace. A cyclone, I venture to remind
your gracious Majesty, is a mighty whirlwind, accompanied by the most
startling meteorological phenomena, such as electrical disturbances,
floods of falling water, darkness and so forth. It moves with great speed,
sucking up everything and reducing it to powder. In many days' journey I
have not found a square _copret_ of the country that did not suffer a
visitation. If any human being escaped he must speedily have perished from
starvation. For some twenty centuries the Pukes have been an extinct race,
and their country a desolation in which no living thing can dwell, unless,
like me, it is supplied with Dr. Blobob's Condensed Life-pills."

The Ahkoond replied that he was pleased to feel the most poignant grief
for the fate of the unfortunate Pukes, and if I should by chance find the
ancient king of the country I was to do my best to revive him with the
patent resuscitator and present him the assurances of his Majesty's
distinguished consideration; but as the politoscope showed that the nation
had been a republic I gave myself no trouble in the matter.

My next report was made six months later and was in substance this:

"_Sire:_ I address your Majesty from a point 430 _coprets_ vertically above
the site of the famous ancient city of Buffalo, once the capital of a
powerful nation called the Smugwumps. I can approach no nearer because of
the hardness of the snow, which is very firmly packed. For hundreds of
_prastams_ in every direction, and for thousands to the north and west, the
land is covered with this substance, which, as your Majesty is doubtless
aware, is extremely cold to the touch, but by application of sufficient
heat can be turned into water. It falls from the heavens, and is believed
by the learned among your Majesty's subjects to have a sidereal origin.

"The Smugwumps were a hardy and intelligent race, but they entertained the
vain delusion that they could subdue Nature. Their year was divided into
two seasons--summer and winter, the former warm, the latter cold. About
the beginning of the nineteenth century according to my archæthermograph,
the summers began to grow shorter and hotter, the winters longer and
colder. At every point in their country, and every day in the year, when
they had not the hottest weather ever known in that place, they had the
coldest. When they were not dying by hundreds from sunstroke they were
dying by thousands from frost. But these heroic and devoted people
struggled on, believing that they were becoming acclimated faster than the
climate was becoming insupportable. Those called away on business were
even afflicted with nostalgia, and with a fatal infatuation returned to
grill or freeze, according to the season of their arrival. Finally there
was no summer at all, though the last flash of heat slew several millions
and set most of their cities afire, and winter reigned eternal.

"The Smugwumps were now keenly sensible of the perils environing them,
and, abandoning their homes, endeavored to reach their kindred, the
Californians, on the western side of the continent in what is now your
Majesty's ever-blessed realm. But it was too late: the snow growing deeper
and deeper day by day, besieged them in their towns and dwellings, and
they were unable to escape. The last one of them perished about the year
1943, and may God have mercy on his fool soul!"

To this dispatch the Ahkoond replied that it was the royal opinion that
the Smugwumps were served very well right.

Some weeks later I reported thus:

"_Sire:_ The country which your Majesty's munificence is enabling your
devoted servant to explore extends southward and southwestward from
Smugwumpia many hundreds of _prastams_, its eastern and southern borders
being the Wintry Sea and the Fiery Gulf, respectively. The population in
ancient times was composed of Whites and Blacks in about equal numbers and
of about equal moral worth--at least that is the record on the dial of my
ethnograph when set for the twentieth century and given a southern
exposure. The Whites were called Crackers and the Blacks known as Coons.

"I find here none of the barrenness and desolation characterizing the land
of the ancient Pukes, and the climate is not so rigorous and thrilling as
that of the country of the late Smugwumps. It is, indeed, rather agreeable
in point of temperature, and the soil being fertile exceedingly, the whole
land is covered with a dense and rank vegetation. I have yet to find a
square _smig_ of it that is open ground, or one that is not the lair of
some savage beast, the haunt of some venomous reptile, or the roost of
some offensive bird. Crackers and Coons alike are long extinct, and these
are their successors.

"Nothing could be more forbidding and unwholesome than these interminable
jungles, with their horrible wealth of organic life in its most
objectionable forms. By repeated observations with the necrohistoriograph
I find that the inhabitants of this country, who had always been more or
less dead, were wholly extirpated contemporaneously with the disastrous
events which swept away the Galoots, the Pukes and the Smugwumps. The
agency of their effacement was an endemic disorder known as yellow fever.
The ravages of this frightful disease were of frequent recurrence, every
point of the country being a center of infection; but in some seasons it
was worse than in others. Once in every half century at first, and
afterward every year[4] it broke out somewhere and swept over wide areas
with such fatal effect that there were not enough of the living to plunder
the dead; but at the first frost it would subside. During the ensuing two
or three months of immunity the stupid survivors returned to the infected
homes from which they had fled and were ready for the next outbreak.
Emigration would have saved them all, but although the Californians (over
whose happy and prosperous descendants your Majesty has the goodness to
reign) invited them again and again to their beautiful land, where
sickness and death were hardly known, they would not go, and by the year
1946 the last one of them, may it please your gracious Majesty, was dead
and damned."

    [4] At one time it was foolishly believed that the disease had been
        eradicated by slapping the mosquitoes which were thought to
        produce it; but a few years later it broke out with greater
        violence than ever before, although the mosquitoes had left the
        country.

Having spoken this into the transmitter of the aerial isochronophone at
the usual hour of 23 o'clock I applied the receiver to my ear, confidently
expecting the customary commendation. Imagine my astonishment and dismay
when my master's well-remembered voice was heard in utterance of the most
awful imprecations on me and my work, followed by appalling threats
against my life!

The Ahkoond had changed his dinner-time to five hours later and I had been
speaking into the ears of an empty stomach!




JOHN SMITH, LIBERATOR




JOHN SMITH, LIBERATOR

(FROM A NEWSPAPER OF THE FAR FUTURE)


At the quiet little village of Smithcester, which certain archæologists
have professed to "identify" as the ancient London, will be celebrated
to-day the thirtieth centennial anniversary of the birth of this
remarkable man, the foremost figure of antiquity. The recurrence of what
no more than six centuries ago was a popular _fête_ day and even now is
seldom permitted to pass without recognition by those to whom liberty
means something more precious than opportunity for gain, excites a
peculiar emotion. It matters little whether or no tradition has correctly
fixed the time and place of Smith's birth. That he was born; that being
born he wrought nobly at the work that his hand found to do; that by the
mere force of his powerful intellect he established and perfected our
present benign form of government, under which civilization has attained
its highest and ripest development--these are facts beside which mere
questions of chronology and geography are trivial and without
significance.

That this extraordinary man originated the Smithocratic form of government
is, perhaps, open to intelligent doubt; possibly it had a _de facto_
existence in crude and uncertain shapes as early as the time of Edward
XVII,--an existence local, unorganized and intermittent. But that he
cleared it of its overlying errors and superstitions, gave it definite
form and shaped it into a coherent and practical scheme there is
unquestionable evidence in fragments of ancestral literature that have
come down to us, disfigured though they are with amazingly contradictory
statements regarding his birth, parentage and manner of life before he
strode out upon the political stage as the Liberator of Mankind. It is
said that Shakspar, a poet whose works had in their day a considerable
vogue, though it is difficult to say why, alludes to him as "the noblest
Roman of them all," our forefathers of the period being known as Romans or
Englishmen, indifferently. In the only authentic fragment of Shakspar
extant, however, this passage is not included.

Smith's military power is amply attested in an ancient manuscript of
undoubted authenticity which has recently been translated from the
Siamese. It is an account of the water battle of Loo, by an eye-witness
whose name, unfortunately, has not reached us. It is stated that in this
famous engagement Smith overthrew the great Neapolitan general, whom he
captured and conveyed in chains to the island of Chickenhurst.

In his "Political History of Europe" the late Professor Mimble has this
luminous sentence: "With the single exception of Ecuador there was no
European government that the Liberator did not transform into a pure
Smithocracy, and although some of them relapsed transiently into the
primitive forms, and others grew into extravagant and fanciful systems
begotten of the intellectual activity to which he had stirred the whole
world, yet so firmly did he establish the principle that in the
thirty-second century the civilized world had become, and has remained,
virtually Smithocratic."

It may be noted here as a singular coincidence that the year which is
believed to have seen the birth of him who founded rational government
witnessed the death of him who perfected literature: Martin Farquhar
Tupper (after Smith the most noted name in history) starved to death in
the streets of London. Like that of Smith his origin is wrapped in
obscurity. No fewer than seven British cities claim the honor of his
nativity. Meager indeed is our knowledge of this only British bard whose
works have endured through thirty centuries. All that is certain is that
he was once arrested for deer-stealing; that, although blind, he fought a
duel with a person named Salmasius, for which he was thrown into Bedford
gaol, whence he escaped to the Tower of London; that the manuscript of his
"Proverbial Philosophy" was for many years hidden in a hollow oak tree,
where it was found by his grandmother, Ella Wheeler Tupper, who fled with
it to America and published many brilliant passages from it over her own
name. Had Smith and Tupper been contemporaries the iron deeds of the
former would doubtless have been recorded in the golden pages of the
latter, to the incalculable enrichment of Roman history.

Strangely unimpressible indeed must be the mind which, looking backward
through the mists of the centuries upon the primitive race from which we
are believed to have sprung, can repress a feeling of sympathetic
interest. The names of John Smith and Martin Farquhar Tupper, blazoned
upon the page of that dim past and surrounded by the lesser names of
Shakspar, the first Neapolitan, Oliver Cornwell, that Mynheer Baloon who
was known as the Flying Dutchman, Julia Cæsar, commonly known as the
Serpent of the Nile--all these are richly suggestive. They call to mind
the odd custom of wearing "clothes"; the incredible error of Copernicus
and other wide and wild guesses of ancient "science"; the lost arts of
telegramy, steam locomotion, printing, and the tempering of iron. They set
us thinking of the zealous idolatry that led men on pious pilgrimages to
the accessible regions about the north pole and into the then savage
interior of Africa in search of the fountain of youth. They conjure up
visions of bloodthirsty "Emperors," tyrannical "Kings," vampire
"Presidents," and robber "Parliaments"--grotesque and horrible shapes in
terrible contrast with the serene and benign figures and features of our
modern Smithocracy.

Let us to-day rejoice and give thanks to Bungoot that the old order of
things has passed forever away. Let us praise Him that our lot has been
cast in more wholesome days than those in which Smith wrought and Tupper
sang. And yet let us not forget whatever there was of good, if any, in the
pre-Smithian period, when men cherished quaint superstitions and rode on
the backs of beasts--when they settled questions of right and expediency
by counting noses--when cows were enslaved and women free--when science
had not dawned to chase away the shadows of imagination and the fear of
immortality--and when the cabalistic letters "A.D.," which from habit we
still affix to numerals designating the date, had perhaps a known
signification. It is indeed well to live in this golden age, under the
benign sway of that supreme and culminating product of Smithocracy, our
gracious sovereign, his Majesty John CLXXVIII.




BITS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY




ON A MOUNTAIN

They say that the lumberman has looked upon the Cheat Mountain country and
seen that it is good, and I hear that some wealthy gentlemen have been
there and made a game preserve. There must be lumber and, I suppose,
sport, but some things one could wish were ordered otherwise. Looking back
upon it through the haze of near half a century, I see that region as a
veritable realm of enchantment; the Alleghanies as the Delectable
Mountains. I note again their dim, blue billows, ridge after ridge
interminable, beyond purple valleys full of sleep, "in which it seemed
always afternoon." Miles and miles away, where the lift of earth meets the
stoop of sky, I discern an imperfection in the tint, a faint graying of
the blue above the main range--the smoke of an enemy's camp.

It was in the autumn of that "most immemorial year," the 1861st of our
Lord, and of our Heroic Age the first, that a small brigade of raw
troops--troops were all raw in those days--had been pushed in across the
Ohio border and after various vicissitudes of fortune and mismanagement
found itself, greatly to its own surprise, at Cheat Mountain Pass, holding
a road that ran from Nowhere to the southeast. Some of us had served
through the summer in the "three-months' regiments," which responded to
the President's first call for troops. We were regarded by the others with
profound respect as "old soldiers." (Our ages, if equalized, would, I
fancy, have given about twenty years to each man.) We gave ourselves, this
aristocracy of service, no end of military airs; some of us even going to
the extreme of keeping our jackets buttoned and our hair combed. We had
been in action, too; had shot off a Confederate leg at Philippi, "the
first battle of the war," and had lost as many as a dozen men at Laurel
Hill and Carrick's Ford, whither the enemy had fled in trying, Heaven
knows why, to get away from us. We now "brought to the task" of subduing
the Rebellion a patriotism which never for a moment doubted that a rebel
was a fiend accursed of God and the angels--one for whose extirpation by
force and arms each youth of us considered himself specially "raised up."

It was a strange country. Nine in ten of us had never seen a mountain, nor
a hill as high as a church spire, until we had crossed the Ohio River. In
power upon the emotions nothing, I think, is comparable to a first sight
of mountains. To a member of a plains-tribe, born and reared on the flats
of Ohio or Indiana, a mountain region was a perpetual miracle. Space
seemed to have taken on a new dimension; areas to have not only length and
breadth, but thickness.

Modern literature is full of evidence that our great grandfathers looked
upon mountains with aversion and horror. The poets of even the seventeenth
century never tire of damning them in good, set terms. If they had had the
unhappiness to read the opening lines of "The Pleasures of Hope," they
would assuredly have thought Master Campbell had gone funny and should be
shut up lest he do himself an injury.

The flatlanders who invaded the Cheat Mountain country had been suckled in
another creed, and to them western Virginia--there was, as yet, no West
Virginia--was an enchanted land. How we reveled in its savage beauties!
With what pure delight we inhaled its fragrances of spruce and pine! How
we stared with something like awe at its clumps of laurel!--real laurel,
as we understood the matter, whose foliage had been once accounted
excellent for the heads of illustrious Romans and such--mayhap to reduce
the swelling. We carved its roots into fingerrings and pipes. We gathered
spruce-gum and sent it to our sweethearts in letters. We ascended every
hill within our picket-lines and called it a "peak."

And, by the way, during those halcyon days (the halcyon was there, too,
chattering above every creek, as he is all over the world) we fought
another battle. It has not got into history, but it had a real objective
existence although by a felicitous afterthought called by us who were
defeated a "reconnaissance in force." Its short and simple annals are hat
we marched a long way and lay down before a fortified camp of the enemy at
the farther edge of a valley. Our commander had the forethought to see
that we lay well out of range of the small-arms of the period. A
disadvantage of this arrangement was that the enemy was out of reach of us
as well, for our rifles were no better than his. Unfortunately--one might
almost say unfairly--he had a few pieces of artillery very well protected,
and with those he mauled us to the eminent satisfaction of his mind and
heart. So we parted from him in anger and returned to our own place,
leaving our dead--not many.

Among them was a chap belonging to my company, named Abbott; it is not odd
that I recollect it, for there was something unusual in the manner of
Abbott's taking off. He was lying flat upon his stomach and was killed by
being struck in the side by a nearly spent cannon-shot that came rolling
in among us. The shot remained in him until removed. It was a solid
round-shot, evidently cast in some private foundry, whose proprietor,
setting the laws of thrift above those of ballistics, had put his
"imprint" upon it: it bore, in slightly sunken letters, the name "Abbott."
That is what I was told--I was not present.

It was after this, when the nights had acquired a trick of biting and the
morning sun appeared to shiver with cold, that we moved up to the summit
of Cheat Mountain to guard the pass through which nobody wanted to go.
Here we slew the forest and builded us giant habitations (astride the road
from Nowhere to the southeast) commodious to lodge an army and fitly
loopholed for discomfiture of the adversary. The long logs that it was our
pride to cut and carry! The accuracy with which we laid them one upon
another, hewn to the line and bullet-proof! The Cyclopean doors that we
hung, with sliding bolts fit to be "the mast of some great admiral"! And
when we had "made the pile complete" some marplot of the Regular Army came
that way and chatted a few moments with our commander, and we made an
earthwork away off on one side of the road (leaving the other side to take
care of itself) and camped outside it in tents! But the Regular Army
fellow had not the heart to suggest the demolition of our Towers of Babel,
and the foundations remain to this day to attest the genius of the
American volunteer soldiery.

We were the original game-preservers of the Cheat Mountain region, for
although we hunted in season and out of season over as wide an area as we
dared to cover we took less game, probably, than would have been taken by
a certain single hunter of disloyal views whom we scared away. There were
bear galore and deer in quantity, and many a winter day, in snow up to his
knees, did the writer of this pass in tracking bruin to his den, where, I
am bound to say, I commonly left him. I agreed with my lamented friend,
the late Robert Weeks, poet:

  Pursuit may be, it seems to me,
  Perfect without possession.

There can be no doubt that the wealthy sportsmen who have made a preserve
of the Cheat Mountain region will find plenty of game if it has not died
since 1861. We left it there.

Yet hunting and idling were not the whole of life's programme up there on
that wild ridge with its shaggy pelt of spruce and firs, and in the
riparian lowlands that it parted. We had a bit of war now and again. There
was an occasional "affair of outposts"; sometimes a hazardous scout into
the enemy's country, ordered, I fear, more to keep up the appearance of
doing something than with a hope of accomplishing a military result. But
one day it was bruited about that a movement in force was to be made on
the enemy's position miles away, at the summit of the main ridge of the
Alleghanies--the camp whose faint blue smoke we had watched for weary
days. The movement was made, as was the fashion in those 'prentice days of
warfare, in two columns, which were to pounce upon the foeman from
opposite sides at the same moment. Led over unknown roads by untrusty
guides, encountering obstacles not foreseen--miles apart and without
communication, the two columns invariably failed to execute the movement
with requisite secrecy and precision. The enemy, in enjoyment of that
inestimable military advantage known in civilian speech as being
"surrounded," always beat the attacking columns one at a time or, turning
red-handed from the wreck of the first, frightened the other away.

All one bright wintry day we marched down from our eyrie; all one bright
wintry night we climbed the great wooded ridge opposite. How romantic it
all was; the sunset valleys full of visible sleep; the glades suffused and
interpenetrated with moonlight; the long valley of the Greenbrier
stretching away to we knew not what silent cities; the river itself unseen
under its "astral body" of mist! Then there was the "spice of danger."

Once we heard shots in front; then there was a long wait. As we trudged on
we passed something--some things--lying by the wayside. During another
wait we examined them, curiously lifting the blankets from their
yellow-clay faces. How repulsive they looked with their blood-smears,
their blank, staring eyes, their teeth uncovered by contraction of the
lips! The frost had begun already to whiten their deranged clothing. We
were as patriotic as ever, but we did not wish to be that way. For an hour
afterward the injunction of silence in the ranks was needless.

       *       *       *       *       *

Repassing the spot the next day, a beaten, dispirited and exhausted force,
feeble from fatigue and savage from defeat, some of us had life enough
left, such as it was, to observe that these bodies had altered their
position. They appeared also to have thrown off some of their clothing,
which lay near by, in disorder. Their expression, too, had an added
blankness--they had no faces.

As soon as the head of our straggling column had reached the spot a
desultory firing had begun. One might have thought the living paid honors
to the dead. No; the firing was a military execution; the condemned, a
herd of galloping swine. They had eaten our fallen, but--touching
magnanimity!--we did not eat theirs.

The shooting of several kinds was very good in the Cheat Mountain country,
even in 1861.


WHAT I SAW OF SHILOH

I

This is a simple story of a battle; such a tale as may be told by a
soldier who is no writer to a reader who is no soldier.

The morning of Sunday, the sixth day of April, 1862, was bright and warm.
Reveille had been sounded rather late, for the troops, wearied with long
marching, were to have a day of rest. The men were idling about the embers
of their bivouac fires; some preparing breakfast, others looking
carelessly to the condition of their arms and accoutrements, against the
inevitable inspection; still others were chatting with indolent dogmatism
on that never-failing theme, the end and object of the campaign. Sentinels
paced up and down the confused front with a lounging freedom of mien and
stride that would not have been tolerated at another time. A few of them
limped unsoldierly in deference to blistered feet. At a little distance in
rear of the stacked arms were a few tents out of which frowsy-headed
officers occasionally peered, languidly calling to their servants to fetch
a basin of water, dust a coat or polish a scabbard. Trim young mounted
orderlies, bearing dispatches obviously unimportant, urged their lazy nags
by devious ways amongst the men, enduring with unconcern their
good-humored raillery, the penalty of superior station. Little negroes of
not very clearly defined status and function lolled on their stomachs,
kicking their long, bare heels in the sunshine, or slumbered peacefully,
unaware of the practical waggery prepared by white hands for their
undoing.

Presently the flag hanging limp and lifeless at headquarters was seen to
lift itself spiritedly from the staff. At the same instant was heard a
dull, distant sound like the heavy breathing of some great animal below
the horizon. The flag had lifted its head to listen. There was a momentary
lull in the hum of the human swarm; then, as the flag drooped the hush
passed away. But there were some hundreds more men on their feet than
before; some thousands of hearts beating with a quicker pulse.

Again the flag made a warning sign, and again the breeze bore to our ears
the long, deep sighing of iron lungs. The division, as if it had received
the sharp word of command, sprang to its feet, and stood in groups at
"attention." Even the little blacks got up. I have since seen similar
effects produced by earthquakes; I am not sure but the ground was
trembling then. The mess-cooks, wise in their generation, lifted the
steaming camp-kettles off the fire and stood by to cast out. The mounted
orderlies had somehow disappeared. Officers came ducking from beneath
their tents and gathered in groups. Headquarters had become a swarming
hive.

The sound of the great guns now came in regular throbbings--the strong,
full pulse of the fever of battle. The flag flapped excitedly, shaking out
its blazonry of stars and stripes with a sort of fierce delight. Toward
the knot of officers in its shadow dashed from somewhere--he seemed to
have burst out of the ground in a cloud of dust--a mounted aide-de-camp,
and on the instant rose the sharp, clear notes of a bugle, caught up and
repeated, and passed on by other bugles, until the level reaches of brown
fields, the line of woods trending away to far hills, and the unseen
valleys beyond were "telling of the sound," the farther, fainter strains
half drowned in ringing cheers as the men ran to range themselves behind
the stacks of arms. For this call was not the wearisome "general" before
which the tents go down; it was the exhilarating "assembly," which goes to
the heart as wine and stirs the blood like the kisses of a beautiful
woman. Who that has heard it calling to him above the grumble of great
guns can forget the wild intoxication of its music?

II

The Confederate forces in Kentucky and Tennessee had suffered a series of
reverses, culminating in the loss of Nashville. The blow was severe:
immense quantities of war material had fallen to the victor, together with
all the important strategic points. General Johnston withdrew Beauregard's
army to Corinth, in northern Mississippi, where he hoped so to recruit and
equip it as to enable it to assume the offensive and retake the lost
territory.

The town of Corinth was a wretched place--the capital of a swamp. It is a
two days' march west of the Tennessee River, which here and for a hundred
and fifty miles farther, to where it falls into the Ohio at Paducah, runs
nearly north. It is navigable to this point--that is to say, to Pittsburg
Landing, where Corinth got to it by a road worn through a thickly wooded
country seamed with ravines and bayous, rising nobody knows where and
running into the river under sylvan arches heavily draped with Spanish
moss. In some places they were obstructed by fallen trees. The Corinth
road was at certain seasons a branch of the Tennessee River. Its mouth was
Pittsburg Landing. Here in 1862 were some fields and a house or two; now
there are a national cemetery and other improvements.

It was at Pittsburg Landing that Grant established his army, with a river
in his rear and two toy steamboats as a means of communication with the
east side, whither General Buell with thirty thousand men was moving from
Nashville to join him. The question has been asked, Why did General Grant
occupy the enemy's side of the river in the face of a superior force
before the arrival of Buell? Buell had a long way to come; perhaps Grant
was weary of waiting. Certainly Johnston was, for in the gray of the
morning of April 6th, when Buell's leading division was _en bivouac_ near
the little town of Savannah, eight or ten miles below, the Confederate
forces, having moved out of Corinth two days before, fell upon Grant's
advance brigades and destroyed them. Grant was at Savannah, but hastened
to the Landing in time to find his camps in the hands of the enemy and the
remnants of his beaten army cooped up with an impassable river at their
backs for moral support. I have related how the news of this affair came
to us at Savannah. It came on the wind--a messenger that does not bear
copious details.

III

On the side of the Tennessee River, over against Pittsburg Landing, are
some low bare hills, partly inclosed by a forest. In the dusk of the
evening of April 6 this open space, as seen from the other side of the
stream--whence, indeed, it was anxiously watched by thousands of eyes, to
many of which it grew dark long before the sun went down--would have
appeared to have been ruled in long, dark lines, with new lines being
constantly drawn across. These lines were the regiments of Buell's leading
division, which having moved up from Savannah through a country presenting
nothing but interminable swamps and pathless "bottom lands," with rank
overgrowths of jungle, was arriving at the scene of action breathless,
footsore and faint with hunger. It had been a terrible race; some
regiments had lost a third of their number from fatigue, the men dropping
from the ranks as if shot, and left to recover or die at their leisure.
Nor was the scene to which they had been invited likely to inspire the
moral confidence that medicines physical fatigue. True, the air was full
of thunder and the earth was trembling beneath their feet; and if there is
truth in the theory of the conversion of force, these men were storing up
energy from every shock that burst its waves upon their bodies. Perhaps
this theory may better than another explain the tremendous endurance of
men in battle. But the eyes reported only matter for despair.

Before us ran the turbulent river, vexed with plunging shells and obscured
in spots by blue sheets of low-lying smoke. The two little steamers were
doing their duty well. They came over to us empty and went back crowded,
sitting very low in the water, apparently on the point of capsizing. The
farther edge of the water could not be seen; the boats came out of the
obscurity, took on their passengers and vanished in the darkness. But on
the heights above, the battle was burning brightly enough; a thousand
lights kindled and expired in every second of time. There were broad
flushings in the sky, against which the branches of the trees showed
black. Sudden flames burst out here and there, singly and in dozens.
Fleeting streaks of fire crossed over to us by way of welcome. These
expired in blinding flashes and fierce little rolls of smoke, attended
with the peculiar metallic ring of bursting shells, and followed by the
musical humming of the fragments as they struck into the ground on every
side, making us wince, but doing little harm. The air was full of noises.
To the right and the left the musketry rattled smartly and petulantly;
directly in front it sighed and growled. To the experienced ear this meant
that the death-line was an arc of which the river was the chord. There
were deep, shaking explosions and smart shocks; the whisper of stray
bullets and the hurtle of conical shells; the rush of round shot. There
were faint, desultory cheers, such as announce a momentary or partial
triumph. Occasionally, against the glare behind the trees, could be seen
moving black figures, singularly distinct but apparently no longer than a
thumb. They seemed to me ludicrously like the figures of demons in old
allegorical prints of hell. To destroy these and all their belongings the
enemy needed but another hour of daylight; the steamers in that case would
have been doing him fine service by bringing more fish to his net. Those
of us who had the good fortune to arrive late could then have eaten our
teeth in impotent rage. Nay, to make his victory sure it did not need that
the sun should pause in the heavens; one of the many random shots falling
into the river would have done the business had chance directed it into
the engine-room of a steamer. You can perhaps fancy the anxiety with which
we watched them leaping down.

But we had two other allies besides the night. Just where the enemy had
pushed his right flank to the river was the mouth of a wide bayou, and
here two gunboats had taken station. They too were of the toy sort, plated
perhaps with railway metals, perhaps with boiler-iron. They staggered
under a heavy gun or two each. The bayou made an opening in the high bank
of the river. The bank was a parapet, behind which the gunboats crouched,
firing up the bayou as through an embrasure. The enemy was at this
disadvantage: he could not get at the gunboats, and he could advance only
by exposing his flank to their ponderous missiles, one of which would have
broken a half-mile of his bones and made nothing of it. Very annoying this
must have been--these twenty gunners beating back an army because a
sluggish creek had been pleased to fall into a river at one point rather
than another. Such is the part that accident may play in the game of war.

As a spectacle this was rather fine. We could just discern the black
bodies of these boats, looking very much like turtles. But when they let
off their big guns there was a conflagration. The river shuddered in its
banks, and hurried on, bloody, wounded, terrified! Objects a mile away
sprang toward our eyes as a snake strikes at the face of its victim. The
report stung us to the brain, but we blessed it audibly. Then we could
hear the great shell tearing away through the air until the sound died out
in the distance; then, a surprisingly long time afterward, a dull, distant
explosion and a sudden silence of small-arms told their own tale.

IV

There was, I remember, no elephant on the boat that passed us across that
evening, nor, I think, any hippopotamus. These would have been out of
place. We had, however, a woman. Whether the baby was somewhere on board I
did not learn. She was a fine creature, this woman; somebody's wife. Her
mission, as she understood it, was to inspire the failing heart with
courage; and when she selected mine I felt less flattered by her
preference than astonished by her penetration. How did she learn? She
stood on the upper deck with the red blaze of battle bathing her beautiful
face, the twinkle of a thousand rifles mirrored in her eyes; and
displaying a small ivory-handled pistol, she told me in a sentence
punctuated by the thunder of great guns that if it came to the worst she
would do her duty like a man! I am proud to remember that I took off my
hat to this little fool.

V

Along the sheltered strip of beach between the river bank and the water
was a confused mass of humanity--several thousands of men. They were
mostly unarmed; many were wounded; some dead. All the camp-following
tribes were there; all the cowards; a few officers. Not one of them knew
where his regiment was, nor if he had a regiment. Many had not. These men
were defeated, beaten, cowed. They were deaf to duty and dead to shame. A
more demented crew never drifted to the rear of broken battalions. They
would have stood in their tracks and been shot down to a man by a
provost-marshal's guard, but they could not have been urged up that bank.
An army's bravest men are its cowards. The death which they would not meet
at the hands of the enemy they will meet at the hands of their officers,
with never a flinching.

Whenever a steamboat would land, this abominable mob had to be kept off
her with bayonets; when she pulled away, they sprang on her and were
pushed by scores into the water, where they were suffered to drown one
another in their own way. The men disembarking insulted them, shoved them,
struck them. In return they expressed their unholy delight in the
certainty of our destruction by the enemy.

By the time my regiment had reached the plateau night had put an end to
the struggle. A sputter of rifles would break out now and then, followed
perhaps by a spiritless hurrah. Occasionally a shell from a far-away
battery would come pitching down somewhere near, with a whir crescendo, or
flit above our heads with a whisper like that made by the wings of a night
bird, to smother itself in the river. But there was no more fighting. The
gunboats, however, blazed away at set intervals all night long, just to
make the enemy uncomfortable and break him of his rest.

For us there was no rest. Foot by foot we moved through the dusky fields,
we knew not whither. There were men all about us, but no camp-fires; to
have made a blaze would have been madness. The men were of strange
regiments; they mentioned the names of unknown generals. They gathered in
groups by the wayside, asking eagerly our numbers. They recounted the
depressing incidents of the day. A thoughtful officer shut their mouths
with a sharp word as he passed; a wise one coming after encouraged them to
repeat their doleful tale all along the line.

Hidden in hollows and behind clumps of rank brambles were large tents,
dimly lighted with candles, but looking comfortable. The kind of comfort
they supplied was indicated by pairs of men entering and reappearing,
bearing litters; by low moans from within and by long rows of dead with
covered faces outside. These tents were constantly receiving the wounded,
yet were never full; they were continually ejecting the dead, yet were
never empty. It was as if the helpless had been carried in and murdered,
that they might not hamper those whose business it was to fall to-morrow.

The night was now black-dark; as is usual after a battle, it had begun to
rain. Still we moved; we were being put into position by somebody. Inch by
inch we crept along, treading on one another's heels by way of keeping
together. Commands were passed along the line in whispers; more commonly
none were given. When the men had pressed so closely together that they
could advance no farther they stood stock-still, sheltering the locks of
their rifles with their ponchos. In this position many fell asleep. When
those in front suddenly stepped away those in the rear, roused by the
tramping, hastened after with such zeal that the line was soon choked
again. Evidently the head of the division was being piloted at a snail's
pace by some one who did not feel sure of his ground. Very often we struck
our feet against the dead; more frequently against those who still had
spirit enough to resent it with a moan. These were lifted carefully to one
side and abandoned. Some had sense enough to ask in their weak way for
water. Absurd! Their clothes were soaken, their hair dank; their white
faces, dimly discernible, were clammy and cold. Besides, none of us had
any water. There was plenty coming, though, for before midnight a
thunderstorm broke upon us with great violence. The rain, which had for
hours been a dull drizzle, fell with a copiousness that stifled us; we
moved in running water up to our ankles. Happily, we were in a forest of
great trees heavily "decorated" with Spanish moss, or with an enemy
standing to his guns the disclosures of the lightning might have been
inconvenient. As it was, the incessant blaze enabled us to consult our
watches and encouraged us by displaying our numbers; our black, sinuous
line, creeping like a giant serpent beneath the trees, was apparently
interminable. I am almost ashamed to say how sweet I found the
companionship of those coarse men.

So the long night wore away, and as the glimmer of morning crept in
through the forest we found ourselves in a more open country. But where?
Not a sign of battle was here. The trees were neither splintered nor
scarred, the underbrush was unmown, the ground had no footprints but our
own. It was as if we had broken into glades sacred to eternal silence. I
should not have been surprised to see sleek leopards come fawning about
our feet, and milk-white deer confront us with human eyes.

A few inaudible commands from an invisible leader had placed us in order
of battle. But where was the enemy? Where, too, were the riddled regiments
that we had come to save? Had our other divisions arrived during the night
and passed the river to assist us? or were we to oppose our paltry five
thousand breasts to an army flushed with victory? What protected our
right? Who lay upon our left? Was there really anything in our front?

There came, borne to us on the raw morning air, the long, weird note of a
bugle. It was directly before us. It rose with a low, clear, deliberate
warble, and seemed to float in the gray sky like the note of a lark. The
bugle calls of the Federal and the Confederate armies were the same: it
was the "assembly"! As it died away I observed that the atmosphere had
suffered a change; despite the equilibrium established by the storm, it
was electric. Wings were growing on blistered feet. Bruised muscles and
jolted bones, shoulders pounded by the cruel knapsack, eyelids leaden from
lack of sleep--all were pervaded by the subtle fluid, all were unconscious
of their clay. The men thrust forward their heads, expanded their eyes and
clenched their teeth. They breathed hard, as if throttled by tugging at
the leash. If you had laid your hand in the beard or hair of one of these
men it would have crackled and shot sparks.

VI

I suppose the country lying between Corinth and Pittsburg Landing could
boast a few inhabitants other than alligators. What manner of people they
were it is impossible to say, inasmuch as the fighting dispersed, or
possibly exterminated them; perhaps in merely classing them as non-saurian
I shall describe them with sufficient particularity and at the same time
avert from myself the natural suspicion attaching to a writer who points
out to persons who do not know him the peculiarities of persons whom he
does not know. One thing, however, I hope I may without offense affirm of
these swamp-dwellers--they were pious. To what deity their veneration was
given--whether, like the Egyptians, they worshiped the crocodile, or, like
other Americans, adored themselves, I do not presume to guess. But
whoever, or whatever, may have been the divinity whose ends they shaped,
unto Him, or It, they had builded a temple. This humble edifice, centrally
situated in the heart of a solitude, and conveniently accessible to the
supersylvan crow, had been christened Shiloh Chapel, whence the name of
the battle. The fact of a Christian church--assuming it to have been a
Christian church--giving name to a wholesale cutting of Christian throats
by Christian hands need not be dwelt on here; the frequency of its
recurrence in the history of our species has somewhat abated the moral
interest that would otherwise attach to it.

VII

Owing to the darkness, the storm and the absence of a road, it had been
impossible to move the artillery from the open ground about the Landing.
The privation was much greater in a moral than in a material sense. The
infantry soldier feels a confidence in this cumbrous arm quite unwarranted
by its actual achievements in thinning out the opposition. There is
something that inspires confidence in the way a gun dashes up to the
front, shoving fifty or a hundred men to one side as if it said, "_Permit
me!_" Then it squares its shoulders, calmly dislocates a joint in its
back, sends away its twenty-four legs and settles down with a quiet
rattle which says as plainly as possible, "I've come to stay." There is a
superb scorn in its grimly defiant attitude, with its nose in the air; it
appears not so much to threaten the enemy as deride him.

Our batteries were probably toiling after us somewhere; we could only hope
the enemy might delay his attack until they should arrive. "He may delay
his defense if he like," said a sententious young officer to whom I had
imparted this natural wish. He had read the signs aright; the words were
hardly spoken when a group of staff officers about the brigade commander
shot away in divergent lines as if scattered by a whirlwind, and galloping
each to the commander of a regiment gave the word. There was a momentary
confusion of tongues, a thin line of skirmishers detached itself from the
compact front and pushed forward, followed by its diminutive reserves of
half a company each--one of which platoons it was my fortune to command.
When the straggling line of skirmishers had swept four or five hundred
yards ahead, "See," said one of my comrades, "she moves!" She did indeed,
and in fine style, her front as straight as a string, her reserve
regiments in columns doubled on the center, following in true
subordination; no braying of brass to apprise the enemy, no fifing and
drumming to amuse him; no ostentation of gaudy flags; no nonsense. This
was a matter of business.

In a few moments we had passed out of the singular oasis that had so
marvelously escaped the desolation of battle, and now the evidences of the
previous day's struggle were present in profusion. The ground was
tolerably level here, the forest less dense, mostly clear of undergrowth,
and occasionally opening out into small natural meadows. Here and there
were small pools--mere discs of rainwater with a tinge of blood. Riven and
torn with cannon-shot, the trunks of the trees protruded bunches of
splinters like hands, the fingers above the wound interlacing with those
below. Large branches had been lopped, and hung their green heads to the
ground, or swung critically in their netting of vines, as in a hammock.
Many had been cut clean off and their masses of foliage seriously impeded
the progress of the troops. The bark of these trees, from the root upward
to a height of ten or twenty feet, was so thickly pierced with bullets and
grape that one could not have laid a hand on it without covering several
punctures. None had escaped. How the human body survives a storm like this
must be explained by the fact that it is exposed to it but a few moments
at a time, whereas these grand old trees had had no one to take their
places, from the rising to the going down of the sun. Angular bits of
iron, concavo-convex, sticking in the sides of muddy depressions, showed
where shells had exploded in their furrows. Knapsacks, canteens,
haversacks distended with soaken and swollen biscuits, gaping to disgorge,
blankets beaten into the soil by the rain, rifles with bent barrels or
splintered stocks, waist-belts, hats and the omnipresent sardine-box--all
the wretched debris of the battle still littered the spongy earth as far
as one could see, in every direction. Dead horses were everywhere; a few
disabled caissons, or limbers, reclining on one elbow, as it were;
ammunition wagons standing disconsolate behind four or six sprawling
mules. Men? There were men enough; all dead, apparently, except one, who
lay near where I had halted my platoon to await the slower movement of the
line--a Federal sergeant, variously hurt, who had been a fine giant in his
time. He lay face upward, taking in his breath in convulsive, rattling
snorts, and blowing it out in sputters of froth which crawled creamily
down his cheeks, piling itself alongside his neck and ears. A bullet had
clipped a groove in his skull, above the temple; from this the brain
protruded in bosses, dropping off in flakes and strings. I had not
previously known one could get on, even in this unsatisfactory fashion,
with so little brain. One of my men, whom I knew for a womanish fellow,
asked if he should put his bayonet through him. Inexpressibly shocked by
the cold-blooded proposal, I told him I thought not; it was unusual, and
too many were looking.

VIII

It was plain that the enemy had retreated to Corinth. The arrival of our
fresh troops and their successful passage of the river had disheartened
him. Three or four of his gray cavalry videttes moving amongst the trees
on the crest of a hill in our front, and galloping out of sight at the
crack of our skirmishers' rifles, confirmed us in the belief; an army face
to face with its enemy does not employ cavalry to watch its front. True,
they might be a general and his staff. Crowning this rise we found a level
field, a quarter of a mile in width; beyond it a gentle acclivity, covered
with an undergrowth of young oaks, impervious to sight. We pushed on into
the open, but the division halted at the edge. Having orders to conform to
its movements, we halted too; but that did not suit; we received an
intimation to proceed. I had performed this sort of service before, and in
the exercise of my discretion deployed my platoon, pushing it forward at a
run, with trailed arms, to strengthen the skirmish line, which I overtook
some thirty or forty yards from the wood. Then--I can't describe it--the
forest seemed all at once to flame up and disappear with a crash like that
of a great wave upon the beach--a crash that expired in hot hissings, and
the sickening "spat" of lead against flesh. A dozen of my brave fellows
tumbled over like ten-pins. Some struggled to their feet, only to go down
again, and yet again. Those who stood fired into the smoking brush and
doggedly retired. We had expected to find, at most, a line of skirmishers
similar to our own; it was with a view to overcoming them by a sudden
_coup_ at the moment of collision that I had thrown forward my little
reserve. What we had found was a line of battle, coolly holding its fire
till it could count our teeth. There was no more to be done but get back
across the open ground, every superficial yard of which was throwing up
its little jet of mud provoked by an impinging bullet. We got back, most
of us, and I shall never forget the ludicrous incident of a young officer
who had taken part in the affair walking up to his colonel, who had been a
calm and apparently impartial spectator, and gravely reporting: "The enemy
is in force just beyond this field, sir."

IX

In subordination to the design of this narrative, as defined by its title,
the incidents related necessarily group themselves about my own
personality as a center; and, as this center, during the few terrible
hours of the engagement, maintained a variably constant relation to the
open field already mentioned, it is important that the reader should bear
in mind the topographical and tactical features of the local situation.
The hither side of the field was occupied by the front of my brigade--a
length of two regiments in line, with proper intervals for field
batteries. During the entire fight the enemy held the slight wooded
acclivity beyond. The debatable ground to the right and left of the open
was broken and thickly wooded for miles, in some places quite inaccessible
to artillery and at very few points offering opportunities for its
successful employment. As a consequence of this the two sides of the field
were soon studded thickly with confronting guns, which flamed away at one
another with amazing zeal and rather startling effect. Of course, an
infantry attack delivered from either side was not to be thought of when
the covered flanks offered inducements so unquestionably superior; and I
believe the riddled bodies of my poor skirmishers were the only ones left
on this "neutral ground" that day. But there was a very pretty line of
dead continually growing in our rear, and doubtless the enemy had at his
back a similar encouragement.

The configuration of the ground offered us no protection. By lying flat on
our faces between the guns we were screened from view by a straggling row
of brambles, which marked the course of an obsolete fence; but the enemy's
grape was sharper than his eyes, and it was poor consolation to know that
his gunners could not see what they were doing, so long as they did it.
The shock of our own pieces nearly deafened us, but in the brief intervals
we could hear the battle roaring and stammering in the dark reaches of the
forest to the right and left, where our other divisions were dashing
themselves again and again into the smoking jungle. What would we not have
given to join them in their brave, hopeless task! But to lie inglorious
beneath showers of shrapnel darting divergent from the unassailable
sky--meekly to be blown out of life by level gusts of grape--to clench our
teeth and shrink helpless before big shot pushing noisily through the
consenting air--this was horrible! "Lie down, there!" a captain would
shout, and then get up himself to see that his order was obeyed. "Captain,
take cover, sir!" the lieutenant-colonel would shriek, pacing up and down
in the most exposed position that he could find.

O those cursed guns!--not the enemy's, but our own. Had it not been for
them, we might have died like men. They must be supported, forsooth, the
feeble, boasting bullies! It was impossible to conceive that these pieces
were doing the enemy as excellent a mischief as his were doing us; they
seemed to raise their "cloud by day" solely to direct aright the streaming
procession of Confederate missiles. They no longer inspired confidence,
but begot apprehension; and it was with grim satisfaction that I saw the
carriage of one and another smashed into matchwood by a whooping shot and
bundled out of the line.

X

The dense forests wholly or partly in which were fought so many battles of
the Civil War, lay upon the earth in each autumn a thick deposit of dead
leaves and stems, the decay of which forms a soil of surprising depth and
richness. In dry weather the upper stratum is as inflammable as tinder. A
fire once kindled in it will spread with a slow, persistent advance as far
as local conditions permit, leaving a bed of light ashes beneath which the
less combustible accretions of previous years will smolder until
extinguished by rains. In many of the engagements of the war the fallen
leaves took fire and roasted the fallen men. At Shiloh, during the first
day's fighting, wide tracts of woodland were burned over in this way and
scores of wounded who might have recovered perished in slow torture. I
remember a deep ravine a little to the left and rear of the field I have
described, in which, by some mad freak of heroic incompetence, a part of
an Illinois regiment had been surrounded, and refusing to surrender was
destroyed, as it very well deserved. My regiment having at last been
relieved at the guns and moved over to the heights above this ravine for
no obvious purpose, I obtained leave to go down into the valley of death
and gratify a reprehensible curiosity.

Forbidding enough it was in every way. The fire had swept every
superficial foot of it, and at every step I sank into ashes to the ankle.
It had contained a thick undergrowth of young saplings, every one of which
had been severed by a bullet, the foliage of the prostrate tops being
afterward burnt and the stumps charred. Death had put his sickle into this
thicket and fire had gleaned the field. Along a line which was not that of
extreme depression, but was at every point significantly equidistant from
the heights on either hand, lay the bodies, half buried in ashes; some in
the unlovely looseness of attitude denoting sudden death by the bullet,
but by far the greater number in postures of agony that told of the
tormenting flame. Their clothing was half burnt away--their hair and beard
entirely; the rain had come too late to save their nails. Some were
swollen to double girth; others shriveled to manikins. According to degree
of exposure, their faces were bloated and black or yellow and shrunken.
The contraction of muscles which had given them claws for hands had cursed
each countenance with a hideous grin. Faugh! I cannot catalogue the charms
of these gallant gentlemen who had got what they enlisted for.

XI

It was now three o'clock in the afternoon, and raining. For fifteen hours
we had been wet to the skin. Chilled, sleepy, hungry and
disappointed--profoundly disgusted with the inglorious part to which they
had been condemned--the men of my regiment did everything doggedly. The
spirit had gone quite out of them. Blue sheets of powder smoke, drifting
amongst the trees, settling against the hillsides and beaten into
nothingness by the falling rain, filled the air with their peculiar
pungent odor, but it no longer stimulated. For miles on either hand could
be heard the hoarse murmur of the battle, breaking out near by with
frightful distinctness, or sinking to a murmur in the distance; and the
one sound aroused no more attention than the other.

We had been placed again in rear of those guns, but even they and their
iron antagonists seemed to have tired of their feud, pounding away at one
another with amiable infrequency. The right of the regiment extended a
little beyond the field. On the prolongation of the line in that direction
were some regiments of another division, with one in reserve. A third of a
mile back lay the remnant of somebody's brigade looking to its wounds. The
line of forest bounding this end of the field stretched as straight as a
wall from the right of my regiment to Heaven knows what regiment of the
enemy. There suddenly appeared, marching down along this wall, not more
than two hundred yards in our front, a dozen files of gray-clad men with
rifles on the right shoulder. At an interval of fifty yards they were
followed by perhaps half as many more; and in fair supporting distance of
these stalked with confident mien a single man! There seemed to me
something indescribably ludicrous in the advance of this handful of men
upon an army, albeit with their left flank protected by a forest. It does
not so impress me now. They were the exposed flanks of three lines of
infantry, each half a mile in length. In a moment our gunners had grappled
with the nearest pieces, swung them half round, and were pouring streams
of canister into the invaded wood. The infantry rose in masses, springing
into line. Our threatened regiments stood like a wall, their loaded rifles
at "ready," their bayonets hanging quietly in the scabbards. The right
wing of my own regiment was thrown slightly backward to threaten the flank
of the assault. The battered brigade away to the rear pulled itself
together.

Then the storm burst. A great gray cloud seemed to spring out of the
forest into the faces of the waiting battalions. It was received with a
crash that made the very trees turn up their leaves. For one instant the
assailants paused above their dead, then struggled forward, their bayonets
glittering in the eyes that shone behind the smoke. One moment, and those
unmoved men in blue would be impaled. What were they about? Why did they
not fix bayonets? Were they stunned by their own volley? Their inaction
was maddening! Another tremendous crash!--the rear rank had fired!
Humanity, thank Heaven! is not made for this, and the shattered gray mass
drew back a score of paces, opening a feeble fire. Lead had scored its
old-time victory over steel; the heroic had broken its great heart against
the commonplace. There are those who say that it is sometimes otherwise.

All this had taken but a minute of time, and now the second Confederate
line swept down and poured in its fire. The line of blue staggered and
gave way; in those two terrific volleys it seemed to have quite poured out
its spirit. To this deadly work our reserve regiment now came up with a
run. It was surprising to see it spitting fire with never a sound, for
such was the infernal din that the ear could take in no more. This fearful
scene was enacted within fifty paces of our toes, but we were rooted to
the ground as if we had grown there. But now our commanding officer rode
from behind us to the front, waved his hand with the courteous gesture
that says _apres vous_, and with a barely audible cheer we sprang into the
fight. Again the smoking front of gray receded, and again, as the enemy's
third line emerged from its leafy covert, it pushed forward across the
piles of dead and wounded to threaten with protruded steel. Never was seen
so striking a proof of the paramount importance of numbers. Within an area
of three hundred yards by fifty there struggled for front places no fewer
than six regiments; and the accession of each, after the first collision,
had it not been immediately counterpoised, would have turned the scale.

As matters stood, we were now very evenly matched, and how long we might
have held out God only knows. But all at once something appeared to have
gone wrong with the enemy's left; our men had somewhere pierced his line.
A moment later his whole front gave way, and springing forward with fixed
bayonets we pushed him in utter confusion back to his original line. Here,
among the tents from which Grant's people had been expelled the day
before, our broken and disordered regiments inextricably intermingled, and
drunken with the wine of triumph, dashed confidently against a pair of
trim battalions, provoking a tempest of hissing lead that made us stagger
under its very weight. The sharp onset of another against our flank sent
us whirling back with fire at our heels and fresh foes in merciless
pursuit--who in their turn were broken upon the front of the invalided
brigade previously mentioned, which had moved up from the rear to assist
in this lively work.

As we rallied to reform behind our beloved guns and noted the ridiculous
brevity of our line--as we sank from sheer fatigue, and tried to moderate
the terrific thumping of our hearts--as we caught our breath to ask who
had seen such-and-such a comrade, and laughed hysterically at the
reply--there swept past us and over us into the open field a long regiment
with fixed bayonets and rifles on the right shoulder. Another followed,
and another; two--three--four! Heavens! where do all these men come from,
and why did they not come before? How grandly and confidently they go
sweeping on like long blue waves of ocean chasing one another to the cruel
rocks! Involuntarily we draw in our weary feet beneath us as we sit, ready
to spring up and interpose our breasts when these gallant lines shall come
back to us across the terrible field, and sift brokenly through among the
trees with spouting fires at their backs. We still our breathing to catch
the full grandeur of the volleys that are to tear them to shreds. Minute
after minute passes and the sound does not come. Then for the first time
we note that the silence of the whole region is not comparative, but
absolute. Have we become stone deaf? See; here comes a stretcher-bearer,
and there a surgeon! Good heavens! a chaplain!

The battle was indeed at an end.

XII

And this was, O so long ago! How they come back to me--dimly and brokenly,
but with what a magic spell--those years of youth when I was soldiering!
Again I hear the far warble of blown bugles. Again I see the tall, blue
smoke of camp-fires ascending from the dim valleys of Wonderland. There
steals upon my sense the ghost of an odor from pines that canopy the
ambuscade. I feel upon my cheek the morning mist that shrouds the hostile
camp unaware of its doom, and my blood stirs at the ringing rifle-shot of
the solitary sentinel. Unfamiliar landscapes, glittering with sunshine or
sullen with rain, come to me demanding recognition, pass, vanish and give
place to others. Here in the night stretches a wide and blasted field
studded with half-extinct fires burning redly with I know not what presage
of evil. Again I shudder as I note its desolation and its awful silence.
Where was it? To what monstrous inharmony of death was it the visible
prelude?

O days when all the world was beautiful and strange; when unfamiliar
constellations burned in the Southern midnights, and the mocking-bird
poured out his heart in the moon-gilded magnolia; when there was something
new under a new sun; will your fine, far memories ever cease to lay
contrasting pictures athwart the harsher features of this later world,
accentuating the ugliness of the longer and tamer life? Is it not strange
that the phantoms of a blood-stained period have so airy a grace and look
with so tender eyes?--that I recall with difficulty the danger and death
and horrors of the time, and without effort all that was gracious and
picturesque? Ah, Youth, there is no such wizard as thou! Give me but one
touch of thine artist hand upon the dull canvas of the Present; gild for
but one moment the drear and somber scenes of to-day, and I will willingly
surrender an other life than the one that I should have thrown away at
Shiloh.


A LITTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA

The history of that awful struggle is well known--I have not the intention
to record it here, but only to relate some part of what I saw of it; my
purpose not instruction, but entertainment.

I was an officer of the staff of a Federal brigade. Chickamauga was not my
first battle by many, for although hardly more than a boy in years, I had
served at the front from the beginning of the trouble, and had seen enough
of war to give me a fair understanding of it. We knew well enough that
there was to be a fight: the fact that we did not want one would have told
us that, for Bragg always retired when we wanted to fight and fought when
we most desired peace. We had manoeuvred him out of Chattanooga, but had
not manoeuvred our entire army into it, and he fell back so sullenly that
those of us who followed, keeping him actually in sight, were a good deal
more concerned about effecting a junction with the rest of our army than
to push the pursuit. By the time that Rosecrans had got his three
scattered corps together we were a long way from Chattanooga, with our
line of communication with it so exposed that Bragg turned to seize it.
Chickamauga was a fight for possession of a road.

Back along this road raced Crittenden's corps, with those of Thomas and
McCook, which had not before traversed it. The whole army was moving by
its left.

There was sharp fighting all along and all day, for the forest was so
dense that the hostile lines came almost into contact before fighting was
possible. One instance was particularly horrible. After some hours of
close engagement my brigade, with foul pieces and exhausted cartridge
boxes, was relieved and withdrawn to the road to protect several batteries
of artillery--probably two dozen pieces--which commanded an open field in
the rear of our line. Before our weary and virtually disarmed men had
actually reached the guns the line in front gave way, fell back behind the
guns and went on, the Lord knows whither. A moment later the field was
gray with Confederates in pursuit. Then the guns opened fire with grape
and canister and for perhaps five minutes--it seemed an hour--nothing
could be heard but the infernal din of their discharge and nothing seen
through the smoke but a great ascension of dust from the smitten soil.
When all was over, and the dust cloud had lifted, the spectacle was too
dreadful to describe. The Confederates were still there--all of them, it
seemed--some almost under the muzzles of the guns. But not a man of all
these brave fellows was on his feet, and so thickly were all covered with
dust that they looked as if they had been reclothed in yellow.

"We bury our dead," said a gunner, grimly, though doubtless all were
afterward dug out, for some were partly alive.

To a "day of danger" succeeded a "night of waking." The enemy, everywhere
held back from the road, continued to stretch his line northward in the
hope to overlap us and put himself between us and Chattanooga. We neither
saw nor heard his movement, but any man with half a head would have known
that he was making it, and we met it by a parallel movement to our left.
By morning we had edged along a good way and thrown up rude intrenchments
at a little distance from the road, on the threatened side. The day was
not very far advanced when we were attacked furiously all along the line,
beginning at the left. When repulsed, the enemy came again and again--his
persistence was dispiriting. He seemed to be using against us the law of
probabilities: of so many efforts one would eventually succeed.

One did, and it was my luck to see it win. I had been sent by my chief,
General Hazen, to order up some artillery ammunition and rode away to the
right and rear in search of it. Finding an ordnance train I obtained from
the officer in charge a few wagons loaded with what I wanted, but he
seemed in doubt as to our occupancy of the region across which I proposed
to guide them. Although assured that I had just traversed it, and that it
lay immediately behind Wood's division, he insisted on riding to the top
of the ridge behind which his train lay and overlooking the ground. We did
so, when to my astonishment I saw the entire country in front swarming
with Confederates; the very earth seemed to be moving toward us! They came
on in thousands, and so rapidly that we had barely time to turn tail and
gallop down the hill and away, leaving them in possession of the train,
many of the wagons being upset by frantic efforts to put them about. By
what miracle that officer had sensed the situation I did not learn, for we
parted company then and there and I never again saw him.

By a misunderstanding Wood's division had been withdrawn from our line of
battle just as the enemy was making an assault. Through the gap of half a
mile the Confederates charged without opposition, cutting our army clean
in two. The right divisions were broken up and with General Rosecrans in
their midst fled how they could across the country, eventually bringing up
in Chattanooga, whence Rosecrans telegraphed to Washington the destruction
of the rest of his army. The rest of his army was standing its ground.

A good deal of nonsense used to be talked about the heroism of General
Garfield, who, caught in the rout of the right, nevertheless went back and
joined the undefeated left under General Thomas. There was no great
heroism in it; that is what every man should have done, including the
commander of the army. We could hear Thomas's guns going--those of us who
had ears for them--and all that was needful was to make a sufficiently
wide detour and then move toward the sound. I did so myself, and have
never felt that it ought to make me President. Moreover, on my way I met
General Negley, and my duties as topographical engineer having given me
some knowledge of the lay of the land offered to pilot him back to glory
or the grave. I am sorry to say my good offices were rejected a little
uncivilly, which I charitably attributed to the general's obvious absence
of mind. His mind, I think, was in Nashville, behind a breastwork.

Unable to find my brigade, I reported to General Thomas, who directed me
to remain with him. He had assumed command of all the forces still intact
and was pretty closely beset. The battle was fierce and continuous, the
enemy extending his lines farther and farther around our right, toward our
line of retreat. We could not meet the extension otherwise than by
"refusing" our right flank and letting him inclose us; which but for
gallant Gordon Granger he would inevitably have done.

This was the way of it. Looking across the fields in our rear (rather
longingly) I had the happy distinction of a discoverer. What I saw was the
shimmer of sunlight on metal: lines of troops were coming in behind us!
The distance was too great, the atmosphere too hazy to distinguish the
color of their uniform, even with a glass. Reporting my momentous "find" I
was directed by the general to go and see who they were. Galloping toward
them until near enough to see that they were of our kidney I hastened back
with the glad tidings and was sent again, to guide them to the general's
position.

It was General Granger with two strong brigades of the reserve, moving
soldier-like toward the sound of heavy firing. Meeting him and his staff I
directed him to Thomas, and unable to think of anything better to do
decided to go visiting. I knew I had a brother in that gang--an officer of
an Ohio battery. I soon found him near the head of a column, and as we
moved forward we had a comfortable chat amongst such of the enemy's
bullets as had inconsiderately been fired too high. The incident was a
trifle marred by one of them unhorsing another officer of the battery,
whom we propped against a tree and left. A few moments later Granger's
force was put in on the right and the fighting was terrific!

By accident I now found Hazen's brigade--or what remained of it--which had
made a half-mile march to add itself to the unrouted at the memorable
Snodgrass Hill. Hazen's first remark to me was an inquiry about that
artillery ammunition that he had sent me for.

It was needed badly enough, as were other kinds: for the last hour or two
of that interminable day Granger's were the only men that had enough
ammunition to make a five minutes' fight. Had the Confederates made one
more general attack we should have had to meet them with the bayonet
alone. I don't know why they did not; probably they were short of
ammunition. I know, though, that while the sun was taking its own time to
set we lived through the agony of at least one death each, waiting for
them to come on.

At last it grew too dark to fight. Then away to our left and rear some of
Bragg's people set up "the rebel yell." It was taken up successively and
passed round to our front, along our right and in behind us again, until
it seemed almost to have got to the point whence it started. It was the
ugliest sound that any mortal ever heard--even a mortal exhausted and
unnerved by two days of hard fighting, without sleep, without rest,
without food and without hope. There was, however, a space somewhere at
the back of us across which that horrible yell did not prolong itself; and
through that we finally retired in profound silence and dejection,
unmolested.

To those of us who have survived the attacks of both Bragg and Time, and
who keep in memory the dear dead comrades whom we left upon that fateful
field, the place means much. May it mean something less to the younger men
whose tents are now pitched where, with bended heads and clasped hands,
God's great angels stood invisible among the heroes in blue and the heroes
in gray, sleeping their last sleep in the woods of Chickamauga.

_1898_.


THE CRIME AT PICKETT'S MILL

There is a class of events which by their very nature, and despite any
intrinsic interest that they may possess, are foredoomed to oblivion. They
are merged in the general story of those greater events of which they were
a part, as the thunder of a billow breaking on a distant beach is unnoted
in the continuous roar. To how many having knowledge of the battles of our
Civil War does the name Pickett's Mill suggest acts of heroism and
devotion performed in scenes of awful carnage to accomplish the
impossible? Buried in the official reports of the victors there are indeed
imperfect accounts of the engagement: the vanquished have not thought it
expedient to relate it. It is ignored by General Sherman in his memoirs,
yet Sherman ordered it. General Howard wrote an account of the campaign of
which it was an incident, and dismissed it in a single sentence; yet
General Howard planned it, and it was fought as an isolated and
independent action under his eye. Whether it was so trifling an affair as
to justify this inattention let the reader judge.

The fight occurred on the 27th of May, 1864, while the armies of Generals
Sherman and Johnston confronted each other near Dallas, Georgia, during
the memorable "Atlanta campaign." For three weeks we had been pushing the
Confederates southward, partly by manoeuvring, partly by fighting, out of
Dalton, out of Resaca, through Adairsville, Kingston and Cassville. Each
army offered battle everywhere, but would accept it only on its own terms.
At Dallas Johnston made another stand and Sherman, facing the hostile
line, began his customary manoeuvring for an advantage. General Wood's
division of Howard's corps occupied a position opposite the Confederate
right. Johnston finding himself on the 26th overlapped by Schofield, still
farther to Wood's left, retired his right (Polk) across a creek, whither
we followed him into the woods with a deal of desultory bickering, and at
nightfall had established the new lines at nearly a right angle with the
old--Schofield reaching well around and threatening the Confederate rear.

The civilian reader must not suppose when he reads accounts of military
operations in which relative positions of the forces are defined, as in
the foregoing passages, that these were matters of general knowledge to
those engaged. Such statements are commonly made, even by those high in
command, in the light of later disclosures, such as the enemy's official
reports. It is seldom, indeed, that a subordinate officer knows anything
about the disposition of the enemy's forces--except that it is
unaimable--or precisely whom he is fighting. As to the rank and file, they
can know nothing more of the matter than the arms they carry. They hardly
know what troops are upon their own right or left the length of a regiment
away. If it is a cloudy day they are ignorant even of the points of the
compass. It may be said, generally, that a soldier's knowledge of what is
going on about him is coterminous with his official relation to it and his
personal connection with it; what is going on in front of him he does not
know at all until he learns it afterward.

At nine o'clock on the morning of the 27th Wood's division was withdrawn
and replaced by Stanley's. Supported by Johnson's division, it moved at
ten o'clock to the left, in the rear of Schofield, a distance of four
miles through a forest, and at two o'clock in the afternoon had reached a
position where General Howard believed himself free to move in behind the
enemy's forces and attack them in the rear, or at least, striking them in
the flank, crush his way along their line in the direction of its length,
throw them into confusion and prepare an easy victory for a supporting
attack in front. In selecting General Howard for this bold adventure
General Sherman was doubtless not unmindful of Chancellorsville, where
Stonewall Jackson had executed a similar manoeuvre for Howard's
instruction. Experience is a normal school: it teaches how to teach.

There are some differences to be noted. At Chancellorsville it was Jackson
who attacked; at Pickett's Mill, Howard. At Chancellorsville it was Howard
who was assailed; at Pickett's Mill, Hood. The significance of the first
distinction is doubled by that of the second.

The attack, it was understood, was to be made in column of brigades,
Hazen's brigade of Wood's division leading. That such was at least Hazen's
understanding I learned from his own lips during the movement, as I was an
officer of his staff. But after a march of less than a mile an hour and a
further delay of three hours at the end of it to acquaint the enemy of our
intention to surprise him, our single shrunken brigade of fifteen hundred
men was sent forward without support to double up the army of General
Johnston. "We will put in Hazen and see what success he has." In these
words of General Wood to General Howard we were first apprised of the true
nature of the distinction about to be conferred upon us.

General W.B. Hazen, a born fighter, an educated soldier, after the war
Chief Signal Officer of the Army and now long dead, was the best hated man
that I ever knew, and his very memory is a terror to every unworthy soul
in the service. His was a stormy life: he was in trouble all round. Grant,
Sherman, Sheridan and a countless multitude of the less eminent luckless
had the misfortune, at one time and another, to incur his disfavor, and he
tried to punish them all. He was always--after the war--the central figure
of a court-martial or a Congressional inquiry, was accused of everything,
from stealing to cowardice, was banished to obscure posts, "jumped on" by
the press, traduced in public and in private, and always emerged
triumphant. While Signal Officer, he went up against the Secretary of War
and put him to the controversial sword. He convicted Sheridan of
falsehood, Sherman of barbarism, Grant of inefficiency. He was aggressive,
arrogant, tyrannical, honorable, truthful, courageous--skillful soldier, a
faithful friend and one of the most exasperating of men Duty was his
religion, and like the Moslem he proselyted with the sword. His missionary
efforts were directed chiefly against the spiritual darkness of his
superiors in rank, though he would turn aside from pursuit of his erring
commander to set a chicken-thieving orderly astride a wooden horse, with a
heavy stone attached to each foot. "Hazen," said a brother brigadier, "is
a synonym of insubordination." For my commander and my friend, my master
in the art of war, now unable to answer for himself, let this fact answer:
when he heard Wood say they would put him in and see what success he would
have in defeating an army--when he saw Howard assent--he uttered never a
word, rode to the head of his feeble brigade and patiently awaited the
command to go. Only by a look which I knew how to read did he betray his
sense of the criminal blunder.

The enemy had now had seven hours in which to learn of the movement and
prepare to meet it. General Johnston says:

"The Federal troops extended their intrenched line [we did not intrench]
so rapidly to their left that it was found necessary to transfer
Cleburne's division to Hardee's corps to our right, where it was formed on
the prolongation of Polk's line."

General Hood, commanding the enemy's right corps, says:

"On the morning of the 27th the enemy were known to be rapidly extending
their left, attempting to turn my right as they extended. Cleburne was
deployed to meet them, and at half-past five P.M. a very stubborn attack
was made on this division, extending to the right, where Major-General
Wheeler with his cavalry division was engaging them. The assault was
continued with great determination upon both Cleburne and Wheeler."

That, then, was the situation: a weak brigade of fifteen hundred men, with
masses of idle troops behind in the character of audience, waiting for the
word to march a quarter-mile up hill through almost impassable tangles of
underwood, along and across precipitous ravines, and attack breastworks
constructed at leisure and manned with two divisions of troops as good as
themselves. True, we did not know all this, but if any man on that ground
besides Wood and Howard expected a "walkover" his must have been a
singularly hopeful disposition. As topographical engineer it had been my
duty to make a hasty examination of the ground in front. In doing so I had
pushed far enough forward through the forest to hear distinctly the murmur
of the enemy awaiting us, and this had been duly reported; but from our
lines nothing could be heard but the wind among the trees and the songs of
birds. Some one said it was a pity to frighten them, but there would
necessarily be more or less noise. We laughed at that: men awaiting death
on the battlefield laugh easily, though not infectiously.

The brigade was formed in four battalions, two in front and two in rear.
This gave us a front of about two hundred yards. The right front battalion
was commanded by Colonel R.L. Kimberly of the 41st Ohio, the left by
Colonel O.H. Payne of the 124th Ohio, the rear battalions by Colonel J.C.
Foy, 23d Kentucky, and Colonel W.W. Berry, 5th Kentucky--all brave and
skillful officers, tested by experience on many fields. The whole command
(known as the Second Brigade, Third Division, Fourth Corps) consisted of
no fewer than nine regiments, reduced by long service to an average of
less than two hundred men each. With full ranks and only the necessary
details for special duty we should have had some eight thousand rifles in
line.

We moved forward. In less than one minute the trim battalions had become
simply a swarm of men struggling through the undergrowth of the forest,
pushing and crowding. The front was irregularly serrated, the strongest
and bravest in advance, the others following in fan-like formations,
variable and inconstant, ever defining themselves anew. For the first two
hundred yards our course lay along the left bank of a small creek in a
deep ravine, our left battalions sweeping along its steep slope. Then we
came to the fork of the ravine. A part of us crossed below, the rest
above, passing over both branches, the regiments inextricably
intermingled, rendering all military formation impossible. The
color-bearers kept well to the front with their flags, closely furled,
aslant backward over their shoulders. Displayed, they would have been torn
to rags by the boughs of the trees. Horses were all sent to the rear; the
general and staff and all the field officers toiled along on foot as best
they could. "We shall halt and form when we get out of this," said an
aide-de-camp.

Suddenly there were a ringing rattle of musketry, the familiar hissing of
bullets, and before us the interspaces of the forest were all blue with
smoke. Hoarse, fierce yells broke out of a thousand throats. The forward
fringe of brave and hardy assailants was arrested in its mutable
extensions; the edge of our swarm grew dense and clearly defined as the
foremost halted, and the rest pressed forward to align themselves beside
them, all firing. The uproar was deafening; the air was sibilant with
streams and sheets of missiles. In the steady, unvarying roar of
small-arms the frequent shock of the cannon was rather felt than heard,
but the gusts of grape which they blew into that populous wood were
audible enough, screaming among the trees and cracking against their stems
and branches. We had, of course, no artillery to reply.

Our brave color-bearers were now all in the forefront of battle in the
open, for the enemy had cleared a space in front of his breastworks. They
held the colors erect, shook out their glories, waved them forward and
back to keep them spread, for there was no wind. From where I stood, at
the right of the line--we had "halted and formed," indeed--I could see six
of our flags at one time. Occasionally one would go down, only to be
instantly lifted by other hands.

I must here quote again from General Johnston's account of this
engagement, for nothing could more truly indicate the resolute nature of
the attack than the Confederate belief that it was made by the whole
Fourth Corps, instead of one weak brigade:

"The Fourth Corps came on in deep order and assailed the Texans with great
vigor, receiving their close and accurate fire with the fortitude always
exhibited by General Sherman's troops in the actions of this campaign....
The Federal troops approached within a few yards of the Confederates, but
at last were forced to give way by their storm of well-directed bullets,
and fell back to the shelter of a hollow near and behind them. They left
hundreds of corpses within twenty paces of the Confederate line. When the
United States troops paused in their advance within fifteen paces of the
Texan front rank one of their color-bearers planted his colors eight or
ten feet in front of his regiment, and was instantly shot dead. A soldier
sprang forward to his place and fell also as he grasped the color-staff. A
second and third followed successively, and each received death as
speedily as his predecessors. A fourth, however, seized and bore back the
object of soldierly devotion."

Such incidents have occurred in battle from time to time since men began
to venerate the symbols of their cause, but they are not commonly related
by the enemy. If General Johnston had known that his veteran divisions
were throwing their successive lines against fewer than fifteen hundred
men his glowing tribute to his enemy's valor could hardly have been more
generously expressed. I can attest the truth of his soldierly praise: I
saw the occurrence that he relates and regret that I am unable to recall
even the name of the regiment whose colors were so gallantly saved.

Early in my military experience I used to ask myself how it was that brave
troops could retreat while still their courage was high. As long as a man
is not disabled he can go forward; can it be anything but fear that makes
him stop and finally retire? Are there signs by which he can infallibly
know the struggle to be hopeless? In this engagement, as in others, my
doubts were answered as to the fact; the explanation is still obscure. In
many instances which have come under my observation, when hostile lines of
infantry engage at close range and the assailants afterward retire, there
was a "dead-line" beyond which no man advanced but to fall. Not a soul of
them ever reached the enemy's front to be bayoneted or captured. It was a
matter of the difference of three or four paces--too small a distance to
affect the accuracy of aim. In these affairs no aim is taken at individual
antagonists; the soldier delivers his fire at the thickest mass in his
front. The fire is, of course, as deadly at twenty paces as at fifteen; at
fifteen as at ten. Nevertheless, there is the "dead-line," with its
well-defined edge of corpses--those of the bravest. Where both lines are
fighting without cover--as in a charge met by a counter-charge--each has
its "dead-line," and between the two is a clear space--neutral ground,
devoid of dead, for the living cannot reach it to fall there.

I observed this phenomenon at Pickett's Mill. Standing at the right of the
line I had an unobstructed view of the narrow, open space across which the
two lines fought. It was dim with smoke, but not greatly obscured: the
smoke rose and spread in sheets among the branches of the trees. Most of
our men fought kneeling as they fired, many of them behind trees, stones
and whatever cover they could get, but there were considerable groups that
stood. Occasionally one of these groups, which had endured the storm of
missiles for moments without perceptible reduction, would push forward,
moved by a common despair, and wholly detach itself from the line. In a
second every man of the group would be down. There had been no visible
movement of the enemy, no audible change in the awful, even roar of the
firing--yet all were down. Frequently the dim figure of an individual
soldier would be seen to spring away from his comrades, advancing alone
toward that fateful interspace, with leveled bayonet. He got no farther
than the farthest of his predecessors. Of the "hundreds of corpses within
twenty paces of the Confederate line," I venture to say that a third were
within fifteen paces, and not one within ten.

It is the perception--perhaps unconscious--of this inexplicable phenomenon
that causes the still unharmed, still vigorous and still courageous
soldier to retire without having come into actual contact with his foe. He
sees, or feels, that he _cannot_. His bayonet is a useless weapon for
slaughter; its purpose is a moral one. Its mandate exhausted, he sheathes
it and trusts to the bullet. That failing, he retreats. He has done all
that he could do with such appliances as he has.

No command to fall back was given, none could have been heard. Man by man,
the survivors withdrew at will, sifting through the trees into the cover
of the ravines, among the wounded who could drag themselves back; among
the skulkers whom nothing could have dragged forward. The left of our
short line had fought at the corner of a cornfield, the fence along the
right side of which was parallel to the direction of our retreat. As the
disorganized groups fell back along this fence on the wooded side, they
were attacked by a flanking force of the enemy moving through the field in
a direction nearly parallel with what had been our front. This force, I
infer from General Johnston's account, consisted of the brigade of General
Lowry, or two Arkansas regiments under Colonel Baucum. I had been sent by
General Hazen to that point and arrived in time to witness this formidable
movement. But already our retreating men, in obedience to their officers,
their courage and their instinct of self-preservation, had formed along
the fence and opened fire. The apparently slight advantage of the
imperfect cover and the open range worked its customary miracle: the
assault, a singularly spiritless one, considering the advantages it
promised and that it was made by an organized and victorious force against
a broken and retreating one, was checked. The assailants actually retired,
and if they afterward renewed the movement they encountered none but our
dead and wounded.

The battle, as a battle, was at an end, but there was still some
slaughtering that it was possible to incur before nightfall; and as the
wreck of our brigade drifted back through the forest we met the brigade
(Gibson's) which, had the attack been made in column, as it should have
been, would have been but five minutes behind our heels, with another five
minutes behind its own. As it was, just forty-five minutes had elapsed,
during which the enemy had destroyed us and was now ready to perform the
same kindly office for our successors. Neither Gibson nor the brigade
which was sent to his "relief" as tardily as he to ours accomplished, or
could have hoped to accomplish, anything whatever. I did not note their
movements, having other duties, but Hazen in his "Narrative of Military
Service" says:

"I witnessed the attack of the two brigades following my own, and none of
these (troops) advanced nearer than one hundred yards of the enemy's
works. They went in at a run, and as organizations were broken in less
than a minute."

Nevertheless their losses were considerable, including several hundred
prisoners taken from a sheltered place whence they did not care to rise
and run. The entire loss was about fourteen hundred men, of whom nearly
one-half fell killed and wounded in Hazen's brigade in less than thirty
minutes of actual fighting.

General Johnston says:

"The Federal dead lying near our line were counted by many persons,
officers and soldiers. According to these counts there were seven hundred
of them."

This is obviously erroneous, though I have not the means at hand to
ascertain the true number. I remember that we were all astonished at the
uncommonly large proportion of dead to wounded--a consequence of the
uncommonly close range at which most of the fighting was done.

The action took its name from a water-power mill near by. This was on a
branch of a stream having, I am sorry to say, the prosaic name of Pumpkin
Vine Creek. I have my own reasons for suggesting that the name of that
water-course be altered to Sunday-School Run.


FOUR DAYS IN DIXIE

During a part of the month of October, 1864, the Federal and Confederate
armies of Sherman and Hood respectively, having performed a surprising and
resultless series of marches and countermarches since the fall of Atlanta,
confronted each other along the separating line of the Coosa River in the
vicinity of Gaylesville, Alabama. Here for several days they remained at
rest--at least most of the infantry and artillery did; what the cavalry
was doing nobody but itself ever knew or greatly cared. It was an
interregnum of expectancy between two régimes of activity.

I was on the staff of Colonel McConnell, who commanded an infantry brigade
in the absence of its regular commander. McConnell was a good man, but he
did not keep a very tight rein upon the half dozen restless and reckless
young fellows who (for his sins) constituted his "military family." In
most matters we followed the trend of our desires, which commonly ran in
the direction of adventure--it did not greatly matter what kind. In
pursuance of this policy of escapades, one bright Sunday morning
Lieutenant Cobb, an aide-de-camp, and I mounted and set out to "seek our
fortunes," as the story books have it. Striking into a road of which we
knew nothing except that it led toward the river, we followed it for a
mile or such a matter, when we found our advance interrupted by a
considerable creek, which we must ford or go back. We consulted a moment
and then rode at it as hard as we could, possibly in the belief that a
high momentum would act as it does in the instance of a skater passing
over thin ice. Cobb was fortunate enough to get across comparatively dry,
but his hapless companion was utterly submerged. The disaster was all the
greater from my having on a resplendent new uniform, of which I had been
pardonably vain. Ah, what a gorgeous new uniform it never was again!

A half-hour devoted to wringing my clothing and dry-charging my revolver,
and we were away. A brisk canter of a half-hour under the arches of the
trees brought us to the river, where it was our ill luck to find a boat
and three soldiers of our brigade. These men had been for several hours
concealed in the brush patiently watching the opposite bank in the amiable
hope of getting a shot at some unwary Confederate, but had seen none. For
a great distance up and down the stream on the other side, and for at
least a mile back from it, extended cornfields. Beyond the cornfields, on
slightly higher ground, was a thin forest, with breaks here and there in
its continuity, denoting plantations, probably. No houses were in sight,
and no camps. We knew that it was the enemy's ground, but whether his
forces were disposed along the slightly higher country bordering the
bottom lands, or at strategic points miles back, as ours were, we knew no
more than the least curious private in our army. In any case the river
line would naturally be picketed or patrolled. But the charm of the
unknown was upon us: the mysterious exerted its old-time fascination,
beckoning to us from that silent shore so peaceful and dreamy in the
beauty of the quiet Sunday morning. The temptation was strong and we fell.
The soldiers were as eager for the hazard as we, and readily volunteered
for the madmen's enterprise. Concealing our horses in a cane-brake, we
unmoored the boat and rowed across unmolested.

Arrived at a kind of "landing" on the other side, our first care was so to
secure the boat under the bank as to favor a hasty re-embarking in case we
should be so unfortunate as to incur the natural consequence of our act;
then, following an old road through the ranks of standing corn, we moved
in force upon the Confederate position, five strong, with an armament of
three Springfield rifles and two Colt's revolvers. We had not the further
advantage of music and banners. One thing favored the expedition, giving
it an apparent assurance of success: it was well officered--an officer to
each man and a half.

After marching about a mile we came into a neck of woods and crossed an
intersecting road which showed no wheel-tracks, but was rich in
hoof-prints. We observed them and kept right on about our business,
whatever that may have been. A few hundred yards farther brought us to a
plantation bordering our road upon the right. The fields, as was the
Southern fashion at that period of the war, were uncultivated and
overgrown with brambles. A large white house stood at some little distance
from the road; we saw women and children and a few negroes there. On our
left ran the thin forest, pervious to cavalry. Directly ahead an ascent in
the road formed a crest beyond which we could see nothing.

On this crest suddenly appeared two horsemen in gray, sharply outlined
against the sky--men and animals looking gigantic. At the same instant a
jingling and tramping were audible behind us, and turning in that
direction I saw a score of mounted men moving forward at a trot. In the
meantime the giants on the crest had multiplied surprisingly. Our invasion
of the Gulf States had apparently failed.

There was lively work in the next few seconds. The shots were thick and
fast--and uncommonly loud; none, I think, from our side. Cobb was on the
extreme left of our advance, I on the right--about two paces apart. He
instantly dived into the wood. The three men and I climbed across the
fence somehow and struck out across the field--actuated, doubtless, by an
intelligent forethought: men on horseback could not immediately follow.
Passing near the house, now swarming like a hive of bees, we made for a
swamp two or three hundred yards away, where I concealed myself in a
jungle, the others continuing--as a defeated commander would put it--to
fall back. In my cover, where I lay panting like a hare, I could hear a
deal of shouting and hard riding and an occasional shot. I heard some one
calling dogs, and the thought of bloodhounds added its fine suggestiveness
to the other fancies appropriate to the occasion.

Finding myself unpursued after the lapse of what seemed an hour, but was
probably a few minutes, I cautiously sought a place where, still
concealed, I could obtain a view of the field of glory. The only enemy in
sight was a group of horsemen on a hill a quarter of a mile away. Toward
this group a woman was running, followed by the eyes of everybody about
the house. I thought she had discovered my hiding-place and was going to
"give me away." Taking to my hands and knees I crept as rapidly as
possible among the clumps of brambles directly back toward the point in
the road where we had met the enemy and failed to make him ours. There I
dragged myself into a patch of briars within ten feet of the road, where I
lay undiscovered during the remainder of the day, listening to a variety
of disparaging remarks upon Yankee valor and to dispiriting declarations
of intention conditional on my capture, as members of the Opposition
passed and repassed and paused in the road to discuss the morning's
events. In this way I learned that the three privates had been headed off
and caught within ten minutes. Their destination would naturally be
Andersonville; what further became of them God knows. Their captors passed
the day making a careful canvass of the swamp for me.

When night had fallen I cautiously left my place of concealment, dodged
across the road into the woods and made for the river through the mile of
corn. Such corn! It towered above me like a forest, shutting out all the
starlight except what came from directly overhead. Many of the ears were a
yard out of reach. One who has never seen an Alabama river-bottom
cornfield has not exhausted nature's surprises; nor will he know what
solitude is until he explores one in a moonless night.

I came at last to the river bank with its fringe of trees and willows and
canes. My intention was to swim across, but the current was swift, the
water forbiddingly dark and cold. A mist obscured the other bank. I could
not, indeed, see the water more than a few yards out. It was a hazardous
and horrible undertaking, and I gave it up, following cautiously along the
bank in search of the spot where we had moored the boat. True, it was
hardly likely that the landing was now unguarded, or, if so, that the boat
was still there. Cobb had undoubtedly made for it, having an even more
urgent need than I; but hope springs eternal in the human breast, and
there was a chance that he had been killed before reaching it. I came at
last into the road that we had taken and consumed half the night in
cautiously approaching the landing, pistol in hand and heart in mouth. The
boat was gone! I continued my journey along the stream--in search of
another.

My clothing was still damp from my morning bath, my teeth rattled with
cold, but I kept on along the stream until I reached the limit of the
cornfields and entered a dense wood. Through this I groped my way, inch by
inch, when, suddenly emerging from a thicket into a space slightly more
open, I came upon a smoldering camp-fire surrounded by prostrate figures
of men, upon one of whom I had almost trodden. A sentinel, who ought to
have been shot, sat by the embers, his carbine across his lap, his chin
upon his breast. Just beyond was a group of unsaddled horses. The men were
asleep; the sentinel was asleep; the horses were asleep. There was
something indescribably uncanny about it all. For a moment I believed them
all lifeless, and O'Hara's familiar line, "The bivouac of the dead,"
quoted itself in my consciousness. The emotion that I felt was that
inspired by a sense of the supernatural; of the actual and imminent peril
of my position I had no thought. When at last it occurred to me I felt it
as a welcome relief, and stepping silently back into the shadow retraced
my course without having awakened a soul. The vividness with which I can
now recall that scene is to me one of the marvels of memory.

Getting my bearings again with some difficulty, I now made a wide detour
to the left, in the hope of passing around this outpost and striking the
river beyond. In this mad attempt I ran upon a more vigilant sentinel,
posted in the heart of a thicket, who fired at me without challenge. To a
soldier an unexpected shot ringing out at dead of night is fraught with an
awful significance. In my circumstances--cut off from my comrades, groping
about an unknown country, surrounded by invisible perils which such a
signal would call into eager activity--the flash and shock of that firearm
were unspeakably dreadful! In any case I should and ought to have fled,
and did so; but how much or little of conscious prudence there was in the
prompting I do not care to discover by analysis of memory. I went back
into the corn, found the river, followed it back a long way and mounted
into the fork of a low tree. There I perched until the dawn, a most
uncomfortable bird.

In the gray light of the morning I discovered that I was opposite an
island of considerable length, separated from the mainland by a narrow and
shallow channel, which I promptly waded. The island was low and flat,
covered with an almost impenetrable cane-brake interlaced with vines.
Working my way through these to the other side, I obtained another look at
God's country--Shermany, so to speak. There were no visible inhabitants.
The forest and the water met. This did not deter me. For the chill of the
water I had no further care, and laying off my boots and outer clothing I
prepared to swim. A strange thing now occurred--more accurately, a
familiar thing occurred at a strange moment. A black cloud seemed to pass
before my eyes--the water, the trees, the sky, all vanished in a profound
darkness. I heard the roaring of a great cataract, felt the earth sinking
from beneath my feet. Then I heard and felt no more.

At the battle of Kennesaw Mountain in the previous June I had been badly
wounded in the head, and for three months was incapacitated for service.
In truth, I had done no actual duty since, being then, as for many years
afterward, subject to fits of fainting, sometimes without assignable
immediate cause, but mostly when suffering from exposure, excitement or
excessive fatigue. This combination of them all had broken me down--most
opportunely, it would seem.

When I regained my consciousness the sun was high. I was still giddy and
half blind. To have taken to the water would have been madness; I must
have a raft. Exploring my island, I found a pen of slender logs: an old
structure without roof or rafters, built for what purpose I do not know.
Several of these logs I managed with patient toil to detach and convey to
the water, where I floated them, lashing them together with vines. Just
before sunset my raft was complete and freighted with my outer clothing,
boots and pistol. Having shipped the last article, I returned into the
brake, seeking something from which to improvise a paddle. While peering
about I heard a sharp metallic click--the cocking of a rifle! I was a
prisoner.

The history of this great disaster to the Union arms is brief and simple.
A Confederate "home guard," hearing something going on upon the island,
rode across, concealed his horse and still-hunted me. And, reader, when
you are "held up" in the same way may it be by as fine a fellow. He not
only spared my life, but even overlooked a feeble and ungrateful
after-attempt upon his own (the particulars of which I shall not relate),
merely exacting my word of honor that I would not again try to escape
while in his custody. Escape! I could not have escaped a new-born babe.

At my captor's house that evening there was a reception, attended by the
élite of the whole vicinity. A Yankee officer in full fig--minus only the
boots, which could not be got on to his swollen feet--was something worth
seeing, and those who came to scoff remained to stare. What most
interested them, I think, was my eating--an entertainment that was
prolonged to a late hour. They were a trifle disappointed by the absence
of horns, hoof and tail, but bore their chagrin with good-natured
fortitude. Among my visitors was a charming young woman from the
plantation where we had met the foe the day before--the same lady whom I
had suspected of an intention to reveal my hiding-place. She had had no
such design; she had run over to the group of horsemen to learn if her
father had been hurt--by whom, I should like to know. No restraint was put
upon me; my captor even left me with the women and children and went off
for instructions as to what disposition he should make of me. Altogether
the reception was "a pronounced success," though it is to be regretted
that the guest of the evening had the incivility to fall dead asleep in
the midst of the festivities, and was put to bed by sympathetic and, he
has reason to believe, fair hands.

The next morning I was started off to the rear in custody of two mounted
men, heavily armed. They had another prisoner, picked up in some raid
beyond the river. He was a most offensive brute--a foreigner of some
mongrel sort, with just sufficient command of our tongue to show that he
could not control his own. We traveled all day, meeting occasional small
bodies of cavalrymen, by whom, with one exception--a Texan officer--was
civilly treated. My guards said, however, that if we should chance to meet
Jeff Gatewood he would probably take me from them and hang me to the
nearest tree; and once or twice, hearing horsemen approach, they directed
me to stand aside, concealed in the brush, one of them remaining near by
to keep an eye on me, the other going forward with my fellow-prisoner, for
whose neck they seemed to have less tenderness, and whom I heartily wished
well hanged.

Jeff Gatewood was a "guerrilla" chief of local notoriety, who was a
greater terror to his friends than to his other foes. My guards related
almost incredible tales of his cruelties and infamies. By their account it
was into his camp that I had blundered on Sunday night.

We put up for the night at a farmhouse, having gone not more than fifteen
miles, owing to the condition of my feet. Here we got a bite of supper and
were permitted to lie before the fire. My fellow-prisoner took off his
boots and was soon sound asleep. I took off nothing and, despite
exhaustion, remained equally sound awake. One of the guards also removed
his footgear and outer clothing, placed his weapons under his neck and
slept the sleep of innocence; the other sat in the chimney corner on
watch. The house was a double log cabin, with an open space between the
two parts, roofed over--a common type of habitation in that region. The
room we were in had its entrance in this open space, the fireplace
opposite, at the end. Beside the door was a bed, occupied by the old man
of the house and his wife. It was partly curtained off from the room.

In an hour or two the chap on watch began to yawn, then to nod. Pretty
soon he stretched himself on the floor, facing us, pistol in hand. For a
while he supported himself on his elbow, then laid his head on his arm,
blinking like an owl. I performed an occasional snore, watching him
narrowly between my eyelashes from the shadow of my arm. The inevitable
occurred--he slept audibly.

A half-hour later I rose quietly to my feet, particularly careful not to
disturb the blackguard at my side, and moved as silently as possible to
the door. Despite my care the latch clicked. The old lady sat bolt upright
in bed and stared at me. She was too late. I sprang through the door and
struck out for the nearest point of woods, in a direction previously
selected, vaulting fences like an accomplished gymnast and followed by a
multitude of dogs. It is said that the State of Alabama has more dogs than
school-children, and that they cost more for their keep. The estimate of
cost is probably too high.

Looking backward as I ran, I saw and heard the place in a turmoil and
uproar; and to my joy the old man, evidently oblivious to the facts of the
situation, was lifting up his voice and calling his dogs. They were good
dogs: they went back; otherwise the malicious old rascal would have had my
skeleton. Again the traditional bloodhound did not materialize. Other
pursuit there was no reason to fear; my foreign gentleman would occupy the
attention of one of the soldiers, and in the darkness of the forest I
could easily elude the other, or, if need be, get him at a disadvantage.
In point of fact there was no pursuit.

I now took my course by the north star (which I can never sufficiently
bless), avoiding all roads and open places about houses, laboriously
boring my way through forests, driving myself like a wedge into brush and
bramble, swimming every stream I came to (some of them more than once,
probably), and pulling myself out of the water by boughs and
briars--whatever could be grasped. Let any one try to go a little way
across even the most familiar country on a moonless night, and he will
have an experience to remember. By dawn I had probably not made three
miles. My clothing and skin were alike in rags.

During the day I was compelled to make wide detours to avoid even the
fields, unless they were of corn; but in other respects the going was
distinctly better. A light breakfast of raw sweet potatoes and persimmons
cheered the inner man; a good part of the outer was decorating the several
thorns, boughs and sharp rocks along my sylvan wake.

Late in the afternoon I found the river, at what point it was impossible
to say. After a half-hour's rest, concluding with a fervent prayer that I
might go to the bottom, I swam across. Creeping up the bank and holding my
course still northward through a dense undergrowth, I suddenly reeled into
a dusty highway and saw a more heavenly vision than ever the eyes of a
dying saint were blessed withal--two patriots in blue carrying a stolen
pig slung upon a pole!

Late that evening Colonel McConnell and his staff were chatting by a
camp-fire in front of his headquarters. They were in a pleasant humor:
some one had just finished a funny story about a man cut in two by a
cannon-shot. Suddenly something staggered in among them from the outer
darkness and fell into the fire. Somebody dragged it out by what seemed to
be a leg. They turned the animal on its back and examined it--they were no
cowards.

"What is it, Cobb?" said the chief, who had not taken the trouble to rise.

"I don't know, Colonel, but thank God it is dead!"

It was not.


WHAT OCCURRED AT FRANKLIN

For several days, in snow and rain, General Schofield's little army had
crouched in its hastily constructed defenses at Columbia, Tennessee. It
had retreated in hot haste from Pulaski, thirty miles to the south,
arriving just in time to foil Hood, who, marching from Florence, Alabama,
by another road, with a force of more than double our strength, had hoped
to intercept us. Had he succeeded, he would indubitably have bagged the
whole bunch of us. As it was, he simply took position in front of us and
gave us plenty of employment, but did not attack; he knew a trick worth
two of that.

Duck River was directly in our rear; I suppose both our flanks rested on
it. The town was between them. One night--that of November 27, 1864--we
pulled up stakes and crossed to the north bank to continue our retreat to
Nashville, where Thomas and safety lay--such safety as is known in war. It
was high time too, for before noon of the next day Forrest's cavalry
forded the river a few miles above us and began pushing back our own horse
toward Spring Hill, ten miles in our rear, on our only road. Why our
infantry was not immediately put in motion toward the threatened point, so
vital to our safety, General Schofield could have told better than I.
Howbeit, we lay there inactive all day.

The next morning--a bright and beautiful one--the brigade of Colonel P.
Sidney Post was thrown out, up the river four or five miles, to see what
it could see. What it saw was Hood's head-of-column coming over on a
pontoon bridge, and a right pretty spectacle it would have been to one
whom it did not concern. It concerned us rather keenly.

As a member of Colonel Post's staff, I was naturally favored with a good
view of the performance. We formed in line of battle at a distance of
perhaps a half-mile from the bridge-head, but that unending column of gray
and steel gave us no more attention than if we had been a crowd of
farmer-folk. Why should it? It had only to face to the left to be itself a
line of battle. Meantime it had more urgent business on hand than brushing
away a small brigade whose only offense was curiosity; it was making for
Spring Hill with all its legs and wheels. Hour after hour we watched that
unceasing flow of infantry and artillery toward the rear of our army. It
was an unnerving spectacle, yet we never for a moment doubted that, acting
on the intelligence supplied by our succession of couriers, our entire
force was moving rapidly to the point of contact. The battle of Spring
Hill was obviously decreed. Obviously, too, our brigade of observation
would be among the last to have a hand in it. The thought annoyed us, made
us restless and resentful. Our mounted men rode forward and back behind
the line, nervous and distressed; the men in the ranks sought relief in
frequent changes of posture, in shifting their weight from one leg to the
other, in needless inspection of their weapons and in that unfailing
resource of the discontented soldier, audible damning of those in the
saddles of authority. But never for more than a moment at a time did any
one remove his eyes from that fascinating and portentous pageant.

Toward evening we were recalled, to learn that of our five divisions of
infantry, with their batteries, numbering twenty-three thousand men, only
one--Stanley's, four thousand weak--had been sent to Spring Hill to meet
that formidable movement of Hood's three veteran corps! Why Stanley was
not immediately effaced is still a matter of controversy. Hood, who was
early on the ground, declared that he gave the needful orders and tried
vainly to enforce them; Cheatham, in command of his leading corps, that he
did not. Doubtless the dispute is still being carried on between these
chieftains from their beds of asphodel and moly in Elysium. So much is
certain: Stanley drove away Forrest and successfully held the junction of
the roads against Cleburne's division, the only infantry that attacked
him.

That night the entire Confederate army lay within a half mile of our road,
while we all sneaked by, infantry, artillery, and trains. The enemy's
camp-fires shone redly--miles of them--seemingly only a stone's throw from
our hurrying column. His men were plainly visible about them, cooking
their suppers--a sight so incredible that many of our own, thinking them
friends, strayed over to them and did not return. At intervals of a few
hundred yards we passed dim figures on horseback by the roadside,
enjoining silence. Needless precaution; we could not have spoken if we had
tried, for our hearts were in our throats. But fools are God's peculiar
care, arid one of his protective methods is the stupidity of other fools.
By daybreak our last man and last wagon had passed the fateful spot
unchallenged, and our first were entering Franklin, ten miles away.
Despite spirited cavalry attacks on trains and rear-guard, all were in
Franklin by noon and such of the men as could be kept awake were throwing
up a slight line of defense, inclosing the town.

Franklin lies--or at that time did lie; I know not what exploration might
now disclose--on the south bank of a small river, the Harpeth by name. For
two miles southward was a nearly flat, open plain, extending to a range of
low hills through which passed the turnpike by which we had come. From
some bluffs on the precipitous north bank of the river was a commanding
overlook of all this open ground, which, although more than a mile away,
seemed almost at one's feet. On this elevated ground the wagon-train had
been parked and General Schofield had stationed himself--the former for
security, the latter for outlook. Both were guarded by General Wood's
infantry division, of which my brigade was a part. "We are in beautiful
luck," said a member of the division staff. With some prevision of what
was to come and a lively recollection of the nervous strain of helpless
observation, I did not think it luck. In the activity of battle one does
not feel one's hair going gray with vicissitudes of emotion.

For some reason to the writer unknown General Schofield had brought along
with him General D.S. Stanley, who commanded two of his divisions--ours
and another, which was not "in luck." In the ensuing battle, when this
excellent officer could stand the strain no longer, he bolted across the
bridge like a shot and found relief in the hell below, where he was
promptly tumbled out of the saddle by a bullet.

Our line, with its reserve brigades, was about a mile and a half long,
both flanks on the river, above and below the town--a mere bridge-head. It
did not look a very formidable obstacle to the march of an army of more
than forty thousand men. In a more tranquil temper than his failure at
Spring Hill had put him into Hood would probably have passed around our
left and turned us out with ease--which would justly have entitled him to
the Humane Society's great gold medal. Apparently that was not his day for
saving life.

About the middle of the afternoon our field-glasses picked up the
Confederate head-of-column emerging from the range of hills previously
mentioned, where it is cut by the Columbia road. But--ominous
circumstance!--it did not come on. It turned to its left, at a right
angle, moving along the base of the hills, parallel to our line. Other
heads-of-column came through other gaps and over the crests farther along,
impudently deploying on the level ground with a spectacular display of
flags and glitter of arms. I do not remember that they were molested, even
by the guns of General Wagner, who had been foolishly posted with two
small brigades across the turnpike, a half-mile in our front, where he was
needless for apprisal and powerless for resistance. My recollection is
that our fellows down there in their shallow trenches noted these
portentous dispositions without the least manifestation of incivility. As
a matter of fact, many of them were permitted by their compassionate
officers to sleep. And truly it was good weather for that: sleep was in
the very atmosphere. The sun burned crimson in a gray-blue sky through a
delicate Indian-summer haze, as beautiful as a day-dream in paradise. If
one had been given to moralizing one might have found material a-plenty
for homilies in the contrast between that peaceful autumn afternoon and
the bloody business that it had in hand. If any good chaplain failed to
"improve the occasion" let us hope that he lived to lament in
sack-cloth-of-gold and ashes-of-roses his intellectual unthrift.

The putting of that army into battle shape--its change from columns into
lines--could not have occupied more than an hour or two, yet it seemed an
eternity. Its leisurely evolutions were irritating, but at last it moved
forward with atoning rapidity and the fight was on. First, the storm
struck Wagner's isolated brigades, which, vanishing in fire and smoke,
instantly reappeared as a confused mass of fugitives inextricably
intermingled with their pursuers. They had not stayed the advance a
moment, and as might have been foreseen were now a peril to the main line,
which could protect itself only by the slaughter of its friends. To the
right and left, however, our guns got into play, and simultaneously a
furious infantry fire broke out along the entire front, the paralyzed
center excepted. But nothing could stay those gallant rebels from a
hand-to-hand encounter with bayonet and butt, and it was accorded to them
with hearty good-will.

Meantime Wagner's conquerors were pouring across the breastwork like water
over a dam. The guns that had spared the fugitives had now no time to
fire; their infantry supports gave way and for a space of more than two
hundred yards in the very center of our line the assailants, mad with
exultation, had everything their own way. From the right and the left
their gray masses converged into the gap, pushed through, and then,
spreading, turned our men out of the works so hardly held against the
attack in their front. From our viewpoint on the bluff we could mark the
constant widening of the gap, the steady encroachment of that blazing and
smoking mass against its disordered opposition.

"It is all up with us," said Captain Dawson, of Wood's staff; "I am going
to have a quiet smoke."

I do not doubt that he supposed himself to have borne the heat and burden
of the strife. In the midst of his preparations for a smoke he paused and
looked again--a new tumult of musketry had broken loose. Colonel Emerson
Opdycke had rushed his reserve brigade into the _mêlée_ and was bitterly
disputing the Confederate advantage. Other fresh regiments joined in the
countercharge, commanderless groups of retreating men returned to their
work, and there ensued a hand-to-hand contest of incredible fury. Two
long, irregular, mutable, and tumultuous blurs of color were consuming
each other's edge along the line of contact. Such devil's work does not
last long, and we had the great joy to see it ending, not as it began, but
"more nearly to the heart's desire." Slowly the mobile blur moved away
from the town, and presently the gray half of it dissolved into its
elemental units, all in slow recession. The retaken guns in the embrasures
pushed up towering clouds of white smoke; to east and to west along the
reoccupied parapet ran a line of misty red till the spitfire crest was
without a break from flank to flank. Probably there was some Yankee
cheering, as doubtless there had been the "rebel yell," but my memory
recalls neither. There are many battles in a war, and many incidents in a
battle: one does not recollect everything. Possibly I have not a retentive
ear.

While this lively work had been doing in the center, there had been no
lack of diligence elsewhere, and now all were as busy as bees. I have read
of many "successive attacks"--"charge after charge"--but I think the only
assaults after the first were those of the second Confederate lines and
possibly some of the reserves; certainly there were no visible abatement
and renewal of effort anywhere except where the men who had been pushed
out of the works backward tried to reenter. And all the time there was
fighting.

After resetting their line the victors could not clear their front, for
the baffled assailants would not desist. All over the open country in
their rear, clear back to the base of the hills, drifted the wreck of
battle, the wounded that were able to walk; and through the receding
throng pushed forward, here and there, horsemen with orders and footmen
whom we knew to be bearing ammunition. There were no wagons, no caissons:
the enemy was not using, and could not use, his artillery. Along the line
of fire we could see, dimly in the smoke, mounted officers, singly and in
small groups, attempting to force their horses across the slight parapet,
but all went down. Of this devoted band was the gallant General Adams,
whose body was found upon the slope, and whose animal's forefeet were
actually inside the crest. General Cleburne lay a few paces farther out,
and five or six other general officers sprawled elsewhere. It was a great
day for Confederates in the line of promotion.

For many minutes at a time broad spaces of battle were veiled in smoke. Of
what might be occurring there conjecture gave a terrifying report. In a
visible peril observation is a kind of defense; against the unseen we lift
a trembling hand. Always from these regions of obscurity we expected the
worst, but always the lifted cloud revealed an unaltered situation.

The assailants began to give way. There was no general retreat; at many
points the fight continued, with lessening ferocity and lengthening range,
well into the night. It became an affair of twinkling musketry and broad
flares of artillery; then it sank to silence in the dark.

Under orders to continue his retreat, Schofield could now do so
unmolested: Hood had suffered so terrible a loss in life and _morale_ that
he was in no condition for effective pursuit. As at Spring Hill, daybreak
found us on the road with all our impedimenta except some of our wounded,
and that night we encamped under the protecting guns of Thomas, at
Nashville. Our gallant enemy audaciously followed, and fortified himself
within rifle-reach, where he remained for two weeks without firing a gun
and was then destroyed.


'WAY DOWN IN ALABAM'

At the break-up of the great Rebellion I found myself at Selma, Alabama,
still in the service of the United States, and although my duties were now
purely civil my treatment was not uniformly so, and I am not surprised
that it was not. I was a minor official in the Treasury Department,
engaged in performance of duties exceedingly disagreeable not only to the
people of the vicinity, but to myself as well. They consisted in the
collection and custody of "captured and abandoned property." The Treasury
had covered pretty nearly the entire area of "the States lately in
rebellion" with a hierarchy of officials, consisting, as nearly as memory
serves, of one supervising agent and a multitude of special agents. Each
special agent held dominion over a collection district and was allowed an
"agency aide" to assist him in his purposeful activity, besides such
clerks, laborers and so forth as he could persuade himself to need. My
humble position was that of agency aide. When the special agent was
present for duty I was his chief executive officer; in his absence I
represented him (with greater or less fidelity to the original and to my
conscience) and was invested with his powers. In the Selma agency the
property that we were expected to seize and defend as best we might was
mostly plantations (whose owners had disappeared; some were dead, others
in hiding) and cotton. The country was full of cotton which had been sold
to the Confederate Government, but not removed from the plantations to
take its chance of export through the blockade. It had been decided that
it now belonged to the United States. It was worth about five hundred
dollars a bale--say one dollar a pound. The world agreed that that was a
pretty good price for cotton.

Naturally the original owners, having received nothing for their product
but Confederate money which the result of the war had made worthless,
manifested an unamiable reluctance to give it up, for if they could market
it for themselves it would more than recoup them for all their losses in
the war. They had therefore exercised a considerable ingenuity in effacing
all record of its transfer to the Confederate Government, obliterating the
marks on the bales, and hiding these away in swamps and other
inconspicuous places, fortifying their claims to private ownership with
appalling affidavits and "covering their tracks" in an infinite variety of
ways generally.

In effecting their purpose they encountered many difficulties. Cotton in
bales is not very portable property; it requires for movement and
concealment a good deal of coöperation by persons having no interest in
keeping the secret and easily accessible to the blandishments of those
interested in tracing it. The negroes, by whom the work was necessarily
done, were zealous to pay for emancipation by fidelity to the new
_régime_, and many poor devils among them forfeited their lives by
services performed with more loyalty than discretion. Railways--even those
having a more than nominal equipment of rails and rolling stock--were
unavailable for secret conveyance of the cotton. Navigating the Alabama
and Tombigbee rivers were a few small steamboats, the half-dozen pilots
familiar with these streams exacting one hundred dollars a day for their
services; but our agents, backed by military authority, were at all the
principal shipping points and no boat could leave without their consent.
The port of Mobile was in our hands and the lower waters were patrolled by
gunboats. Cotton might, indeed, be dumped down a "slide" by night at some
private landing and fall upon the deck of a steamer idling innocently
below. It might even arrive at Mobile, but secretly to transfer it to a
deep-water vessel and get it out of the country--that was a dream.

On the movement of private cotton we put no restrictions; and such were
the freight rates that it was possible to purchase a steamboat at Mobile,
go up the river in ballast, bring down a cargo of cotton and make a
handsome profit, after deducting the cost of the boat and all expenses of
the venture, including the wage of the pilot. With no great knowledge of
"business" I venture to think that in Alabama in the latter part of the
year of grace 1865 commercial conditions were hardly normal.

Nor were social conditions what I trust they have now become. There was no
law in the country except of the unsatisfactory sort known as "martial,"
and that was effective only within areas covered by the guns of isolated
forts and the physical activities of their small garrisons. True, there
were the immemorial laws of self-preservation and retaliation, both of
which were liberally interpreted. The latter was faithfully administered,
mostly against straggling Federal soldiers and too zealous government
officials. When my chief had been ordered to Selma he had arrived just in
time to act as sole mourner at the funeral of his predecessor--who had had
the bad luck to interpret his instructions in a sense that was
disagreeable to a gentleman whose interests were affected by the
interpretation. Early one pleasant morning shortly afterward two United
States marshals were observed by the roadside in a suburb of the town.
They looked comfortable enough there in the sunshine, but each

      had that across his throat
  Which you had hardly cared to see.

When dispatched on business of a delicate nature men in the service of the
agency had a significant trick of disappearing--they were of "the
unreturning brave." Really the mortality among the unacclimated in the
Selma district at that time was excessive. When my chief and I parted at
dinner time (our palates were not in harmony) we commonly shook hands and
tried to say something memorable that was worthy to serve as "last words."
We had been in the army together and had many a time gone into battle
without having taken that precaution in the interest of history.

Of course the better class of the people were not accountable for this
state of affairs, and I do not remember that I greatly blamed the others.
The country was full of the "elements of combustion." The people were
impoverished and smarting with a sense of defeat. Organized resistance was
no longer possible, but many men trained to the use of arms did not
consider themselves included in the surrender and conscientiously believed
it both right and expedient to prolong the struggle by private enterprise.
Many, no doubt, made the easy and natural transition from soldiering to
assassination by insensible degrees, unconscious of the moral difference,
such as it is. Selma was little better than a ruin; in the concluding
period of the war General Wilson's cavalry had raided it and nearly
destroyed it, and the work begun by the battery had been completed by the
torch. The conflagration was generally attributed to the negroes, who
certainly augmented it, for a number of those suspected of the crime were
flung into the flames by the maddened populace. None the less were the
Yankee invaders held responsible.

Every Northern man represented some form or phase of an authority which
these luckless people horribly hated, and to which they submitted only
because, and in so far as, they had to. Fancy such a community, utterly
without the restraints of law and with no means of ascertaining public
opinion--for newspapers were not--denied even the moral advantage of the
pulpit! Considering what human nature has the misfortune to be, it is
wonderful that there was so little of violence and crime.

As the carcass invites the vulture, this prostrate land drew adventurers
from all points of the compass. Many, I am sorry to say, were in the
service of the United States Government. Truth to tell, the special agents
of the Treasury were themselves, as a body, not altogether spotless. I
could name some of them, and some of their assistants, who made large
fortunes by their opportunities. The special agents were allowed
one-fourth of the value of the confiscated cotton for expenses of
collection--none too much, considering the arduous and perilous character
of the service; but the plan opened up such possibilities of fraud as have
seldom been accorded by any system of conducting the public business, and
never without disastrous results to official morality. Against bribery no
provision could have provided an adequate safeguard; the magnitude of the
interests involved was too great, the administration of the trust too
loose and irresponsible. The system as it was, hastily devised in the
storm and stress of a closing war, broke down in the end, and it is
doubtful if the Government might not more profitably have let the
"captured and abandoned property" alone.

As an instance of the temptations to which we were exposed, and of our
tactical dispositions in resistance, I venture to relate a single
experience of my own. During an absence of my chief I got upon the trail
of a lot of cotton--seven hundred bales, as nearly as I now
recollect--which had been hidden with so exceptional ingenuity that I was
unable to trace it. One day there came to my office two well-dressed and
mannerly fellows who suffered me to infer that they knew all about this
cotton and controlled it. When our conference on the subject ended it was
past dinner time and they civilly invited me to dine with them, which, in
hope of eliciting information over the wine, I did. I knew well enough
that they indulged a similar selfish hope, so I had no scruples about
using their hospitality to their disadvantage if I could. The subject,
however, was not mentioned at table, and we were all singularly abstemious
in the matter of champagne--so much so that as we rose from a rather long
session at the board we disclosed our sense of the ludicrousness of the
situation by laughing outright. Nevertheless, neither party would accept
defeat, and for the next few weeks the war of hospitality was fast and
furious. We dined together nearly every day, sometimes at my expense,
sometimes at theirs. We drove, rode, walked, played at billiards and made
many a night of it; but youth and temperance (in drink) pulled me through
without serious inroads on my health. We had early come to an
understanding and a deadlock. Failing to get the slenderest clew to the
location of the cotton I offered them one-fourth if they would surrender
it or disclose its hiding-place; they offered me one-fourth if I would
sign a permit for its shipment as private property.

All things have an end, and this amusing contest finally closed. Over the
remains of a farewell dinner, unusually luxurious, as befitted the
occasion, we parted with expressions of mutual esteem--not, I hope,
altogether insincere, and the ultimate fate of the cotton is to me
unknown. Up to the date of my departure from the agency not a bale of it
had either come into possession of the Government or found an outlet. I am
sometimes disloyal enough to indulge myself in the hope that they baffled
my successors as skilfully as they did me. One cannot help feeling a
certain tenderness for men who know and value a good dinner.

Another corrupt proposal that I had the good fortune to be afraid to
entertain came, as it were, from within. There was a dare-devil fellow
whom, as I know him to be dead, I feel justified in naming Jack Harris. He
was engaged in all manner of speculative ventures on his own account, but
the special agent had so frequently employed him in "enterprises of great
pith and moment" that he was in a certain sense and to a certain extent
one of us. He seemed to me at the time unique, but shortly afterward I had
learned to classify him as a type of the Californian adventurer with whose
peculiarities of manner, speech and disposition most of us are to-day
familiar enough. He never spoke of his past, having doubtless good reasons
for reticence, but any one learned in Western slang--a knowledge then
denied me--would have catalogued him with infallible accuracy. He was a
rather large, strong fellow, swarthy, black-bearded, black-eyed,
black-hearted and entertaining, no end; ignorant with an ignorance whose
frankness redeemed it from offensiveness, vulgar with a vulgarity that
expressed itself in such metaphors and similes as would have made its
peace with the most implacable refinement. He drank hard, gambled high,
swore like a parrot, scoffed at everything, was openly and proudly a
rascal, did not know the meaning of fear, borrowed money abundantly, and
squandered it with royal disregard. Desiring one day to go to Mobile, but
reluctant to leave Montgomery and its pleasures--unwilling to quit
certainty for hope--he persuaded the captain of a loaded steamboat to wait
four days for him at an expense of $400 a day; and lest time should hang
too heavy on the obliging skipper's hands, Jack permitted him to share the
orgies gratis. But that is not my story.

One day Jack came to me with a rather more sinful proposal than he had
heretofore done me the honor to submit. He knew of about a thousand bales
of cotton, some of it private property, some of it confiscable, stored at
various points on the banks of the Alabama. He had a steamboat in
readiness, "with a gallant, gallant crew," and he proposed to drop quietly
down to the various landings by night, seize the cotton, load it on his
boat and make off down the river. What he wanted from me, and was willing
to pay for, was only my official signature to some blank shipping permits;
or if I would accompany the expedition and share its fortunes no papers
would be necessary. In declining this truly generous offer I felt that I
owed it to Jack to give him a reason that he was capable of understanding,
so I explained to him the arrangements at Mobile, which would prevent him
from transferring his cargo to a ship and getting the necessary papers
permitting her to sail. He was astonished and, I think, pained by my
simplicity. Did I think him a fool? He did not purpose--not he--to
tranship at all: the perfected plan was to dispense with all hampering
formality by slipping through Mobile Bay in the black of the night and
navigating his laden river craft across the Gulf to Havana! The rascal was
in dead earnest, and that natural timidity of disposition which compelled
me to withhold my coöperation greatly lowered me in his esteem, I fear.

It was in Cuba, by the way, that Jack came to grief some years later. He
was one of the crew of the filibustering vessel _Virginius_, and was
captured and shot along with the others. Something in his demeanor as he
knelt in the line to receive the fatal fusillade prompted a priest to
inquire his religion. "I am an atheist, by God!" said Jack, and with this
quiet profession of faith that gentle spirit winged its way to other
tropics.

Having expounded with some particularity the precarious tenure by which I
held my office and my life in those "thrilling regions" where my duties
lay, I ought to explain by what unhappy chance I am still able to afflict
the reader. There lived in Selma a certain once wealthy and still
influential citizen, whose two sons, of about my own age, had served as
officers in the Confederate Army. I will designate them simply as Charles
and Frank. They were types of a class now, I fear, almost extinct. Born
and bred in luxury and knowing nothing of the seamy side of life--except,
indeed, what they had learned in the war--well educated, brave, generous,
sensitive to points of honor, and of engaging manners, these brothers were
by all respected, by many loved and by some feared. For they had quick
fingers upon the pistol-trigger withal, and would rather fight a duel than
eat--nay, drink. Nor were they over-particular about the combat taking the
form of a duel--almost any form was good enough. I made their acquaintance
by chance and cultivated it for the pleasure it gave me. It was long
afterward that I gave a thought to its advantages; but from the time that
I became generally known as their friend my safety was assured through all
that region; an army with banners could not have given me the same
immunity from danger, obstruction or even insult in the performance of my
disagreeable duties. What glorious fellows they were, to be sure--these my
late antagonists of the dark days when, God forgive us, we were trying to
cut one another's throat. To this day I feel a sense of regret when I
think of my instrumentality, however small, in depriving the world of many
such men in the criminal insanity that we call battle.

Life in Selma became worth living even as the chance of living it
augmented. With my new friends and a friend of theirs, whose name--the
more shame to me--I cannot now recall, but should not write here if I
could, I passed most of my leisure hours. At the houses of themselves and
their friends I did most of my dining; and, heaven be praised! there was
no necessity for moderation in wine. In their society I committed my sins,
and together beneath that noble orb unknown to colder skies, the Southern
moon, we atoned for them by acts of devotion performed with song and lute
beneath the shrine window of many a local divinity.

One night we had an adventure. We were out late--so late that it was night
only astronomically. The streets were "deserted and drear," and, of
course, unlighted--the late Confederacy had no gas and no oil.
Nevertheless, we saw that we were followed. A man keeping at a fixed
distance behind turned as we turned, paused as we paused, and pursued as
we moved on. We stopped, went back and remonstrated; asked his intentions
in, I dare say, no gentle words. He gave us no reply, but as we left him
he followed. Again we stopped, and I felt my pistol plucked out of my
pocket. Frank had unceremoniously possessed himself of it and was
advancing on the enemy. I do not remember if I had any wish to interpose a
protest--anyhow there was no time. Frank fired and the man fell. In a
moment all the chamber-windows in the street were thrown open with a head
visible (and audible) in each. We told Frank to go home, which to our
surprise he did; the rest of us, assisted by somebody's private
policeman--who afterward apprised us that we were in arrest--carried the
man to a hotel. It was found that his leg was broken above the knee, and
the next day it was amputated. We paid his surgeon and his hotel bill, and
when he had sufficiently recovered sent him to an address which he gave us
in Mobile; but not a word could anybody get out of him as to who he had
the misfortune to be, or why he had persisted, against the light, in
following a quartet of stray revelers.

On the morning of the shooting, when everything possible had been done for
the comfort of the victim, we three accomplices were released on our own
recognizance by an old gentleman of severe aspect, who had resumed his
function of justice of the peace where he had laid it down during the war.
I did not then know that he had no more legal authority than I had myself,
and I was somewhat disturbed in mind as I reflected on the possibilities
of the situation. The opportunity to get rid of an offensive Federal
official must of course be very tempting, and after all the shooting was a
trifle hasty and not altogether justifiable.

On the day appointed for our preliminary examination, all of us except
Frank were released and put on the witness-stand. We gave a true and
congruent history of the affair. The holdover justice listened to it all
very patiently and then, with commendable brevity and directness of
action, fined Frank five dollars and costs for disorderly conduct. There
was no appeal.

There were queer characters in Alabama in those days, as you shall see.
Once upon a time the special agent and I started down the Tombigbee River
with a steamboat load of government cotton--some six hundred bales. At one
of the military stations we took on a guard of a dozen or fifteen soldiers
under command of a non-commissioned officer. One evening, just before
dusk, as we were rounding a bend where the current set strongly against
the left bank of the stream and the channel lay close to that shore, we
were suddenly saluted with a volley of bullets and buckshot from that
direction. The din of the firing, the rattle and crash of the missiles
splintering the woodwork and the jingle of broken glass made a very rude
arousing from the tranquil indolence of a warm afternoon on the sluggish
Tombigbee. The left bank, which at this point was a trifle higher than the
hurricane deck of a steamer, was now swarming with men who, almost near
enough to jump aboard, looked unreasonably large and active as they sprang
about from cover to cover, pouring in their fire. At the first volley the
pilot had deserted his wheel, as well he might, and the boat, drifting in
to the bank under the boughs of a tree, was helpless. Her jackstaff and
yawl were carried away, her guards broken in, and her deck-load of cotton
was tumbling into the stream a dozen bales at once. The captain was
nowhere to be seen, the engineer had evidently abandoned his post and the
special agent had gone to hunt up the soldiers. I happened to be on the
hurricane deck, armed with a revolver, which I fired as rapidly as I
could, listening all the time for the fire of the soldiers--and listening
in vain. It transpired later that they had not a cartridge among them; and
of all helpless mortals a soldier without a cartridge is the most
imbecile. But all this time the continuous rattle of the enemy's guns and
the petulant pop of my own pocket firearm were punctuated, as it were, by
pretty regularly recurring loud explosions, as of a small cannon. They
came from somewhere forward--I supposed from the opposition, as I knew we
had no artillery on board.

The failure of our military guard made the situation somewhat grave. For
two of us, at least, capture meant hanging out of hand. I had never been
hanged in all my life and was not enamored of the prospect. Fortunately
for us the bandits had selected their point of attack without military
foresight. Immediately below them a bayou, impassable to them, let into
the river. The moment we had drifted below it we were safe from boarding
and capture. The captain was found in hiding and an empty pistol at his
ear persuaded him to resume command of his vessel; the engineer and pilot
were encouraged to go back to their posts and after some remarkably long
minutes, during which we were under an increasingly long-range fire, we
got under way. A few cotton bales piled about the pilot-house made us
tolerably safe from that sort of thing in the future and then we took
account of our damages. Nobody had been killed and only a few were
wounded. This gratifying result was attributable to the fact that, being
unarmed, nearly everybody had dived below at the first fire and taken
cover among the cotton bales. While issuing a multitude of needless
commands from the front of the hurricane-deck I looked below, and there,
stretched out at full length on his stomach, lay a long, ungainly person,
clad in faded butternut, bare-headed, his long, lank hair falling down
each side of his neck, his coat-tails similarly parted, and his enormous
feet spreading their soles to the blue sky. He had an old-fashioned
horse-pistol, some two feet long, which he was in the act of sighting
across his left palm for a parting shot at the now distant assailants. A
more ludicrous figure I never saw; I laughed outright; but when his weapon
went off it was matter for gratitude to be above it instead of before it.
It was the "cannon" whose note I had marked all through the unequal fray.

The fellow was a returned Confederate whom we had taken on at one of the
upper landings as our only passenger; we were dead-heading him to Mobile.
He was undoubtedly in hearty sympathy with the enemy, and I at first
suspected him of collusion, but circumstances not necessary to detail here
rendered this impossible. Moreover, I had distinctly seen one of the
"guerrillas" fall and remain down after my own weapon was empty, and no
man else on board except the passenger had fired a shot or had a shot to
fire. When everything had been made snug again, and we were gliding along
under the stars, without apprehension; when I had counted fifty-odd bullet
holes through the pilot-house (which had not received the attention that
by its prominence and importance it was justly entitled to) and everybody
was variously boasting his prowess, I approached my butternut
comrade-in-arms and thanked him for his kindly aid. "But," said I, "how
the devil does it happen that _you_ fight _that_ crowd?"

"Wal, Cap," he drawled, as he rubbed the powder grime from his antique
artillery, "I allowed it was mouty clever in you-all to take me on, seein'
I hadn't ary cent, so I thought I'd jist kinder work my passage."


WORKING FOR AN EMPRESS

In the spring of 1874 I was living in the pretty English town of
Leamington, a place that will be remembered by most Americans who have
visited the grave of Shakespeare at Stratford-on-Avon, or by personal
inspection of the ruins of Kenilworth Castle have verified their knowledge
of English history derived from Scott's incomparable romance. I was at
that time connected with several London newspapers, among them the
_Figaro_, a small weekly publication, semi-humorous, semi-theatrical, with
a remarkable aptitude for managing the political affairs of France in the
interest of the Imperialists. This last peculiarity it owed to the
personal sympathies of its editor and proprietor, Mr. James Mortimer, a
gentleman who for some twenty years before the overthrow of the Empire had
lived in Paris. Mr. Mortimer had been a personal friend of the Emperor and
Empress, and on the flight of the latter to England had rendered her
important service; and after the release of the Emperor from captivity
among the Germans Mr. Mortimer was a frequent visitor to the imperial
exiles at Chiselhurst.

One day at Leamington my London mail brought a letter from Mr. Mortimer,
informing me that he intended to publish a new satirical journal, which he
wished me to write. I was to do all the writing, he the editing; and it
would not be necessary for me to come up to London; I could send
manuscript by mail. The new journal was not to appear at stated periods,
but "occasionally." Would I submit to him a list of suitable titles for
it, from which he could make a selection?

With some surprise at what seemed to me the singularly whimsical and
unbusiness-like features of the enterprise I wrote him earnestly advising
him either to abandon it or materially to modify his plan. I represented
to him that such a journal, so conducted, could not in my judgment
succeed; but he was obdurate and after a good deal of correspondence I
consented to do all the writing if he was willing to do all the losing
money. I submitted a number of names which I thought suitable for the
paper, but all were rejected, and he finally wrote that he had decided to
call the new journal _The Lantern_. This decision elicited from me another
energetic protest. The title was not original, but obviously borrowed from
M. Rochefort's famous journal, _La Lanterne_. True, that publication was
dead, and its audacious editor deported to New Caledonia with his
Communistic following; but the name could hardly be agreeable to Mr.
Mortimer's Imperialist friends, particularly the Empress--the Emperor was
then dead. To my surprise Mr. Mortimer not only adhered to his resolution
but suggested the propriety of my taking M. Rochefort's late lamented
journal as a model for our own. This I flatly declined to do and carried
my point; I was delighted to promise, however, that the new paper should
resemble the old in one particular: it should be irritatingly
disrespectful of existing institutions and exalted personages.

On the 18th of May, 1874, there was published at the corner of St. Bride
Street and Shoe Lane, E.C., London, the first number of "_The
Lantern_--Appearing Occasionally. Illuminated by Faustin. Price,
sixpence." It was a twelve-page paper with four pages of superb
illustrations in six colors. I winced when I contemplated its artistic and
mechanical excellence, for I knew at what a price that quality had been
obtained. A gold mine would be required to maintain that journal, and that
journal could by no means ever be itself a gold mine. A copy lies before
me as I write and noting it critically I cannot help thinking that the
illuminated title-page of this pioneer in the field of chromatic
journalism is the finest thing of the kind that ever came from a press.

Of the literary contents I am less qualified for judgment, inasmuch as I
wrote every line in the paper. It may perhaps be said without immodesty
that the new "candidate for popular favor" was not distinguished by
servile flattery of the British character and meek subservience to the
British Government, as might perhaps be inferred from the following
extract from an article on General Sir Garnet Wolseley, who had just
received the thanks of his Sovereign and a munificent reward from
Parliament for his successful plundering expedition through Ashantee:

"We feel a comfortable sense of satisfaction in the thought that _The
Lantern_ will never fail to shed the light of its loyal approval upon any
unworthy act by which our country shall secure an adequate and permanent
advantage. When the great heart of England is stirred by quick cupidity to
profitable crime, far be it from us to lift our palms in deprecation. In
the wrangle for existence nations, equally with individuals, work by
diverse means to a common end--the spoiling of the weak; and when by
whatever of outrage we have pushed a feeble competitor to the wall, in
Heaven's name let us pin him fast and relieve his pockets of the material
good to which, in bestowing it upon him, the bountiful Lord has invited
our thieving hand. But these Ashantee women were not worth garroting.
Their fal-lals, precious to them, are worthless to us; the entire loot
fetched only £11,000--of which sum the man who brought home the trinkets
took a little more than four halves. We submit that with practiced agents
in every corner of the world and a watchful government at home this great
commercial nation might dispose of its honor to better advantage."

With the candor of repentance it may now be confessed that, however
unscrupulous it may be abroad, a government which tolerates this kind of
criticism cannot rightly be charged with tyranny at home.

By way (as I supposed) of gratitude to M. Rochefort for the use of the
title of his defunct journal it had been suggested by Mr. Mortimer that he
be given a little wholesome admonition here and there in the paper and I
had cheerfully complied. M. Rochefort had escaped from New Caledonia some
months before. A disagreeable cartoon was devised for his discomfort and
he received a number of such delicate attentions as that following, which
in the issue of July 15th greeted him on his arrival in England along with
his distinguished compatriot, M. Pascal Grousset:

"M. Rochefort is a gentleman who has lost his standing. There have been
greater falls than his. Kings before now have become servitors, honest men
bandits, thieves communists. Insignificant in his fortunes as in his
abilities, M. Rochefort, who was never very high, is not now very low--he
has avoided the falsehood of extremes: never quite a count, he is now but
half a convict. Having missed the eminence that would have given him
calumniation, he is also denied the obscurity that would bring
misconstruction. He is not even a _miserable_; he is a person. It is
curious to note how persistently this man has perverted his gifts. With
talents that might have corrupted panegyric, he preferred to refine
detraction; fitted to disgrace the _salon_, he has elected to adorn the
cell; the qualities that would have endeared him to a blackguard he has
wasted upon Pascal Grousset.

"As we write, it is reported that this person is in England. It is further
affirmed that it is his intention to proceed to Belgium or Switzerland to
fight certain journalists who have not had the courtesy to suppress the
truth about him, though he never told it of them. We presume, however,
this rumor is false; M. Rochefort must retain enough of the knowledge he
acquired when he was esteemed a gentleman to be aware that a meeting
between him and a journalist is now impossible. This is the more to be
regretted, because M. Paul de Cassagnac would have much pleasure in taking
M. Rochefort's life and we in lamenting his fall.

"M. Rochefort, we believe, is already suffering from an unhealed wound. It
is his mouth."

There was a good deal of such "scurril jesting" in the paper, especially
in a department called "Prattle." There were verses on all manner of
subjects--mostly the nobility and their works and ways, from the viewpoint
of disapproval--and epigrams, generally ill-humorous, like the following,
headed "_Novum Organum_":

  "In Bacon see the culminating prime
   Of British intellect and British crime.
   He died, and Nature, settling his affairs,
   Parted his powers among us, his heirs:
   To each a pinch of common-sense, for seed,
   And, to develop it, a pinch of greed.
   Each frugal heir, to make the gift suffice,
   Buries the talent to manure the vice."

When the first issue of _The Lantern_ appeared I wrote to Mr. Mortimer,
again urging him to modify his plans and alter the character of the
journal. He replied that it suited him as it was and he would let me know
when to prepare "copy" for the second number. That eventually appeared on
July 15th. I never was instructed to prepare any more copy, and there has
been, I believe, no further issue of that interesting sheet as yet.

Taking a retrospective view of this singular venture in journalism, one
day, the explanation of the whole matter came to my understanding in the
light of a revelation, and was confirmed later by Mr. Mortimer.

In the days when Napoleon III was at the zenith of his glory and power
there was a thorn in his side. It was the pen of M. Henri Rochefort, le
Comte de Luçay, journalist and communard. Despite fines, "suppressions,"
and imprisonments, this gifted writer and unscrupulous blackguard had, as
every one knows, made incessant war upon the Empire and all its
_personnel_. The bitter and unfair attacks of his paper, _La Lanterne_,
made life at the Tuilleries exceedingly uncomfortable. His rancor against
the Empress was something horrible, and went to the length of denying the
legitimacy of the Prince Imperial. His existence was a menace and a terror
to the illustrious lady, even when she was in exile at Chiselhurst and he
in confinement on the distant island of New Caledonia. When the news of
his escape from that penal colony arrived at Chiselhurst the widowed
Empress was in despair; and when, on his way to England, he announced his
intention of reviving _La Lanterne_ in London (of course he dared not
cross the borders of France) she was utterly prostrated by the fear of his
pitiless animosity. But what could she do? Not prevent the revival of his
dreadful newspaper, certainly, but--well, she could send for Mr. Mortimer.
That ingenious gentleman was not long at a loss for an expedient that
would accomplish what was possible. He shut Rochefort out of London by
forestalling him. At the very time when Mortimer was asking me to suggest
a suitable name for the new satirical journal he had already registered at
Stationers' Hall--that is to say, copyrighted--the title of _The Lantern_,
a precaution which M. Rochefort's French friends had neglected to take,
although they had expended thousands of pounds in a plant for their
venture. Mr. Mortimer cruelly permitted them to go on with their costly
preparations, and the first intimation they had that the field was
occupied came from the newsdealers selling _The Lantern_. After some
futile attempts at relief and redress, M. Rochefort took himself off and
set up his paper in Belgium.

The expenses of _The Lantern_--including a generous _douceur_ to
myself--were all defrayed by the Empress. She was the sole owner of it
and, I was gratified to learn, took so lively an interest in her venture
that a special French edition was printed for her private reading. I was
told that she especially enjoyed the articles on M. le Comte de Luçay,
though I dare say some of the delicate subtleties of their literary style
were lost in translation.

Being in London later in the year, I received through Mortimer an
invitation to visit the poor lady, _en famille_, at Chiselhurst; but as
the iron rules of imperial etiquette, even in exile, required that the
hospitable request be made in the form of a "command," my republican
independence took alarm and I had the incivility to disobey; and I still
think it a sufficient distinction to be probably the only American
journalist who was ever employed by an Empress in so congenial a pursuit
as the pursuit of another journalist.


ACROSS THE PLAINS

That noted pioneer, General John Bidwell, of California, once made a
longish step up the western slope of our American Parnassus by an account
of his journey "across the plains" seven years before the lamented Mr.
Marshall had found the least and worst of all possible reasons for making
the "trek." General Bidwell had not the distinction to be a great writer,
but in order to command admiration and respect in that province of the
Republic of Letters which lies in the Sacramento Valley above the mouth of
the Yuba the gift of writing greatly is a needless endowment. Nevertheless
I read his narrative with an interest which on analysis turns out to be a
by-product of personal experience: among my youthful indiscretions was a
journey over much of the same ground, which I took in much the same
way--as did many thousands before and after.

It was a far cry from 1841 to 1866, yet the country between the Missouri
River and the Sierra Nevada had not greatly improved: civilization had
halted at the river, awaiting transportation. A railroad had set out from
Omaha westward, and another at Sacramento was solemnly considering the
impossible suggestion of going eastward to meet it. There were lunatics in
those days, as there are in these. I left the one road a few miles out of
the Nebraskan village and met the other at Dutch Flat, in California.

Waste no compassion on the loneliness of my journey: a thriving colony of
Mormons had planted itself in the valley of Salt Lake and there were
"forts" at a few points along the way, where ambitious young army officers
passed the best years of their lives guarding live stock and teaching the
mysteries of Hardee's tactics to that alien patriot, the American regular.
There was a dusty wagon road, bordered with bones--not always those of
animals--with an occasional mound, sometimes dignified with a warped and
rotting head-board bearing an illegible inscription. (One inscription not
entirely illegible is said to have concluded with this touching tribute to
the worth of the departed: "He was a good egg." Another was: "He done his
damnedest") In other particulars the "Great American Desert" of our
fathers was very like what it was when General Bidwell's party traversed
it with that hereditary instinct, that delicacy of spiritual nose which
served the Western man of that day in place of a map and guide-book.
Westward the course of empire had taken its way, but excepting these poor
vestiges it had for some fifteen hundred miles left no trace of its march.
The Indian of the plains had as yet seen little to unsettle his assurance
of everlasting dominion. Of the slender lines of metal creeping slowly
toward him from East and West he knew little; and had he known more, how
could he have foreseen their momentous effect upon his "ancient solitary
reign"?

I remember very well, as so many must, some of the marked features of the
route that General Bidwell mentions. One of the most imposing of these is
Court House Rock, near the North Platte. Surely no object of such dignity
ever had a more belittling name--given it in good faith no doubt by some
untraveled wight whose county court-house was the most "reverend pile" of
which he had any conception. It should have been called the Titan's
Castle. What a gracious memory I have of the pomp and splendor of its
aspect, with the crimson glories of the setting sun fringing its outlines,
illuminating its western walls like the glow of Mammon's fires for the
witches' revel in the Hartz, and flung like banners from its crest!

I suppose Court House Rock is familiar enough and commonplace enough to
the dwellers in that land (riparian tribes once infesting the low lands of
Ohio and Indiana and the flats of Iowa), but to me, tipsy with youth,
full-fed on Mayne Reid's romances, and now first entering the enchanted
region that he so charmingly lied about, it was a revelation and a dream.
I wish that anything in the heavens, on the earth, or in the waters under
the earth would give me now such an emotion as I experienced in the shadow
of that "great rock in a weary land."

I was not a pilgrim, but an engineer _attaché_ to an expedition through
Dakota and Montana, to inspect some new military posts. The expedition
consisted, where the Indians preserved the peace, of the late General W.B.
Hazen, myself, a cook and a teamster; elsewhere we had an escort of
cavalry. My duty, as I was given to understand it, was to amuse the
general and other large game, make myself as comfortable as possible
without too much discomfort to others, and when in an unknown country
survey and map our route for the benefit of those who might come after.
The posts which the general was to inspect had recently been established
along a military road, one end of which was at the North Platte and the
other--there was no other end; up about Fort C.F. Smith at the foot of the
Big-Horn Mountains the road became a buffalo trail and was lost in the
weeds. But it was a useful road, for by leaving it before going too far
one could reach a place near the headwaters of the Yellowstone, where the
National Park is now.

By a master stroke of military humor we were ordered to return (to
Washington) via Salt Lake City, San Francisco and Panama. I obeyed until I
got as far as San Francisco, where, finding myself appointed to a second
lieutenancy in the Regular Army, ingratitude, more strong than traitors'
arms, quite vanquished me: I resigned, parted from Hazen more in sorrow
than in anger and remained in California.

I have thought since that this may have been a youthful error: the
Government probably meant no harm, and if I had served long enough I might
have become a captain. In time, if I lived, I should naturally have become
the senior captain of the Army; and then if there were another war and any
of the field officers did me the favor to paunch a bullet I should become
the junior major, certain of another step upward as soon as a number of my
superiors equal to the whole number of majors should be killed, resign or
die of old age--enchanting prospect! But I am getting a long way off the
trail.

It was near Fort C.F. Smith that we found our first buffaloes, and
abundant they were. We had to guard our camp at night with fire and sword
to keep them from biting us as they grazed. Actually one of them
half-scalped a teamster as he lay dreaming of home with his long fair hair
commingled with the toothsome grass. His utterances as the well-meaning
beast lifted him from the ground and tried to shake the earth from his
roots were neither wise nor sweet, but they made a profound impression on
the herd, which, arching its multitude of tails, absented itself to
pastures new like an army with banners.

At Fort C.F. Smith we parted with our _impedimenta_, and with an escort of
about two dozen cavalrymen and a few pack animals struck out on horseback
through an unexplored country northwest for old Fort Benton, on the upper
Missouri. The journey was not without its perils. Our only guide was my
compass; we knew nothing of the natural obstacles that we must encounter;
the Indians were on the warpath, and our course led us through the very
heart of their country. Luckily for us they were gathering their clans
into one great army for a descent upon the posts that we had left behind;
a little later some three thousand of them moved upon Fort Phil Kearney,
lured a force of ninety men and officers outside and slaughtered them to
the last man. This was one of the posts that we had inspected, and the
officers killed had hospitably entertained us.

In that lively and interesting book, "Indian Fights and Fighters," Dr.
Cyrus Townsend Brady says of this "outpost of civilization":

"The most careful watchfulness was necessary at all hours of the day and
night. The wood trains to fetch logs to the sawmills were heavily guarded.
There was fighting all the time. Casualties among the men were by no means
rare. At first it was difficult to keep men within the limits of the camp;
but stragglers who failed to return, and some who had been cut off,
scalped and left for dead, but who had crawled back to die, convinced
every one of the wisdom of the commanding officer's repeated orders and
cautions. To chronicle the constant succession of petty skirmishes would
be wearisome; yet they often resulted in torture and loss of life on the
part of the soldiers, although the Indians in most instances suffered the
more severely."

In a footnote the author relates this characteristic instance of the
Government's inability to understand: "Just when the alarms were most
frequent a messenger came to the headquarters, announcing that a train _en
route_ from Fort Laramie, with special messengers from that post, was
corraled by Indians, and demanded immediate help. An entire company of
infantry in wagons, with a mountain howitzer and several rounds of
grapeshot, was hastened to their relief. It proved to be a train with mail
from the Laramie Commission, announcing the confirmation of a
'satisfactory treaty of peace with all the Indians of the Northwest,' and
assuring the district commander of the fact. The messenger was brought in
in safety, and _peace_ lasted until his message was delivered. So much was
gained--that the messenger did not lose his scalp."

Through this interesting environment our expeditionary force of four men
had moved to the relief of the beleaguered post, but finding it impossible
to "raise the siege" had--with a score of troopers--pushed on to Fort C.F.
Smith, and thence into the Unknown.

The first part of this new journey was well enough; there were game and
water. Where we swam the Yellowstone we had an abundance of both, for the
entire river valley, two or three miles wide, was dotted with elk. There
were hundreds. As we advanced they became scarce; buffalo became scarce;
bear, deer, rabbits, sage-hens, even prairie dogs gave out, and we were
near starving. Water gave out too, and starvation was a welcome state: our
hunger was so much less disagreeable than our thirst that it was a real
treat.

However, we got to Benton, Heaven knows how and why, but we were a
sorry-looking lot, though our scalps were intact. If in all that region
there is a mountain that I have not climbed, a river that I have not swum,
an alkali pool that I have not thrust my muzzle into, or an Indian that I
have not shuddered to think about, I am ready to go back in a Pullman
sleeper and do my duty.

From Fort Benton we came down through Helena and Virginia City,
Montana--then new mining camps--to Salt Lake, thence westward to
California. Our last bivouac was on the old camp of the Donner party,
where, in the flickering lights and dancing shadows made by our camp-fire,
I first heard the story of that awful winter, and in the fragrance of the
meat upon the coals fancied I could detect something significantly
uncanny. The meat which the Donner party had cooked at that spot was not
quite like ours. Pardon: I mean it was not like that which we cooked.


THE MIRAGE

Since the overland railways have long been carrying many thousands of
persons across the elevated plateaus of the continent the mirage in many
of its customary aspects has become pretty well known to great numbers of
persons all over the Union, and the tales of early observers who came "der
blains agross" are received with a less frigid inhospitality than they
formerly were by incredulous pioneers who had come "der Horn aroundt," as
the illustrious Hans Breitmann phrases it; but in its rarer and more
marvelous manifestations, the mirage is still a rock upon which many a
reputation for veracity is wrecked remediless. With an ambition intrepidly
to brave this disaster, and possibly share it with the hundreds of devoted
souls whose disregard of the injunction never to tell an incredible truth
has branded them as hardy and impenitent liars, I purpose to note here a
few of the more remarkable illusions by which my own sense of sight has
been befooled by the freaks of the enchanter.

It is apart from my purpose to explain the mirage scientifically, and not
altogether in my power. Every schoolboy can do so, I suppose, to the
satisfaction of his teacher if the teacher has not himself seen the
phenomenon, or has seen it only in the broken, feeble and evanescent
phases familiar to the overland passenger; but for my part I am unable to
understand how the simple causes affirmed in the text-books sufficiently
account for the infinite variety and complexity of some of the effects
said to be produced by them. But of this the reader shall judge for
himself.

One summer morning in the upper North Platte country I rose from my
blankets, performed the pious acts of sun-worship by yawning toward the
east, kicked together the parted embers of my camp-fire, and bethought me
of water for my ablutions. We had gone into bivouac late in the night on
the open plain, and without any clear notion of where we were. There were
a half-dozen of us, our chief on a tour of inspection of the new military
posts in Wyoming. I accompanied the expedition as surveyor. Having an
aspiration for water I naturally looked about to see what might be the
prospect of obtaining it, and to my surprise and delight saw a long line
of willows, apparently some three hundred yards away. Willows implied
water, and snatching up a camp-kettle I started forward without taking the
trouble to put on my coat and hat. For the first mile or two I preserved a
certain cheerful hopefulness; but when the sun had risen farther toward
the meridian and began to affect my bare head most uncomfortably, and the
picketed horses at the camp were hull down on the horizon in the rear, and
the willows in front increased their pace out of all proportion to mine, I
began to grow discouraged and sat down on a stone to wish myself back.
Perceiving that the willows also had halted for breath I determined to
make a dash at them, leaving the camp-kettle behind to make its way back
to camp as best it could. I was now traveling "flying light," and had no
doubt of my ability to overtake the enemy, which had, however, disappeared
over the crest of a low sandhill. Ascending this I was treated to a
surprise. Right ahead of me lay a barren waste of sand extending to the
right and left as far as I could see. Its width in the direction that I
was going I judged to be about twenty miles. On its farther border the
cactus plain began again, sloping gradually upward to the horizon, along
which was a fringe of cedar trees--the willows of my vision! In that
country a cedar will not grow within thirty miles of water if it knows it.

On my return journey I coldly ignored the appeals of the camp-kettle, and
when I met the rescuing party which had been for some hours trailing me
made no allusion to the real purpose of my excursion. When the chief asked
if I purposed to enter a plea of temporary insanity I replied that I would
reserve my defense for the present; and in fact I never did disclose it
until now.

I had afterward the satisfaction of seeing the chief, an experienced
plainsman, consume a full hour, rifle in hand, working round to the
leeward of a dead coyote in the sure and certain hope of bagging a
sleeping buffalo. Mirage or no mirage, you must not too implicitly trust
your eyes in the fantastic atmosphere of the high plains.

I remember that one forenoon I looked forward to the base of the Big Horn
Mountains and selected a most engaging nook for the night's camp. My good
opinion of it was confirmed when we reached it three days later. The
deception in this instance was due to nothing but the marvelous lucidity
of the atmosphere and the absence of objects of known dimensions, and
these sources of error are sometimes sufficient of themselves to produce
the most incredible illusions. When they are in alliance with the mirage
the combination's pranks are bewildering.

One of the most grotesque and least comfortable of my experiences with the
magicians of the air occurred near the forks of the Platte. There had been
a tremendous thunder-storm, lasting all night. In the morning my party set
forward over the soaken prairie under a cloudless sky intensely blue. I
was riding in advance, absorbed in thought, when I was suddenly roused to
a sense of material things by exclamations of astonishment and
apprehension from the men behind. Looking forward, I beheld a truly
terrifying spectacle. Immediately in front, at a distance, apparently, of
not more than a quarter-mile, was a long line of the most formidable
looking monsters that the imagination ever conceived. They were taller
than trees. In them the elements of nature seemed so fantastically and
discordantly confused and blended, compounded, too, with architectural and
mechanical details, that they partook of the triple character of animals,
houses and machines. Legs they had, that an army of elephants could have
marched among; bodies that ships might have sailed beneath; heads about
which eagles might have delighted to soar, and ears--they were singularly
well gifted with ears. But wheels also they were endowed with, and vast
sides of blank wall; the wheels as large as the ring of a circus, the
walls white and high as cliffs of chalk along an English coast. Among
them, on them, beneath, in and a part of them, were figures and fragments
of figures of gigantic men. All were inextricably interblended and
superposed--a man's head and shoulders blazoned on the side of an animal;
a wheel with legs for spokes rolling along the creature's back; a vast
section of wall, having no contact with the earth, but (with a tail
hanging from its rear, like a note of admiration) moving along the line,
obscuring here an anatomical horror and disclosing there a mechanical
nightmare. In short, this appalling procession, which was crossing our
road with astonishing rapidity, seemed made up of unassigned and
unassorted units, out of which some imaginative god might be about to
create a world of giants, ready supplied with some of the appliances of a
high civilization. Yet the whole apparition had so shadowy and spectral a
look that the terror it inspired was itself vague and indefinite, like the
terror of a dream. It affected our horses as well as ourselves; they
extended their necks and threw forward their ears. For some moments we sat
in our saddles surveying the hideous and extravagant spectacle without a
word, and our tongues were loosened only when it began rapidly to diminish
and recede, and at last was resolved into a train of mules and wagons,
barely visible on the horizon. They were miles away and outlined against
the blue sky.

I then remembered what my astonishment had not permitted me closely to
note--that this pageant had appeared to move along parallel to the foot of
a slope extending upward and backward to an immense height, intersected
with rivers and presenting all the features of a prairie landscape. The
mirage had in effect contracted the entire space between us and the train
to a pistol-shot in breadth, and had made a background for its horrible
picture by lifting into view Heaven knows how great an extent of country
below our horizon. Does refraction account for all this? To this day I
cannot without vexation remember the childish astonishment that prevented
me from observing the really interesting features of the spectacle and
kept my eyes fixed with a foolish distension on a lot of distorted mules,
teamsters and wagons.

One of the commonest and best known tricks of the mirage is that of
overlaying a dry landscape with ponds and lakes, and by a truly
interesting and appropriate coincidence one or more travelers perishing of
thirst seem always to be present, properly to appreciate the humor of the
deception; but when a gentleman whose narrative suggested this article
averred that he had seen these illusory lakes navigated by phantom boats
filled with visionary persons he was, I daresay, thought to be drawing the
long bow, even by many miragists in good standing. For aught I know he may
have been. I can only attest the entirely credible character of the
statement.

Away up at the headwaters of the Missouri, near the British possessions, I
found myself one afternoon rather unexpectedly on the shore of an ocean.
At less than a gunshot from where I stood was as plainly defined a
seabeach as one could wish to see. The eye could follow it in either
direction, with all its bays, inlets and promontories, to the horizon. The
sea was studded with islands, and these with tall trees of many kinds,
both islands and trees being reflected in the water with absolute
fidelity. On many of the islands were houses, showing white beneath the
trees, and on one which lay farthest out seaward was a considerable city,
with towers, domes and clusters of steeples. There were ships in the
offing whose sails glistened in the sunlight and, closer in, several boats
of novel but graceful design, crowded with human figures, moved smoothly
among the lesser islands, impelled by some power invisible from my point
of view, each boat attended by its inverted reflection "crowding up
beneath the keel." It must be admitted that the voyagers were habited
after a somewhat uncommon fashion--almost unearthly, I may say--and were
so grouped that at my distance I could not clearly distinguish their
individual limbs and attitudes. Their features were, of course, entirely
invisible. None the less, they were plainly human beings--what other
creatures would be boating? Of the other features of the scene--the coast,
islands, trees, houses, city and ships hull-down in the offing--I
distinctly affirm an absolute identity of visible aspect with those to
which we are accustomed in the realm of reality; imagination had simply
nothing to do with the matter. True, I had not recently had the advantage
of seeing any such objects, except trees, and these had been mighty poor
specimens, but, like Macduff, I "could not but remember such things were,"
nor had I forgotten how they looked.

Of course I was not for an instant deceived by all this: I knew that under
it all lay a particularly forbidding and inhospitable expanse of sagebrush
and cactus, peopled with nothing more nearly akin to me than prairie dogs,
ground owls and jackass rabbits--that with these exceptions the desert was
as desolate as the environment of Ozymandias' "vast and trunkless legs of
stone." But as a show it was surely the most enchanting that human eyes
had ever looked on, and after more years than I care to count it remains
one of memory's most precious possessions. The one thing which always
somewhat impairs the illusion in such instances--the absence of the
horizon water-line--did not greatly abate the _vraisemblance_ in this, for
the large island in the distance nearly closed the view seaward, and the
ships occupied most of the remaining space. I had but to fancy a slight
haze on the farther water, and all was right and regular. For more than a
half-hour this charming picture remained intact; then ugly patches of
plain began to show through, the islands with their palms and temples
slowly dissolved, the boats foundered with every soul on board, the sea
drifted over the headlands in a most unwaterlike way, and inside the hour
since,

  like stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes
    He stared at the Pacific, and all his men
  Looked at each other with a wild surmise,
    Silent upon a peak in Darien,

I had discovered this unknown sea all this insubstantial pageant had faded
like the baseless fabric of the vision that it was and left not a rack
behind.

In some of its minor manifestations the mirage is sometimes seen on the
western coast of our continent, in the bay of San Francisco, for example,
causing no small surprise to the untraveled and unread observer, and no
small pain to the spirits of purer fire who are fated to be caught within
earshot and hear him pronounce it a "mirridge." I have seen Goat Island
without visible means of support and Red Rock suspended in mid-air like
the coffin of the Prophet. Looking up toward Mare Island one most
ungracious morning when a barbarous norther had purged the air of every
stain and the human soul of every virtue, I saw San Pablo Bay margined
with cliffs whose altitude must have exceeded considerably that from whose
dizzy verge old eyeless Gloster, falling in a heap at his own feet,
supposed himself to have sailed like a stone.

One more instance and "I've done, i' faith." Gliding along down the Hudson
River one hot summer afternoon in a steamboat, I went out on the
afterguard for a breath of fresh air, but there was none to be had. The
surface of the river was like oil and the steamer's hull slipped through
it with surprisingly little disturbance. Her tremor was for once hardly
perceptible; the beating of her paddles was subdued to an almost inaudible
rhythm. The air seemed what we call "hollow" and had apparently hardly
enough tenuity to convey sounds. Everywhere on the surface of the glassy
stream were visible undulations of heat, and the light steam of
evaporation lay along the sluggish water and hung like a veil between the
eye and the bank. Seated in an armchair and overcome by the heat and the
droning of some prosy passengers near by, I fell asleep. When I awoke the
guards were crowded with passengers in a high state of excitement,
pointing and craning shoreward. Looking in the same direction I saw,
through the haze, the sharp outlines of a city in gray silhouette. Roofs,
spires, pinnacles, chimneys, angles of wall--all were there, cleanly cut
out against the air.

"What is it?" I cried, springing to my feet.

"That, sir," replied a passenger stolidly, "is Poughkeepsie."

It was.


A SOLE SURVIVOR

Among the arts and sciences, the art of Sole Surviving is one of the most
interesting, as (to the artist) it is by far the most important. It is not
altogether an art, perhaps, for success in it is largely due to accident.
One may study how solely to survive, yet, having an imperfect natural
aptitude, may fail of proficiency and be early cut off. To the contrary,
one little skilled in its methods, and not even well grounded in its
fundamental principles, may, by taking the trouble to have been born with
a suitable constitution, attain to a considerable eminence in the art.
Without undue immodesty, I think I may fairly claim some distinction in it
myself, although I have not regularly acquired it as one acquires
knowledge and skill in writing, painting and playing the flute. O yes, I
am a notable Sole Survivor, and some of my work in that way attracts great
attention, mostly my own.

You would naturally expect, then, to find in me one who has experienced
all manner of disaster at sea and the several kinds of calamity incident
to a life on dry land. It would seem a just inference from my Sole
Survivorship that I am familiar with railroad wrecks, inundations (though
these are hardly dry-land phenomena), pestilences, earthquakes,
conflagrations and other forms of what the reporters delight to call "a
holocaust." This is not entirely true; I have never been shipwrecked,
never assisted as "unfortunate sufferer" at a fire or railway collision,
and know of the ravages of epidemics only by hearsay. The most destructive
_temblor_ of which I have had a personal experience decreased the
population of San Francisco by fewer, probably, than ten thousand persons,
of whom not more than a dozen were killed; the others moved out of town.
It is true that I once followed the perilous trade of a soldier, but my
eminence in Sole Surviving is of a later growth and not specially the
product of the sword.

Opening the portfolio of memory, I draw out picture after
picture--"figure-pieces"--groups of forms and faces whereof mine only now
remains, somewhat the worse for wear.

Here are three young men lolling at ease on a grassy bank. One, a
handsome, dark-eyed chap, with a forehead like that of a Grecian god,
raises his body on his elbow, looks straight away to the horizon, where
some black trees hold captive certain vestiges of sunset as if they had
torn away the plumage of a flight of flamingoes, and says: "Fellows, I
mean to be rich. I shall see every country worth seeing. I shall taste
every pleasure worth having. When old, I shall become a hermit."

Said another slender youth, fair-haired: "I shall become President and
execute a _coup d'etat_ making myself an absolute monarch. I shall then
issue a decree requiring that all hermits be put to death."

The third said nothing. Was he restrained by some prescient sense of the
perishable nature of the material upon which he was expected to inscribe
the record of his hopes? However it may have been, he flicked his shoe
with a hazel switch and kept his own counsel. For twenty years he has been
the Sole Survivor of the group.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scene changes. Six men are on horseback on a hill--a general and his
staff. Below, in the gray fog of a winter morning, an army, which has left
its intrenchments, is moving upon those of the enemy--creeping silently
into position. In an hour the whole wide valley for miles to left and
right will be all aroar with musketry stricken to seeming silence now and
again by thunder claps of big guns. In the meantime the risen sun has
burned a way through the fog, splendoring a part of the beleaguered city.

"Look at that, General," says an aide; "it is like enchantment."

"Go and enchant Colonel Post," said the general, without taking his
field-glass from his eyes, "and tell him to pitch in as soon as he hears
Smith's guns."

All laughed. But to-day I laugh alone. I am the Sole Survivor.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would be easy to fill many pages with instances of Sole Survival, from
my own experience. I could mention extinct groups composed wholly (myself
excepted) of the opposing sex, all of whom, with the same exception, have
long ceased their opposition, their warfare accomplished, their pretty
noses blue and chill under the daisies. They were good girls, too, mostly,
Heaven rest them! There were Maud and Lizzie and Nanette (ah, Nanette,
indeed; she is the deadest of the whole bright band) and Emeline and--but
really this is not discreet; one should not survive and tell.

The flame of a camp-fire stands up tall and straight toward the black sky.
We feed it constantly with sage brush. A circling wall of darkness closes
us in; but turn your back to the fire and walk a little away and you shall
see the serrated summit-line of snow-capped mountains, ghastly cold in the
moonlight. They are in all directions; everywhere they efface the great
gold stars near the horizon, leaving the little green ones of the
mid-heaven trembling viciously, as bleak as steel. At irregular intervals
we hear the distant howling of a wolf--now on this side and again on that.
We check our talk to listen; we cast quick glances toward our weapons, our
saddles, our picketed horses: the wolves may be of the variety known as
Sioux, and there are but four of us.

"What would you do, Jim," said Hazen, "if we were surrounded by Indians?"

Jim Beckwourth was our guide--a life-long frontiersman, an old man "beated
and chopped with tanned antiquity." He had at one time been a chief of the
Crows.

"I'd spit on that fire," said Jim Beckwourth.

The old man has gone, I hope, where there is no fire to be quenched. And
Hazen, and the chap with whom I shared my blanket that winter night on the
plains--both gone. One might suppose that I would feel something of the
natural exultation of a Sole Survivor; but as Byron found that

    our thoughts take wildest flight
  Even at the moment when they should array
  Themselves in pensive order,

so I find that they sometimes array themselves in pensive order, even at
the moment when they ought to be most hilarious.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of reminiscences there is no end. I have a vast store of them laid up,
wherewith to wile away the tedious years of my anecdotage--whenever it
shall please Heaven to make me old. Some years that I passed in London as
a working journalist are particularly rich in them. Ah! "we were a gallant
company" in those days.

I am told that the English are heavy thinkers and dull talkers. My
recollection is different; speaking from that, I should say they are no
end clever with their tongues. Certainly I have not elsewhere heard such
brilliant talk as among the artists and writers of London. Of course they
were a picked lot; some of them had attained to some eminence in the world
of intellect; others have achieved it since. But they were not all English
by many. London draws the best brains of Ireland and Scotland, and there
is always a small American contingent, mostly correspondents of the big
New York journals.

The typical London journalist is a gentleman. He is usually a graduate of
one or the other of the great universities. He is well paid and holds his
position, whatever it may be, by a less precarious tenure than his
American congener. He rather moves than "dabbles" in literature, and not
uncommonly takes a hand at some of the many forms of art. On the whole, he
is a good fellow, too, with a skeptical mind, a cynical tongue, and a warm
heart. I found these men agreeable, hospitable, intelligent, amusing. We
worked too hard, dined too well, frequented too many clubs, and went to
bed too late in the forenoon. We were overmuch addicted to shedding the
blood of the grape. In short, we diligently, conscientiously, and with a
perverse satisfaction burned the candle of life at both ends and in the
middle.

This was many a year ago. To-day a list of these men's names with a cross
against that of each one whom I know to be dead would look like a Roman
Catholic cemetery. I could dine all the survivors at the table on which I
write, and I should like to do so. But the dead ones, I must say, were the
best diners.

But about Sole Surviving. There was a London publisher named John Camden
Hotten. Among American writers he had a pretty dark reputation as a
"pirate." They accused him of republishing their books without their
assent, which, in absence of international copyright, he had a legal, and
it seems to me (a "sufferer") a moral right to do. Through sympathy with
their foreign confrères British writers also held him in high disesteem.

I knew Hotten very well, and one day I stood by what purported to be his
body, which afterward I assisted to bury in the cemetery at Highgate. I am
sure that it was his body, for I was uncommonly careful in the matter of
identification, for a very good reason, which you shall know.

Aside from his "piracy," Hotten had a wide renown as "a hard man to deal
with." For several months before his death he had owed me one hundred
pounds sterling, and he could not possibly have been more reluctant to
part with anything but a larger sum. Even to this day in reviewing the
intelligent methods--ranging from delicate finesse to frank effrontery--by
which that good man kept me out of mine own I am prostrated with
admiration and consumed with envy. Finally by a lucky chance I got him at
a disadvantage and seeing my power he sent his manager--a fellow named
Chatto, who as a member of the firm of Chatto & Windus afterward succeeded
to his business and methods--to negotiate. I was the most implacable
creditor in the United Kingdom, and after two mortal hours of me in my
most acidulated mood Chatto pulled out a check for the full amount, ready
signed by Hotten in anticipation of defeat. Before handing it to me Chatto
said: "This check is dated next Saturday. Of course you will not present
it until then."

To this I cheerfully consented.

"And now," said Chatto, rising to go, "as everything is satisfactory I
hope you will go out to Hotten's house and have a friendly talk. It is his
wish."

On Saturday morning I went. In pursuance, doubtless, of his design when he
antedated that check he had died of a pork pie promptly on the stroke of
twelve o'clock the night before--which invalidated the check! I have met
American publishers who thought they knew something about the business of
drinking champagne out of writers' skulls. If this narrative--which, upon
my soul, is every word true--teaches them humility by showing that genuine
commercial sagacity is not bounded by geographical lines it will have
served its purpose.

Having assured myself that Mr. Hotten was really no more, I drove
furiously bank-ward, hoping that the sad tidings had not preceded me--and
they had not.

Alas! on the route was a certain tap-room greatly frequented by authors,
artists, newspaper men and "gentlemen of wit and pleasure about town."

Sitting about the customary table were a half-dozen or more choice
spirits--George Augustus Sala, Henry Sampson, Tom Hood the younger,
Captain Mayne Reid, and others less known to fame. I am sorry to say my
somber news affected these sinners in a way that was shocking. Their
levity was a thing to shudder at. As Sir Boyle Roche might have said, it
grated harshly upon an ear that had a dubious check in its pocket. Having
uttered their hilarious minds by word of mouth all they knew how, these
hardy and impenitent offenders set about writing "appropriate epitaphs."
Thank Heaven, all but one of these have escaped my memory, one that I
wrote myself. At the close of the rites, several hours later, I resumed my
movement against the bank. Too late--the old, old story of the hare and
the tortoise was told again. The "heavy news" had overtaken and passed me
as I loitered by the wayside.

All attended the funeral--Sala, Sampson, Hood, Reid, and the
undistinguished others, including this present Sole Survivor of the group.
As each cast his handful of earth upon the coffin I am very sure that,
like Lord Brougham on a somewhat similar occasion, we all felt more than
we cared to express. On the death of a political antagonist whom he had
not treated with much consideration his lordship was asked, rather rudely,
"Have you no regrets now that he is gone?"

After a moment of thoughtful silence he replied, with gravity, "Yes; I
favor his return."

       *       *       *       *       *

One night in the summer of 1880 I was driving in a light wagon through the
wildest part of the Black Hills in South Dakota. I had left Deadwood and
was well on my way to Rockerville with thirty thousand dollars on my
person, belonging to a mining company of which I was the general manager.
Naturally, I had taken the precaution to telegraph my secretary at
Rockerville to meet me at Rapid City, then a small town, on another route;
the telegram was intended to mislead the "gentlemen of the road" whom I
knew to be watching my movements, and who might possibly have a
confederate in the telegraph office. Beside me on the seat of the wagon
sat Boone May.

Permit me to explain the situation. Several months before, it had been the
custom to send a "treasure-coach" twice a week from Deadwood to Sidney,
Nebraska. Also, it had been the custom to have this coach captured and
plundered by "road agents." So intolerable had this practice become--even
iron-clad coaches loopholed for rifles proving a vain device--that the
mine owners had adopted the more practicable plan of importing from
California a half-dozen of the most famous "shotgun messengers" of Wells,
Fargo & Co.--fearless and trusty fellows with an instinct for killing, a
readiness of resource that was an intuition, and a sense of direction that
put a shot where it would do the most good more accurately than the most
careful aim. Their feats of marksmanship were so incredible that seeing
was scarcely believing.

In a few weeks these chaps had put the road agents out of business and out
of life, for they attacked them wherever found. One sunny Sunday morning
two of them strolling down a street of Deadwood recognized five or six of
the rascals, ran back to their hotel for their rifles, and returning
killed them all!

Boone May was one of these avengers. When I employed him, as a messenger,
he was under indictment for murder. He had trailed a "road agent" across,
the Bad Lands for hundreds of miles, brought him back to within a few
miles of Deadwood and picketed him out for the night. The desperate man,
tied as he was, had attempted to escape, and May found it expedient to
shoot and bury him. The grave by the roadside is perhaps still pointed out
to the curious. May gave himself up, was formally charged with murder,
released on his own recognizance, and I had to give him leave of absence
to go to court and be acquitted. Some of the New York directors of my
company having been good enough to signify their disapproval of my action
in employing "such a man," I could do no less than make some recognition
of their dissent, and thenceforth he was borne upon the pay-rolls as
"Boone May, Murderer." Now let me get back to my story.

I knew the road fairly well, for I had previously traveled it by night, on
horseback, my pockets bulging with currency and my free hand holding a
cocked revolver the entire distance of fifty miles. To make the journey by
wagon with a companion was luxury. Still, the drizzle of rain was
uncomfortable. May sat hunched up beside me, a rubber poncho over his
shoulders and a Winchester rifle in its leathern case between his knees. I
thought him a trifle off his guard, but said nothing. The road, barely
visible, was rocky, the wagon rattled, and alongside ran a roaring stream.
Suddenly we heard through it all the clinking of a horse's shoes directly
behind, and simultaneously the short, sharp words of authority: "Throw up
your hands!"

With an involuntary jerk at the reins I brought my team to its haunches
and reached for my revolver. Quite needless: with the quickest movement
that I had ever seen in anything but a cat--almost before the words were
out of the horseman's mouth--May had thrown himself backward across the
back of the seat, face upward, and the muzzle of his rifle was within a
yard of the fellow's breast! What further occurred among the three of us
there in the gloom of the forest has, I fancy, never been accurately
related.

Boone May is long dead of yellow fever in Brazil, and I am the Sole
Survivor.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a famous _prima donna_ with whom it was my good fortune to cross
the Atlantic to New York. In truth I was charged by a friend of both with
the agreeable duty of caring for her safety and comfort. Madame was
gracious, clever, altogether charming, and before the voyage was two days
old a half-dozen of the men aboard, whom she had permitted me to present,
were heels over head in love with her, as I was myself.

Our competition for her favor did not make us enemies; on the contrary we
were drawn together into something like an offensive and defensive
alliance by a common sorrow--the successful rivalry of a singularly
handsome Italian who sat next her at table. So assiduous was he in his
attentions that my office as the lady's guide, philosopher and friend was
nearly a sinecure, and as to the others, they had hardly one chance a day
to prove their devotion: that enterprising son of Italy dominated the
entire situation. By some diabolical prevision he anticipated Madame's
every need and wish--placed her reclining-chair in the most sheltered
spots on deck, smothered her in layer upon layer of wraps, and conducted
himself, generally, in the most inconsiderate way. Worse still, Madame
accepted his good offices with a shameless grace "which said as plain as
whisper in the ear" that there was a perfect understanding between them.
What made it harder to bear was the fellow's faulty civility to the rest
of us; he seemed hardly aware of our existence.

Our indignation was not loud, but deep. Every day in the smoking-room we
contrived the most ingenious and monstrous, plans for his undoing in this
world and the next; the least cruel being a project to lure him to the
upper deck on a dark night and send him unshriven to his account by way of
the lee rail; but as none of us knew enough Italian to tell him the
needful falsehood that scheme of justice came to nothing, as did all the
others. At the wharf in New York we parted from Madame more in sorrow than
in anger, and from her conquering cavalier with polite manifestations of
the contempt we did not feel.

That evening I called on her at her hotel, facing Union Square. Soon after
my arrival there was an audible commotion out in front: the populace,
headed by a brass band and incited, doubtless, by pure love of art, had
arrived to do honor to the great singer. There was music--a
serenade--followed by shoutings of the lady's name. She seemed a trifle
nervous, but I led her to the balcony, where she made a very pretty little
speech, piquant with her most charming accent. When the tumult and
shouting had died we re-entered her apartment to resume our conversation.
Would it please monsieur to have a glass, of wine? It would. She left the
room for a moment; then came the wine and glasses on a tray, borne by that
impossible Italian! He had a napkin across his arm--he was a servant.

Barring some of the band and the populace, I am doubtless the Sole
Survivor, for Madame has for a number of years had a permanent engagement
Above, and my faith in Divine Justice does not permit me to think that the
servile wretch who cast down the mighty from their seat among the Sons of
Hope was suffered to live out the other half of his days.

       *       *       *       *       *

A dinner of seven in an old London tavern--a good dinner, the memory
whereof is not yet effaced from the tablets of the palate. A soup, a plate
of white-bait be-lemoned and red-peppered with exactness, a huge joint of
roast beef, from which we sliced at will, flanked by various bottles of
old dry Sherry and crusty Port--such Port! (And we are expected to be
patriots in a country where it cannot be procured! And the Portuguese are
expected to love the country which, having it, sends it away!) That was
the dinner--there was Stilton cheese; it were shameful not to mention the
Stilton. Good, wholesome, and toothsome it was, rich and nutty. The
Stilton that we get here, clouted in tin-foil, is monstrous poor stuff,
hardly better than our American sort. After dinner there were walnuts and
coffee and cigars. I cannot say much for the cigars; they are not
over-good in England: too long at sea, I suppose.

On the whole, it was a memorable dinner. Even its non-essential features
were satisfactory. The waiter was fascinatingly solemn, the floor snowily
sanded, the company sufficiently distinguished in literature and art for
me to keep track of them through the newspapers. They are dead--as dead as
Queen Anne, every mother's son of them! I am in my favorite rôle of Sole
Survivor. It has become habitual to me; I rather like it.

Of the company were two eminent gastronomes--call them Messrs. Guttle and
Swig--who so acridly hated each other that nothing but a good dinner could
bring them under the same roof. (They had had a quarrel, I think, about
the merit of a certain Amontillado--which, by the way, one insisted,
despite Edgar Allan Poe, who certainly knew too much of whiskey to know
much of wine, _is_ a Sherry.) After the cloth had been removed and the
coffee, walnuts and cigars brought in, the company stood, and to an air
extemporaneously composed by Guttle, sang the following shocking and
reprehensible song, which had been written during the proceedings by this
present Sole Survivor. It will serve as fitly to conclude this feast of
unreason as it did that:

THE SONG

  Jack Satan's the greatest of gods,
    And Hell is the best of abodes.
  'Tis reached through the Valley of Clods
    By seventy beautiful roads.
  Hurrah for the Seventy Roads!
    Hurrah for the clods that resound
    With a hollow, thundering sound!
  Hurrah for the Best of Abodes!

  We'll serve him as long as we've breath--
    Jack Satan, the greatest of gods.
  To all of his enemies, death!--
    A home in the Valley of Clods.
  Hurrah for the thunder of clods
    That smother the souls of his foes!
    Hurrah for the spirit that goes
  To dwell with the Greatest of Gods!





THE DEVIL'S DICTIONARY

by Ambrose Bierce




AUTHOR'S PREFACE

_The Devil's Dictionary_ was begun in a weekly paper in 1881, and was
continued in a desultory way at long intervals until 1906.  In that
year a large part of it was published in covers with the title _The
Cynic's Word Book_, a name which the author had not the power to
reject or happiness to approve.  To quote the publishers of the
present work:

"This more reverent title had previously been forced upon him by
the religious scruples of the last newspaper in which a part of the
work had appeared, with the natural consequence that when it came out
in covers the country already had been flooded by its imitators with a
score of 'cynic' books--_The Cynic's This_, _The Cynic's That_, and
_The Cynic's t'Other_.  Most of these books were merely stupid, though
some of them added the distinction of silliness.  Among them, they
brought the word 'cynic' into disfavor so deep that any book bearing
it was discredited in advance of publication."

Meantime, too, some of the enterprising humorists of the country
had helped themselves to such parts of the work as served their needs,
and many of its definitions, anecdotes, phrases and so forth, had
become more or less current in popular speech.  This explanation is
made, not with any pride of priority in trifles, but in simple denial
of possible charges of plagiarism, which is no trifle.  In merely
resuming his own the author hopes to be held guiltless by those to
whom the work is addressed--enlightened souls who prefer dry wines
to sweet, sense to sentiment, wit to humor and clean English to slang.

A conspicuous, and it is hoped not unpleasant, feature of the book
is its abundant illustrative quotations from eminent poets, chief of
whom is that learned and ingenius cleric, Father Gassalasca Jape,
S.J., whose lines bear his initials.  To Father Jape's kindly
encouragement and assistance the author of the prose text is greatly
indebted.

A.B.




A



ABASEMENT, n.  A decent and customary mental attitude in the presence
of wealth or power.  Peculiarly appropriate in an employee when
addressing an employer.

ABATIS, n.  Rubbish in front of a fort, to prevent the rubbish outside
from molesting the rubbish inside.

ABDICATION, n.  An act whereby a sovereign attests his sense of the
high temperature of the throne.

  Poor Isabella's Dead, whose abdication
  Set all tongues wagging in the Spanish nation.
  For that performance 'twere unfair to scold her:
  She wisely left a throne too hot to hold her.
  To History she'll be no royal riddle--
  Merely a plain parched pea that jumped the griddle.

G.J.


ABDOMEN, n.  The temple of the god Stomach, in whose worship, with
sacrificial rights, all true men engage.  From women this ancient
faith commands but a stammering assent.  They sometimes minister at
the altar in a half-hearted and ineffective way, but true reverence
for the one deity that men really adore they know not.  If woman had a
free hand in the world's marketing the race would become
graminivorous.

ABILITY, n.  The natural equipment to accomplish some small part of
the meaner ambitions distinguishing able men from dead ones.  In the
last analysis ability is commonly found to consist mainly in a high
degree of solemnity.  Perhaps, however, this impressive quality is
rightly appraised; it is no easy task to be solemn.

ABNORMAL, adj.  Not conforming to standard.  In matters of thought and
conduct, to be independent is to be abnormal, to be abnormal is to be
detested.  Wherefore the lexicographer adviseth a striving toward the
straiter [sic] resemblance of the Average Man than he hath to himself.
Whoso attaineth thereto shall have peace, the prospect of death and
the hope of Hell.

ABORIGINIES, n.  Persons of little worth found cumbering the soil of a
newly discovered country.  They soon cease to cumber; they fertilize.

ABRACADABRA.

  By _Abracadabra_ we signify
      An infinite number of things.
  'Tis the answer to What? and How? and Why?
  And Whence? and Whither?--a word whereby
      The Truth (with the comfort it brings)
  Is open to all who grope in night,
  Crying for Wisdom's holy light.

  Whether the word is a verb or a noun
      Is knowledge beyond my reach.
  I only know that 'tis handed down.
          From sage to sage,
          From age to age--
      An immortal part of speech!

  Of an ancient man the tale is told
  That he lived to be ten centuries old,
      In a cave on a mountain side.
      (True, he finally died.)
  The fame of his wisdom filled the land,
  For his head was bald, and you'll understand
      His beard was long and white
      And his eyes uncommonly bright.

  Philosophers gathered from far and near
  To sit at his feet and hear and hear,
          Though he never was heard
          To utter a word
      But "_Abracadabra, abracadab_,
          _Abracada, abracad_,
      _Abraca, abrac, abra, ab!_"
          'Twas all he had,
  'Twas all they wanted to hear, and each
  Made copious notes of the mystical speech,
          Which they published next--
          A trickle of text
  In the meadow of commentary.
      Mighty big books were these,
      In a number, as leaves of trees;
  In learning, remarkably--very!

          He's dead,
          As I said,
  And the books of the sages have perished,
  But his wisdom is sacredly cherished.
  In _Abracadabra_ it solemnly rings,
  Like an ancient bell that forever swings.
          O, I love to hear
          That word make clear
  Humanity's General Sense of Things.

Jamrach Holobom


ABRIDGE, v.t.  To shorten.

      When in the course of human events it becomes necessary for
  people to abridge their king, a decent respect for the opinions of
  mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
  them to the separation.

Oliver Cromwell


ABRUPT, adj.  Sudden, without ceremony, like the arrival of a cannon-
shot and the departure of the soldier whose interests are most
affected by it.  Dr. Samuel Johnson beautifully said of another
author's ideas that they were "concatenated without abruption."

ABSCOND, v.i.  To "move in a mysterious way," commonly with the
property of another.

  Spring beckons!  All things to the call respond;
  The trees are leaving and cashiers abscond.

Phela Orm


ABSENT, adj.  Peculiarly exposed to the tooth of detraction; vilifed;
hopelessly in the wrong; superseded in the consideration and affection
of another.

  To men a man is but a mind.  Who cares
  What face he carries or what form he wears?
  But woman's body is the woman.  O,
  Stay thou, my sweetheart, and do never go,
  But heed the warning words the sage hath said:
  A woman absent is a woman dead.

Jogo Tyree


ABSENTEE, n.  A person with an income who has had the forethought to
remove himself from the sphere of exaction.

ABSOLUTE, adj.  Independent, irresponsible.  An absolute monarchy is
one in which the sovereign does as he pleases so long as he pleases
the assassins.  Not many absolute monarchies are left, most of them
having been replaced by limited monarchies, where the sovereign's
power for evil (and for good) is greatly curtailed, and by republics,
which are governed by chance.

ABSTAINER, n.  A weak person who yields to the temptation of denying
himself a pleasure.  A total abstainer is one who abstains from
everything but abstention, and especially from inactivity in the
affairs of others.

  Said a man to a crapulent youth:  "I thought
      You a total abstainer, my son."
  "So I am, so I am," said the scapegrace caught--
      "But not, sir, a bigoted one."

G.J.


ABSURDITY, n.  A statement or belief manifestly inconsistent with
one's own opinion.

ACADEME, n.  An ancient school where morality and philosophy were
taught.

ACADEMY, n.  [from ACADEME]   A modern school where football is
taught.

ACCIDENT, n.  An inevitable occurrence due to the action of immutable
natural laws.

ACCOMPLICE, n.  One associated with another in a crime, having guilty
knowledge and complicity, as an attorney who defends a criminal,
knowing him guilty.  This view of the attorney's position in the
matter has not hitherto commanded the assent of attorneys, no one
having offered them a fee for assenting.

ACCORD, n.  Harmony.

ACCORDION, n.  An instrument in harmony with the sentiments of an
assassin.

ACCOUNTABILITY, n.  The mother of caution.

  "My accountability, bear in mind,"
      Said the Grand Vizier:  "Yes, yes,"
  Said the Shah:  "I do--'tis the only kind
      Of ability you possess."

Joram Tate


ACCUSE, v.t.  To affirm another's guilt or unworth; most commonly as a
justification of ourselves for having wronged him.

ACEPHALOUS, adj.  In the surprising condition of the Crusader who
absently pulled at his forelock some hours after a Saracen scimitar
had, unconsciously to him, passed through his neck, as related by de
Joinville.

ACHIEVEMENT, n.  The death of endeavor and the birth of disgust.

ACKNOWLEDGE, v.t.  To confess.  Acknowledgement of one another's
faults is the highest duty imposed by our love of truth.

ACQUAINTANCE, n.  A person whom we know well enough to borrow from,
but not well enough to lend to.  A degree of friendship called slight
when its object is poor or obscure, and intimate when he is rich or
famous.

ACTUALLY, adv.  Perhaps; possibly.

ADAGE, n.  Boned wisdom for weak teeth.

ADAMANT, n.  A mineral frequently found beneath a corset.  Soluble in
solicitate of gold.

ADDER, n.  A species of snake.  So called from its habit of adding
funeral outlays to the other expenses of living.

ADHERENT, n.  A follower who has not yet obtained all that he expects
to get.

ADMINISTRATION, n.  An ingenious abstraction in politics, designed to
receive the kicks and cuffs due to the premier or president.  A man of
straw, proof against bad-egging and dead-catting.

ADMIRAL, n.  That part of a war-ship which does the talking while the
figure-head does the thinking.

ADMIRATION, n.  Our polite recognition of another's resemblance to
ourselves.

ADMONITION, n.  Gentle reproof, as with a meat-axe.  Friendly warning.

  Consigned by way of admonition,
  His soul forever to perdition.

Judibras


ADORE, v.t.  To venerate expectantly.

ADVICE, n.  The smallest current coin.

  "The man was in such deep distress,"
  Said Tom, "that I could do no less
  Than give him good advice."  Said Jim:
  "If less could have been done for him
  I know you well enough, my son,
  To know that's what you would have done."

Jebel Jocordy


AFFIANCED, pp.  Fitted with an ankle-ring for the ball-and-chain.

AFFLICTION, n.  An acclimatizing process preparing the soul for
another and bitter world.

AFRICAN, n.  A nigger that votes our way.

AGE, n.  That period of life in which we compound for the vices that
we still cherish by reviling those that we have no longer the
enterprise to commit.

AGITATOR, n.  A statesman who shakes the fruit trees of his neighbors
--to dislodge the worms.

AIM, n.  The task we set our wishes to.
  "Cheer up!  Have you no aim in life?"
      She tenderly inquired.
  "An aim?  Well, no, I haven't, wife;
      The fact is--I have fired."

G.J.


AIR, n.  A nutritious substance supplied by a bountiful Providence for
the fattening of the poor.

ALDERMAN, n.  An ingenious criminal who covers his secret thieving
with a pretence of open marauding.

ALIEN, n.  An American sovereign in his probationary state.

ALLAH, n.  The Mahometan Supreme Being, as distinguished from the
Christian, Jewish, and so forth.

  Allah's good laws I faithfully have kept,
  And ever for the sins of man have wept;
      And sometimes kneeling in the temple I
  Have reverently crossed my hands and slept.

Junker Barlow


ALLEGIANCE, n.

  This thing Allegiance, as I suppose,
  Is a ring fitted in the subject's nose,
  Whereby that organ is kept rightly pointed
  To smell the sweetness of the Lord's anointed.

G.J.


ALLIANCE, n.  In international politics, the union of two thieves who
have their hands so deeply inserted in each other's pockets that they
cannot separately plunder a third.

ALLIGATOR, n.  The crocodile of America, superior in every detail to
the crocodile of the effete monarchies of the Old World.  Herodotus
says the Indus is, with one exception, the only river that produces
crocodiles, but they appear to have gone West and grown up with the
other rivers.  From the notches on his back the alligator is called a
sawrian.

ALONE, adj.  In bad company.

  In contact, lo! the flint and steel,
  By spark and flame, the thought reveal
  That he the metal, she the stone,
  Had cherished secretly alone.

Booley Fito


ALTAR, n.  The place whereupon the priest formerly raveled out the
small intestine of the sacrificial victim for purposes of divination
and cooked its flesh for the gods.  The word is now seldom used,
except with reference to the sacrifice of their liberty and peace by a
male and a female tool.

  They stood before the altar and supplied
  The fire themselves in which their fat was fried.
  In vain the sacrifice!--no god will claim
  An offering burnt with an unholy flame.

M.P. Nopput


AMBIDEXTROUS, adj.  Able to pick with equal skill a right-hand pocket
or a left.

AMBITION, n.  An overmastering desire to be vilified by enemies while
living and made ridiculous by friends when dead.

AMNESTY, n.  The state's magnanimity to those offenders whom it would
be too expensive to punish.

ANOINT, v.t.  To grease a king or other great functionary already
sufficiently slippery.

  As sovereigns are anointed by the priesthood,
  So pigs to lead the populace are greased good.

Judibras


ANTIPATHY, n.  The sentiment inspired by one's friend's friend.

APHORISM, n.  Predigested wisdom.

  The flabby wine-skin of his brain
  Yields to some pathologic strain,
  And voids from its unstored abysm
  The driblet of an aphorism.

"The Mad Philosopher," 1697


APOLOGIZE, v.i.  To lay the foundation for a future offence.

APOSTATE, n.  A leech who, having penetrated the shell of a turtle
only to find that the creature has long been dead, deems it expedient
to form a new attachment to a fresh turtle.

APOTHECARY, n.  The physician's accomplice, undertaker's benefactor
and grave worm's provider.

  When Jove sent blessings to all men that are,
  And Mercury conveyed them in a jar,
  That friend of tricksters introduced by stealth
  Disease for the apothecary's health,
  Whose gratitude impelled him to proclaim:
  "My deadliest drug shall bear my patron's name!"

G.J.


APPEAL, v.t.  In law, to put the dice into the box for another throw.

APPETITE, n.  An instinct thoughtfully implanted by Providence as a
solution to the labor question.

APPLAUSE, n.  The echo of a platitude.

APRIL FOOL, n.  The March fool with another month added to his folly.

ARCHBISHOP, n.  An ecclesiastical dignitary one point holier than a
bishop.

  If I were a jolly archbishop,
  On Fridays I'd eat all the fish up--
  Salmon and flounders and smelts;
  On other days everything else.

Jodo Rem


ARCHITECT, n.  One who drafts a plan of your house, and plans a draft
of your money.

ARDOR, n.  The quality that distinguishes love without knowledge.

ARENA, n.  In politics, an imaginary rat-pit in which the statesman
wrestles with his record.

ARISTOCRACY, n.  Government by the best men.  (In this sense the word
is obsolete; so is that kind of government.)  Fellows that wear downy
hats and clean shirts--guilty of education and suspected of bank
accounts.

ARMOR, n.  The kind of clothing worn by a man whose tailor is a
blacksmith.

ARRAYED, pp.  Drawn up and given an orderly disposition, as a rioter
hanged to a lamppost.

ARREST, v.t.  Formally to detain one accused of unusualness.

  God made the world in six days and was arrested on the seventh.

_The Unauthorized Version_


ARSENIC, n.  A kind of cosmetic greatly affected by the ladies, whom
it greatly affects in turn.

  "Eat arsenic?  Yes, all you get,"
      Consenting, he did speak up;
  "'Tis better you should eat it, pet,
      Than put it in my teacup."

Joel Huck


ART, n.  This word has no definition.  Its origin is related as
follows by the ingenious Father Gassalasca Jape, S.J.

  One day a wag--what would the wretch be at?--
  Shifted a letter of the cipher RAT,
  And said it was a god's name!  Straight arose
  Fantastic priests and postulants (with shows,
  And mysteries, and mummeries, and hymns,
  And disputations dire that lamed their limbs)
  To serve his temple and maintain the fires,
  Expound the law, manipulate the wires.
  Amazed, the populace that rites attend,
  Believe whate'er they cannot comprehend,
  And, inly edified to learn that two
  Half-hairs joined so and so (as Art can do)
  Have sweeter values and a grace more fit
  Than Nature's hairs that never have been split,
  Bring cates and wines for sacrificial feasts,
  And sell their garments to support the priests.

ARTLESSNESS, n.  A certain engaging quality to which women attain by
long study and severe practice upon the admiring male, who is pleased
to fancy it resembles the candid simplicity of his young.

ASPERSE, v.t.  Maliciously to ascribe to another vicious actions which
one has not had the temptation and opportunity to commit.

ASS, n.  A public singer with a good voice but no ear.  In Virginia
City, Nevada, he is called the Washoe Canary, in Dakota, the Senator,
and everywhere the Donkey.  The animal is widely and variously
celebrated in the literature, art and religion of every age and
country; no other so engages and fires the human imagination as this
noble vertebrate.  Indeed, it is doubted by some (Ramasilus, _lib.
II., De Clem._, and C. Stantatus, _De Temperamente_) if it is not a
god; and as such we know it was worshiped by the Etruscans, and, if we
may believe Macrobious, by the Cupasians also.  Of the only two
animals admitted into the Mahometan Paradise along with the souls of
men, the ass that carried Balaam is one, the dog of the Seven Sleepers
the other.  This is no small distinction.  From what has been written
about this beast might be compiled a library of great splendor and
magnitude, rivalling that of the Shakespearean cult, and that which
clusters about the Bible.  It may be said, generally, that all
literature is more or less Asinine.

  "Hail, holy Ass!" the quiring angels sing;
  "Priest of Unreason, and of Discords King!"
  Great co-Creator, let Thy glory shine:
  God made all else, the Mule, the Mule is thine!"

G.J.


AUCTIONEER, n.  The man who proclaims with a hammer that he has picked
a pocket with his tongue.

AUSTRALIA, n.  A country lying in the South Sea, whose industrial and
commercial development has been unspeakably retarded by an unfortunate
dispute among geographers as to whether it is a continent or an
island.

AVERNUS, n.  The lake by which the ancients entered the infernal
regions.  The fact that access to the infernal regions was obtained by
a lake is believed by the learned Marcus Ansello Scrutator to have
suggested the Christian rite of baptism by immersion.  This, however,
has been shown by Lactantius to be an error.

  _Facilis descensus Averni,_
      The poet remarks; and the sense
  Of it is that when down-hill I turn I
      Will get more of punches than pence.

Jehal Dai Lupe





B



BAAL, n.  An old deity formerly much worshiped under various names.
As Baal he was popular with the Phoenicians; as Belus or Bel he had
the honor to be served by the priest Berosus, who wrote the famous
account of the Deluge; as Babel he had a tower partly erected to his
glory on the Plain of Shinar.  From Babel comes our English word
"babble."  Under whatever name worshiped, Baal is the Sun-god.  As
Beelzebub he is the god of flies, which are begotten of the sun's rays
on the stagnant water.  In Physicia Baal is still worshiped as Bolus,
and as Belly he is adored and served with abundant sacrifice by the
priests of Guttledom.

BABE or BABY, n.  A misshapen creature of no particular age, sex, or
condition, chiefly remarkable for the violence of the sympathies and
antipathies it excites in others, itself without sentiment or emotion.
There have been famous babes; for example, little Moses, from whose
adventure in the bulrushes the Egyptian hierophants of seven centuries
before doubtless derived their idle tale of the child Osiris being
preserved on a floating lotus leaf.

          Ere babes were invented
          The girls were contended.
          Now man is tormented
  Until to buy babes he has squandered
  His money.  And so I have pondered
          This thing, and thought may be
          'T were better that Baby
  The First had been eagled or condored.

Ro Amil


BACCHUS, n.  A convenient deity invented by the ancients as an excuse
for getting drunk.

  Is public worship, then, a sin,
      That for devotions paid to Bacchus
  The lictors dare to run us in,
      And resolutely thump and whack us?

Jorace


BACK, n.  That part of your friend which it is your privilege to
contemplate in your adversity.

BACKBITE, v.t.  To speak of a man as you find him when he can't find
you.

BAIT, n.  A preparation that renders the hook more palatable.  The
best kind is beauty.

BAPTISM, n.  A sacred rite of such efficacy that he who finds himself
in heaven without having undergone it will be unhappy forever.  It is
performed with water in two ways--by immersion, or plunging, and by
aspersion, or sprinkling.

  But whether the plan of immersion
  Is better than simple aspersion
      Let those immersed
      And those aspersed
  Decide by the Authorized Version,
  And by matching their agues tertian.

G.J.


BAROMETER, n.  An ingenious instrument which indicates what kind of
weather we are having.

BARRACK, n.  A house in which soldiers enjoy a portion of that of
which it is their business to deprive others.

BASILISK, n.  The cockatrice.  A sort of serpent hatched form the egg
of a cock.  The basilisk had a bad eye, and its glance was fatal.
Many infidels deny this creature's existence, but Semprello Aurator
saw and handled one that had been blinded by lightning as a punishment
for having fatally gazed on a lady of rank whom Jupiter loved.  Juno
afterward restored the reptile's sight and hid it in a cave.  Nothing
is so well attested by the ancients as the existence of the basilisk,
but the cocks have stopped laying.

BASTINADO, n.  The act of walking on wood without exertion.

BATH, n.  A kind of mystic ceremony substituted for religious worship,
with what spiritual efficacy has not been determined.

  The man who taketh a steam bath
  He loseth all the skin he hath,
  And, for he's boiled a brilliant red,
  Thinketh to cleanliness he's wed,
  Forgetting that his lungs he's soiling
  With dirty vapors of the boiling.

Richard Gwow


BATTLE, n.  A method of untying with the teeth of a political knot
that would not yield to the tongue.

BEARD, n.  The hair that is commonly cut off by those who justly
execrate the absurd Chinese custom of shaving the head.

BEAUTY, n.  The power by which a woman charms a lover and terrifies a
husband.

BEFRIEND, v.t.  To make an ingrate.

BEG, v.  To ask for something with an earnestness proportioned to the
belief that it will not be given.

  Who is that, father?
                        A mendicant, child,
  Haggard, morose, and unaffable--wild!
  See how he glares through the bars of his cell!
  With Citizen Mendicant all is not well.

  Why did they put him there, father?

                                       Because
  Obeying his belly he struck at the laws.

  His belly?

              Oh, well, he was starving, my boy--
  A state in which, doubtless, there's little of joy.
  No bite had he eaten for days, and his cry
  Was "Bread!" ever "Bread!"

                              What's the matter with pie?

  With little to wear, he had nothing to sell;
  To beg was unlawful--improper as well.

  Why didn't he work?

                       He would even have done that,
  But men said:  "Get out!" and the State remarked:  "Scat!"
  I mention these incidents merely to show
  That the vengeance he took was uncommonly low.
  Revenge, at the best, is the act of a Siou,
  But for trifles--

                      Pray what did bad Mendicant do?

  Stole two loaves of bread to replenish his lack
  And tuck out the belly that clung to his back.

  Is that _all_ father dear?

                              There's little to tell:
  They sent him to jail, and they'll send him to--well,
  The company's better than here we can boast,
  And there's--

                  Bread for the needy, dear father?

                                                     Um--toast.

Atka Mip


BEGGAR, n.  One who has relied on the assistance of his friends.

BEHAVIOR, n.  Conduct, as determined, not by principle, but by
breeding.  The word seems to be somewhat loosely used in Dr. Jamrach
Holobom's translation of the following lines from the _Dies Irae_:

      Recordare, Jesu pie,
      Quod sum causa tuae viae.
      Ne me perdas illa die.

  Pray remember, sacred Savior,
  Whose the thoughtless hand that gave your
  Death-blow.  Pardon such behavior.

BELLADONNA, n.  In Italian a beautiful lady; in English a deadly
poison.  A striking example of the essential identity of the two
tongues.

BENEDICTINES, n.  An order of monks otherwise known as black friars.

  She thought it a crow, but it turn out to be
      A monk of St. Benedict croaking a text.
  "Here's one of an order of cooks," said she--
      "Black friars in this world, fried black in the next."

"The Devil on Earth" (London, 1712)


BENEFACTOR, n.  One who makes heavy purchases of ingratitude, without,
however, materially affecting the price, which is still within the
means of all.

BERENICE'S HAIR, n.  A constellation (_Coma Berenices_) named in honor
of one who sacrificed her hair to save her husband.

  Her locks an ancient lady gave
  Her loving husband's life to save;
  And men--they honored so the dame--
  Upon some stars bestowed her name.

  But to our modern married fair,
  Who'd give their lords to save their hair,
  No stellar recognition's given.
  There are not stars enough in heaven.

G.J.


BIGAMY, n.  A mistake in taste for which the wisdom of the future will
adjudge a punishment called trigamy.

BIGOT, n.  One who is obstinately and zealously attached to an opinion
that you do not entertain.

BILLINGSGATE, n.  The invective of an opponent.

BIRTH, n.  The first and direst of all disasters.  As to the nature of
it there appears to be no uniformity.  Castor and Pollux were born
from the egg.  Pallas came out of a skull.  Galatea was once a block
of stone.  Peresilis, who wrote in the tenth century, avers that he
grew up out of the ground where a priest had spilled holy water.  It
is known that Arimaxus was derived from a hole in the earth, made by a
stroke of lightning.  Leucomedon was the son of a cavern in Mount
Aetna, and I have myself seen a man come out of a wine cellar.

BLACKGUARD, n.  A man whose qualities, prepared for display like a box
of berries in a market--the fine ones on top--have been opened on
the wrong side.  An inverted gentleman.

BLANK-VERSE, n.  Unrhymed iambic pentameters--the most difficult
kind of English verse to write acceptably; a kind, therefore, much
affected by those who cannot acceptably write any kind.

BODY-SNATCHER, n.  A robber of grave-worms.  One who supplies the
young physicians with that with which the old physicians have supplied
the undertaker.  The hyena.

  "One night," a doctor said, "last fall,
  I and my comrades, four in all,
      When visiting a graveyard stood
  Within the shadow of a wall.

  "While waiting for the moon to sink
  We saw a wild hyena slink
      About a new-made grave, and then
  Begin to excavate its brink!

  "Shocked by the horrid act, we made
  A sally from our ambuscade,
      And, falling on the unholy beast,
  Dispatched him with a pick and spade."

Bettel K. Jhones


BONDSMAN, n.  A fool who, having property of his own, undertakes to
become responsible for that entrusted to another to a third.

Philippe of Orleans wishing to appoint one of his favorites, a
dissolute nobleman, to a high office, asked him what security he would
be able to give.  "I need no bondsmen," he replied, "for I can give
you my word of honor."  "And pray what may be the value of that?"
inquired the amused Regent.  "Monsieur, it is worth its weight in gold."

BORE, n.  A person who talks when you wish him to listen.

BOTANY, n.  The science of vegetables--those that are not good to
eat, as well as those that are.  It deals largely with their flowers,
which are commonly badly designed, inartistic in color, and
ill-smelling.

BOTTLE-NOSED, adj.  Having a nose created in the image of its maker.

BOUNDARY, n.  In political geography, an imaginary line between two
nations, separating the imaginary rights of one from the imaginary
rights of the other.

BOUNTY, n.  The liberality of one who has much, in permitting one who
has nothing to get all that he can.

      A single swallow, it is said, devours ten millions of insects
  every year.  The supplying of these insects I take to be a signal
  instance of the Creator's bounty in providing for the lives of His
  creatures.

Henry Ward Beecher


BRAHMA, n.  He who created the Hindoos, who are preserved by Vishnu
and destroyed by Siva--a rather neater division of labor than is
found among the deities of some other nations.  The Abracadabranese,
for example, are created by Sin, maintained by Theft and destroyed by
Folly.  The priests of Brahma, like those of Abracadabranese, are holy
and learned men who are never naughty.

  O Brahma, thou rare old Divinity,
  First Person of the Hindoo Trinity,
  You sit there so calm and securely,
  With feet folded up so demurely--
  You're the First Person Singular, surely.

Polydore Smith


BRAIN, n. An apparatus with which we think what we think.  That which
distinguishes the man who is content to _be_ something from the man
who wishes to _do_ something.  A man of great wealth, or one who has
been pitchforked into high station, has commonly such a headful of
brain that his neighbors cannot keep their hats on.  In our
civilization, and under our republican form of government, brain is so
highly honored that it is rewarded by exemption from the cares of
office.

BRANDY, n.  A cordial composed of one part thunder-and-lightning, one
part remorse, two parts bloody murder, one part death-hell-and-the
grave and four parts clarified Satan.  Dose, a headful all the time.
Brandy is said by Dr. Johnson to be the drink of heroes.  Only a hero
will venture to drink it.

BRIDE, n.  A woman with a fine prospect of happiness behind her.

BRUTE, n.  See HUSBAND.




C



CAABA, n.  A large stone presented by the archangel Gabriel to the
patriarch Abraham, and preserved at Mecca.  The patriarch had perhaps
asked the archangel for bread.

CABBAGE, n.  A familiar kitchen-garden vegetable about as large and
wise as a man's head.

The cabbage is so called from Cabagius, a prince who on ascending
the throne issued a decree appointing a High Council of Empire
consisting of the members of his predecessor's Ministry and the
cabbages in the royal garden.  When any of his Majesty's measures of
state policy miscarried conspicuously it was gravely announced that
several members of the High Council had been beheaded, and his
murmuring subjects were appeased.

CALAMITY, n.  A more than commonly plain and unmistakable reminder
that the affairs of this life are not of our own ordering.  Calamities
are of two kinds:  misfortune to ourselves, and good fortune to
others.

CALLOUS, adj.  Gifted with great fortitude to bear the evils
afflicting another.

When Zeno was told that one of his enemies was no more he was
observed to be deeply moved.  "What!" said one of his disciples, "you
weep at the death of an enemy?"  "Ah, 'tis true," replied the great
Stoic; "but you should see me smile at the death of a friend."

CALUMNUS, n.  A graduate of the School for Scandal.

CAMEL, n.  A quadruped (the _Splaypes humpidorsus_) of great value to
the show business.  There are two kinds of camels--the camel proper
and the camel improper.  It is the latter that is always exhibited.

CANNIBAL, n.  A gastronome of the old school who preserves the simple
tastes and adheres to the natural diet of the pre-pork period.

CANNON, n.  An instrument employed in the rectification of national
boundaries.

CANONICALS, n.  The motley worm by Jesters of the Court of Heaven.

CAPITAL, n.  The seat of misgovernment.  That which provides the fire,
the pot, the dinner, the table and the knife and fork for the
anarchist; the part of the repast that himself supplies is the
disgrace before meat.  _Capital Punishment_, a penalty regarding the
justice and expediency of which many worthy persons--including all
the assassins--entertain grave misgivings.

CARMELITE, n.  A mendicant friar of the order of Mount Carmel.

  As Death was a-rising out one day,
  Across Mount Camel he took his way,
      Where he met a mendicant monk,
      Some three or four quarters drunk,
  With a holy leer and a pious grin,
  Ragged and fat and as saucy as sin,
      Who held out his hands and cried:
  "Give, give in Charity's name, I pray.
  Give in the name of the Church.  O give,
  Give that her holy sons may live!"
      And Death replied,
      Smiling long and wide:
      "I'll give, holy father, I'll give thee--a ride."

      With a rattle and bang
      Of his bones, he sprang
  From his famous Pale Horse, with his spear;
      By the neck and the foot
      Seized the fellow, and put
  Him astride with his face to the rear.

  The Monarch laughed loud with a sound that fell
  Like clods on the coffin's sounding shell:
  "Ho, ho!  A beggar on horseback, they say,
      Will ride to the devil!"--and _thump_
      Fell the flat of his dart on the rump
  Of the charger, which galloped away.

  Faster and faster and faster it flew,
  Till the rocks and the flocks and the trees that grew
  By the road were dim and blended and blue
      To the wild, wild eyes
      Of the rider--in size
      Resembling a couple of blackberry pies.
  Death laughed again, as a tomb might laugh
      At a burial service spoiled,
      And the mourners' intentions foiled
      By the body erecting
      Its head and objecting
  To further proceedings in its behalf.

  Many a year and many a day
  Have passed since these events away.
  The monk has long been a dusty corse,
  And Death has never recovered his horse.
      For the friar got hold of its tail,
      And steered it within the pale
  Of the monastery gray,
  Where the beast was stabled and fed
  With barley and oil and bread
  Till fatter it grew than the fattest friar,
  And so in due course was appointed Prior.

G.J.


CARNIVOROUS, adj.  Addicted to the cruelty of devouring the timorous
vegetarian, his heirs and assigns.

CARTESIAN, adj.  Relating to Descartes, a famous philosopher, author
of the celebrated dictum, _Cogito ergo sum_--whereby he was pleased
to suppose he demonstrated the reality of human existence.  The dictum
might be improved, however, thus:  _Cogito cogito ergo cogito sum_--
"I think that I think, therefore I think that I am;" as close an
approach to certainty as any philosopher has yet made.

CAT, n.  A soft, indestructible automaton provided by nature to be
kicked when things go wrong in the domestic circle.

  This is a dog,
      This is a cat.
  This is a frog,
      This is a rat.
  Run, dog, mew, cat.
  Jump, frog, gnaw, rat.

Elevenson


CAVILER, n.  A critic of our own work.

CEMETERY, n.  An isolated suburban spot where mourners match lies,
poets write at a target and stone-cutters spell for a wager.  The
inscriptions following will serve to illustrate the success attained
in these Olympian games:

      His virtues were so conspicuous that his enemies, unable to
  overlook them, denied them, and his friends, to whose loose lives
  they were a rebuke, represented them as vices.  They are here
  commemorated by his family, who shared them.
      In the earth we here prepare a
      Place to lay our little Clara.

Thomas M. and Mary Frazer

      P.S.--Gabriel will raise her.

CENTAUR, n.  One of a race of persons who lived before the division of
labor had been carried to such a pitch of differentiation, and who
followed the primitive economic maxim, "Every man his own horse."  The
best of the lot was Chiron, who to the wisdom and virtues of the horse
added the fleetness of man.  The scripture story of the head of John
the Baptist on a charger shows that pagan myths have somewhat
sophisticated sacred history.

CERBERUS, n.  The watch-dog of Hades, whose duty it was to guard the
entrance--against whom or what does not clearly appear; everybody,
sooner or later, had to go there, and nobody wanted to carry off the
entrance.  Cerberus is known to have had three heads, and some of the
poets have credited him with as many as a hundred.  Professor
Graybill, whose clerky erudition and profound knowledge of Greek give
his opinion great weight, has averaged all the estimates, and makes
the number twenty-seven--a judgment that would be entirely
conclusive is Professor Graybill had known (a) something about dogs,
and (b) something about arithmetic.

CHILDHOOD, n.  The period of human life intermediate between the
idiocy of infancy and the folly of youth--two removes from the sin
of manhood and three from the remorse of age.

CHRISTIAN, n.  One who believes that the New Testament is a divinely
inspired book admirably suited to the spiritual needs of his neighbor.
One who follows the teachings of Christ in so far as they are not
inconsistent with a life of sin.

  I dreamed I stood upon a hill, and, lo!
  The godly multitudes walked to and fro
  Beneath, in Sabbath garments fitly clad,
  With pious mien, appropriately sad,
  While all the church bells made a solemn din--
  A fire-alarm to those who lived in sin.
  Then saw I gazing thoughtfully below,
  With tranquil face, upon that holy show
  A tall, spare figure in a robe of white,
  Whose eyes diffused a melancholy light.
  "God keep you, strange," I exclaimed.  "You are
  No doubt (your habit shows it) from afar;
  And yet I entertain the hope that you,
  Like these good people, are a Christian too."
  He raised his eyes and with a look so stern
  It made me with a thousand blushes burn
  Replied--his manner with disdain was spiced:
  "What!  I a Christian?  No, indeed!  I'm Christ."

G.J.


CIRCUS, n.  A place where horses, ponies and elephants are permitted
to see men, women and children acting the fool.

CLAIRVOYANT, n.  A person, commonly a woman, who has the power of
seeing that which is invisible to her patron, namely, that he is a
blockhead.

CLARIONET, n.  An instrument of torture operated by a person with
cotton in his ears.  There are two instruments that are worse than a
clarionet--two clarionets.

CLERGYMAN, n.  A man who undertakes the management of our spiritual
affairs as a method of better his temporal ones.

CLIO, n.  One of the nine Muses.  Clio's function was to preside over
history--which she did with great dignity, many of the prominent
citizens of Athens occupying seats on the platform, the meetings being
addressed by Messrs. Xenophon, Herodotus and other popular speakers.

CLOCK, n.  A machine of great moral value to man, allaying his concern
for the future by reminding him what a lot of time remains to him.

  A busy man complained one day:
  "I get no time!"  "What's that you say?"
  Cried out his friend, a lazy quiz;
  "You have, sir, all the time there is.
  There's plenty, too, and don't you doubt it--
  We're never for an hour without it."

Purzil Crofe


CLOSE-FISTED, adj.  Unduly desirous of keeping that which many
meritorious persons wish to obtain.

  "Close-fisted Scotchman!" Johnson cried
      To thrifty J. Macpherson;
  "See me--I'm ready to divide
      With any worthy person."
  Sad Jamie:  "That is very true--
      The boast requires no backing;
  And all are worthy, sir, to you,
      Who have what you are lacking."

Anita M. Bobe


COENOBITE, n.  A man who piously shuts himself up to meditate upon the
sin of wickedness; and to keep it fresh in his mind joins a
brotherhood of awful examples.

  O Coenobite, O coenobite,
      Monastical gregarian,
  You differ from the anchorite,
      That solitudinarian:
  With vollied prayers you wound Old Nick;
  With dropping shots he makes him sick.

Quincy Giles


COMFORT, n.  A state of mind produced by contemplation of a neighbor's
uneasiness.

COMMENDATION, n.  The tribute that we pay to achievements that
resembles, but do not equal, our own.

COMMERCE, n.  A kind of transaction in which A plunders from B the
goods of C, and for compensation B picks the pocket of D of money
belonging to E.

COMMONWEALTH, n.  An administrative entity operated by an incalculable
multitude of political parasites, logically active but fortuitously
efficient.

  This commonwealth's capitol's corridors view,
  So thronged with a hungry and indolent crew
  Of clerks, pages, porters and all attaches
  Whom rascals appoint and the populace pays
  That a cat cannot slip through the thicket of shins
  Nor hear its own shriek for the noise of their chins.
  On clerks and on pages, and porters, and all,
  Misfortune attend and disaster befall!
  May life be to them a succession of hurts;
  May fleas by the bushel inhabit their shirts;
  May aches and diseases encamp in their bones,
  Their lungs full of tubercles, bladders of stones;
  May microbes, bacilli, their tissues infest,
  And tapeworms securely their bowels digest;
  May corn-cobs be snared without hope in their hair,
  And frequent impalement their pleasure impair.
  Disturbed be their dreams by the awful discourse
  Of audible sofas sepulchrally hoarse,
  By chairs acrobatic and wavering floors--
  The mattress that kicks and the pillow that snores!
  Sons of cupidity, cradled in sin!
  Your criminal ranks may the death angel thin,
  Avenging the friend whom I couldn't work in.

K.Q.


COMPROMISE, n.  Such an adjustment of conflicting interests as gives
each adversary the satisfaction of thinking he has got what he ought
not to have, and is deprived of nothing except what was justly his
due.

COMPULSION, n.  The eloquence of power.

CONDOLE, v.i.  To show that bereavement is a smaller evil than
sympathy.

CONFIDANT, CONFIDANTE, n.  One entrusted by A with the secrets of B,
confided by _him_ to C.

CONGRATULATION, n.  The civility of envy.

CONGRESS, n.  A body of men who meet to repeal laws.

CONNOISSEUR, n.  A specialist who knows everything about something and
nothing about anything else.

An old wine-bibber having been smashed in a railway collision,
some wine was pouted on his lips to revive him.  "Pauillac, 1873," he
murmured and died.

CONSERVATIVE, n.  A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as
distinguished from the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with
others.

CONSOLATION, n.  The knowledge that a better man is more unfortunate
than yourself.

CONSUL, n.  In American politics, a person who having failed to secure
an office from the people is given one by the Administration on
condition that he leave the country.

CONSULT, v.i.  To seek another's disapproval of a course already
decided on.

CONTEMPT, n.  The feeling of a prudent man for an enemy who is too
formidable safely to be opposed.

CONTROVERSY, n.  A battle in which spittle or ink replaces the
injurious cannon-ball and the inconsiderate bayonet.

  In controversy with the facile tongue--
  That bloodless warfare of the old and young--
  So seek your adversary to engage
  That on himself he shall exhaust his rage,
  And, like a snake that's fastened to the ground,
  With his own fangs inflict the fatal wound.
  You ask me how this miracle is done?
  Adopt his own opinions, one by one,
  And taunt him to refute them; in his wrath
  He'll sweep them pitilessly from his path.
  Advance then gently all you wish to prove,
  Each proposition prefaced with, "As you've
  So well remarked," or, "As you wisely say,
  And I cannot dispute," or, "By the way,
  This view of it which, better far expressed,
  Runs through your argument."  Then leave the rest
  To him, secure that he'll perform his trust
  And prove your views intelligent and just.

Conmore Apel Brune


CONVENT, n.  A place of retirement for woman who wish for leisure to
meditate upon the vice of idleness.

CONVERSATION, n.  A fair to the display of the minor mental
commodities, each exhibitor being too intent upon the arrangement of
his own wares to observe those of his neighbor.

CORONATION, n.  The ceremony of investing a sovereign with the outward
and visible signs of his divine right to be blown skyhigh with a
dynamite bomb.

CORPORAL, n.  A man who occupies the lowest rung of the military
ladder.

  Fiercely the battle raged and, sad to tell,
  Our corporal heroically fell!
  Fame from her height looked down upon the brawl
  And said:  "He hadn't very far to fall."

Giacomo Smith


CORPORATION, n.  An ingenious device for obtaining individual profit
without individual responsibility.

CORSAIR, n.  A politician of the seas.

COURT FOOL, n.  The plaintiff.

COWARD, n.  One who in a perilous emergency thinks with his legs.

CRAYFISH, n.  A small crustacean very much resembling the lobster, but
less indigestible.

      In this small fish I take it that human wisdom is admirably
  figured and symbolized; for whereas the crayfish doth move only
  backward, and can have only retrospection, seeing naught but the
  perils already passed, so the wisdom of man doth not enable him to
  avoid the follies that beset his course, but only to apprehend
  their nature afterward.

Sir James Merivale


CREDITOR, n.  One of a tribe of savages dwelling beyond the Financial
Straits and dreaded for their desolating incursions.

CREMONA, n.  A high-priced violin made in Connecticut.

CRITIC, n.  A person who boasts himself hard to please because nobody
tries to please him.

  There is a land of pure delight,
      Beyond the Jordan's flood,
  Where saints, apparelled all in white,
      Fling back the critic's mud.

  And as he legs it through the skies,
      His pelt a sable hue,
  He sorrows sore to recognize
      The missiles that he threw.

Orrin Goof


CROSS, n.  An ancient religious symbol erroneously supposed to owe its
significance to the most solemn event in the history of Christianity,
but really antedating it by thousands of years.  By many it has been
believed to be identical with the _crux ansata_ of the ancient phallic
worship, but it has been traced even beyond all that we know of that,
to the rites of primitive peoples.  We have to-day the White Cross as
a symbol of chastity, and the Red Cross as a badge of benevolent
neutrality in war.  Having in mind the former, the reverend Father
Gassalasca Jape smites the lyre to the effect following:

  "Be good, be good!" the sisterhood
      Cry out in holy chorus,
  And, to dissuade from sin, parade
      Their various charms before us.

  But why, O why, has ne'er an eye
      Seen her of winsome manner
  And youthful grace and pretty face
      Flaunting the White Cross banner?

  Now where's the need of speech and screed
      To better our behaving?
  A simpler plan for saving man
      (But, first, is he worth saving?)

  Is, dears, when he declines to flee
      From bad thoughts that beset him,
  Ignores the Law as 't were a straw,
      And wants to sin--don't let him.

CUI BONO?  [Latin]  What good would that do _me_?

CUNNING, n.  The faculty that distinguishes a weak animal or person
from a strong one.  It brings its possessor much mental satisfaction
and great material adversity.  An Italian proverb says:  "The furrier
gets the skins of more foxes than asses."

CUPID, n.  The so-called god of love.  This bastard creation of a
barbarous fancy was no doubt inflicted upon mythology for the sins of
its deities.  Of all unbeautiful and inappropriate conceptions this is
the most reasonless and offensive.  The notion of symbolizing sexual
love by a semisexless babe, and comparing the pains of passion to the
wounds of an arrow--of introducing this pudgy homunculus into art
grossly to materialize the subtle spirit and suggestion of the work--
this is eminently worthy of the age that, giving it birth, laid it on
the doorstep of prosperity.

CURIOSITY, n.  An objectionable quality of the female mind.  The
desire to know whether or not a woman is cursed with curiosity is one
of the most active and insatiable passions of the masculine soul.

CURSE, v.t.  Energetically to belabor with a verbal slap-stick.  This
is an operation which in literature, particularly in the drama, is
commonly fatal to the victim.  Nevertheless, the liability to a
cursing is a risk that cuts but a small figure in fixing the rates of
life insurance.

CYNIC, n.  A blackguard whose faulty vision sees things as they are,
not as they ought to be.  Hence the custom among the Scythians of
plucking out a cynic's eyes to improve his vision.




D



DAMN, v.  A word formerly much used by the Paphlagonians, the meaning
of which is lost.  By the learned Dr. Dolabelly Gak it is believed to
have been a term of satisfaction, implying the highest possible degree
of mental tranquillity.  Professor Groke, on the contrary, thinks it
expressed an emotion of tumultuous delight, because it so frequently
occurs in combination with the word _jod_ or _god_, meaning "joy."  It
would be with great diffidence that I should advance an opinion
conflicting with that of either of these formidable authorities.

DANCE, v.i.  To leap about to the sound of tittering music, preferably
with arms about your neighbor's wife or daughter.  There are many
kinds of dances, but all those requiring the participation of the two
sexes have two characteristics in common:  they are conspicuously
innocent, and warmly loved by the vicious.

DANGER, n.

  A savage beast which, when it sleeps,
      Man girds at and despises,
  But takes himself away by leaps
      And bounds when it arises.

Ambat Delaso


DARING, n.  One of the most conspicuous qualities of a man in
security.

DATARY, n.  A high ecclesiastic official of the Roman Catholic Church,
whose important function is to brand the Pope's bulls with the words
_Datum Romae_.  He enjoys a princely revenue and the friendship of
God.

DAWN, n.  The time when men of reason go to bed.  Certain old men
prefer to rise at about that time, taking a cold bath and a long walk
with an empty stomach, and otherwise mortifying the flesh.  They then
point with pride to these practices as the cause of their sturdy
health and ripe years; the truth being that they are hearty and old,
not because of their habits, but in spite of them.  The reason we find
only robust persons doing this thing is that it has killed all the
others who have tried it.

DAY, n.  A period of twenty-four hours, mostly misspent.  This period
is divided into two parts, the day proper and the night, or day
improper--the former devoted to sins of business, the latter
consecrated to the other sort.  These two kinds of social activity
overlap.

DEAD, adj.

  Done with the work of breathing; done
  With all the world; the mad race run
  Though to the end; the golden goal
  Attained and found to be a hole!

Squatol Johnes


DEBAUCHEE, n.  One who has so earnestly pursued pleasure that he has
had the misfortune to overtake it.

DEBT, n.  An ingenious substitute for the chain and whip of the
slave-driver.

  As, pent in an aquarium, the troutlet
  Swims round and round his tank to find an outlet,
  Pressing his nose against the glass that holds him,
  Nor ever sees the prison that enfolds him;
  So the poor debtor, seeing naught around him,
  Yet feels the narrow limits that impound him,
  Grieves at his debt and studies to evade it,
  And finds at last he might as well have paid it.

Barlow S. Vode


DECALOGUE, n.  A series of commandments, ten in number--just enough
to permit an intelligent selection for observance, but not enough to
embarrass the choice.  Following is the revised edition of the
Decalogue, calculated for this meridian.

  Thou shalt no God but me adore:
  'Twere too expensive to have more.

  No images nor idols make
  For Robert Ingersoll to break.

  Take not God's name in vain; select
  A time when it will have effect.

  Work not on Sabbath days at all,
  But go to see the teams play ball.

  Honor thy parents.  That creates
  For life insurance lower rates.

  Kill not, abet not those who kill;
  Thou shalt not pay thy butcher's bill.

  Kiss not thy neighbor's wife, unless
  Thine own thy neighbor doth caress

  Don't steal; thou'lt never thus compete
  Successfully in business.  Cheat.

  Bear not false witness--that is low--
  But "hear 'tis rumored so and so."

  Cover thou naught that thou hast not
  By hook or crook, or somehow, got.

G.J.


DECIDE, v.i.  To succumb to the preponderance of one set of influences
over another set.

  A leaf was riven from a tree,
  "I mean to fall to earth," said he.

  The west wind, rising, made him veer.
  "Eastward," said he, "I now shall steer."

  The east wind rose with greater force.
  Said he:  "'Twere wise to change my course."

  With equal power they contend.
  He said:  "My judgment I suspend."

  Down died the winds; the leaf, elate,
  Cried:  "I've decided to fall straight."

  "First thoughts are best?"  That's not the moral;
  Just choose your own and we'll not quarrel.

  Howe'er your choice may chance to fall,
  You'll have no hand in it at all.

G.J.


DEFAME, v.t.  To lie about another.  To tell the truth about another.

DEFENCELESS, adj.  Unable to attack.

DEGENERATE, adj.  Less conspicuously admirable than one's ancestors.
The contemporaries of Homer were striking examples of degeneracy; it
required ten of them to raise a rock or a riot that one of the heroes
of the Trojan war could have raised with ease.  Homer never tires of
sneering at "men who live in these degenerate days," which is perhaps
why they suffered him to beg his bread--a marked instance of
returning good for evil, by the way, for if they had forbidden him he
would certainly have starved.

DEGRADATION, n.  One of the stages of moral and social progress from
private station to political preferment.

DEINOTHERIUM, n.  An extinct pachyderm that flourished when the
Pterodactyl was in fashion.  The latter was a native of Ireland, its
name being pronounced Terry Dactyl or Peter O'Dactyl, as the man
pronouncing it may chance to have heard it spoken or seen it printed.

DEJEUNER, n.  The breakfast of an American who has been in Paris.
Variously pronounced.

DELEGATION, n.  In American politics, an article of merchandise that
comes in sets.

DELIBERATION, n.  The act of examining one's bread to determine which
side it is buttered on.

DELUGE, n.  A notable first experiment in baptism which washed away
the sins (and sinners) of the world.

DELUSION, n.  The father of a most respectable family, comprising
Enthusiasm, Affection, Self-denial, Faith, Hope, Charity and many
other goodly sons and daughters.

  All hail, Delusion!  Were it not for thee
  The world turned topsy-turvy we should see;
  For Vice, respectable with cleanly fancies,
  Would fly abandoned Virtue's gross advances.

Mumfrey Mappel


DENTIST, n.  A prestidigitator who, putting metal into your mouth,
pulls coins out of your pocket.

DEPENDENT, adj.  Reliant upon another's generosity for the support
which you are not in a position to exact from his fears.

DEPUTY, n.  A male relative of an office-holder, or of his bondsman.
The deputy is commonly a beautiful young man, with a red necktie and
an intricate system of cobwebs extending from his nose to his desk.
When accidentally struck by the janitor's broom, he gives off a cloud
of dust.

  "Chief Deputy," the Master cried,
  "To-day the books are to be tried
  By experts and accountants who
  Have been commissioned to go through
  Our office here, to see if we
  Have stolen injudiciously.
  Please have the proper entries made,
  The proper balances displayed,
  Conforming to the whole amount
  Of cash on hand--which they will count.
  I've long admired your punctual way--
  Here at the break and close of day,
  Confronting in your chair the crowd
  Of business men, whose voices loud
  And gestures violent you quell
  By some mysterious, calm spell--
  Some magic lurking in your look
  That brings the noisiest to book
  And spreads a holy and profound
  Tranquillity o'er all around.
  So orderly all's done that they
  Who came to draw remain to pay.
  But now the time demands, at last,
  That you employ your genius vast
  In energies more active.  Rise
  And shake the lightnings from your eyes;
  Inspire your underlings, and fling
  Your spirit into everything!"
  The Master's hand here dealt a whack
  Upon the Deputy's bent back,
  When straightway to the floor there fell
  A shrunken globe, a rattling shell
  A blackened, withered, eyeless head!
  The man had been a twelvemonth dead.

Jamrach Holobom


DESTINY, n.  A tyrant's authority for crime and fool's excuse for
failure.

DIAGNOSIS, n.  A physician's forecast of the disease by the patient's
pulse and purse.

DIAPHRAGM, n.  A muscular partition separating disorders of the chest
from disorders of the bowels.

DIARY, n.  A daily record of that part of one's life, which he can
relate to himself without blushing.

  Hearst kept a diary wherein were writ
  All that he had of wisdom and of wit.
  So the Recording Angel, when Hearst died,
  Erased all entries of his own and cried:
  "I'll judge you by your diary."  Said Hearst:
  "Thank you; 'twill show you I am Saint the First"--
  Straightway producing, jubilant and proud,
  That record from a pocket in his shroud.
  The Angel slowly turned the pages o'er,
  Each stupid line of which he knew before,
  Glooming and gleaming as by turns he hit
  On Shallow sentiment and stolen wit;
  Then gravely closed the book and gave it back.
  "My friend, you've wandered from your proper track:
  You'd never be content this side the tomb--
  For big ideas Heaven has little room,
  And Hell's no latitude for making mirth,"
  He said, and kicked the fellow back to earth.

"The Mad Philosopher"


DICTATOR, n.  The chief of a nation that prefers the pestilence of
despotism to the plague of anarchy.

DICTIONARY, n.  A malevolent literary device for cramping the growth
of a language and making it hard and inelastic.  This dictionary,
however, is a most useful work.

DIE, n.  The singular of "dice."  We seldom hear the word, because
there is a prohibitory proverb, "Never say die."  At long intervals,
however, some one says:  "The die is cast," which is not true, for it
is cut.  The word is found in an immortal couplet by that eminent poet
and domestic economist, Senator Depew:

  A cube of cheese no larger than a die
  May bait the trap to catch a nibbling mie.

DIGESTION, n.  The conversion of victuals into virtues.  When the
process is imperfect, vices are evolved instead--a circumstance from
which that wicked writer, Dr. Jeremiah Blenn, infers that the ladies
are the greater sufferers from dyspepsia.

DIPLOMACY, n.  The patriotic art of lying for one's country.

DISABUSE, v.t.  The present your neighbor with another and better
error than the one which he has deemed it advantageous to embrace.

DISCRIMINATE, v.i.  To note the particulars in which one person or
thing is, if possible, more objectionable than another.

DISCUSSION, n.  A method of confirming others in their errors.

DISOBEDIENCE, n.  The silver lining to the cloud of servitude.

DISOBEY, v.t.  To celebrate with an appropriate ceremony the maturity
of a command.

  His right to govern me is clear as day,
  My duty manifest to disobey;
  And if that fit observance e'er I shut
  May I and duty be alike undone.

Israfel Brown


DISSEMBLE, v.i.  To put a clean shirt upon the character.
  Let us dissemble.

Adam


DISTANCE, n.  The only thing that the rich are willing for the poor to
call theirs, and keep.

DISTRESS, n.  A disease incurred by exposure to the prosperity of a
friend.

DIVINATION, n.  The art of nosing out the occult.  Divination is of as
many kinds as there are fruit-bearing varieties of the flowering dunce
and the early fool.

DOG, n.  A kind of additional or subsidiary Deity designed to catch
the overflow and surplus of the world's worship.  This Divine Being in
some of his smaller and silkier incarnations takes, in the affection
of Woman, the place to which there is no human male aspirant.  The Dog
is a survival--an anachronism.  He toils not, neither does he spin,
yet Solomon in all his glory never lay upon a door-mat all day long,
sun-soaked and fly-fed and fat, while his master worked for the means
wherewith to purchase the idle wag of the Solomonic tail, seasoned
with a look of tolerant recognition.

DRAGOON, n.  A soldier who combines dash and steadiness in so equal
measure that he makes his advances on foot and his retreats on
horseback.

DRAMATIST, n.  One who adapts plays from the French.

DRUIDS, n.  Priests and ministers of an ancient Celtic religion which
did not disdain to employ the humble allurement of human sacrifice.
Very little is now known about the Druids and their faith.  Pliny says
their religion, originating in Britain, spread eastward as far as
Persia.  Caesar says those who desired to study its mysteries went to
Britain.  Caesar himself went to Britain, but does not appear to have
obtained any high preferment in the Druidical Church, although his
talent for human sacrifice was considerable.

Druids performed their religious rites in groves, and knew nothing
of church mortgages and the season-ticket system of pew rents.  They
were, in short, heathens and--as they were once complacently
catalogued by a distinguished prelate of the Church of England--
Dissenters.

DUCK-BILL, n.  Your account at your restaurant during the canvas-back
season.

DUEL, n.  A formal ceremony preliminary to the reconciliation of two
enemies.  Great skill is necessary to its satisfactory observance; if
awkwardly performed the most unexpected and deplorable consequences
sometimes ensue.  A long time ago a man lost his life in a duel.

  That dueling's a gentlemanly vice
      I hold; and wish that it had been my lot
      To live my life out in some favored spot--
  Some country where it is considered nice
  To split a rival like a fish, or slice
      A husband like a spud, or with a shot
      Bring down a debtor doubled in a knot
  And ready to be put upon the ice.
  Some miscreants there are, whom I do long
      To shoot, to stab, or some such way reclaim
  The scurvy rogues to better lives and manners,
  I seem to see them now--a mighty throng.
      It looks as if to challenge _me_ they came,
  Jauntily marching with brass bands and banners!

Xamba Q. Dar


DULLARD, n.  A member of the reigning dynasty in letters and life.
The Dullards came in with Adam, and being both numerous and sturdy
have overrun the habitable world.  The secret of their power is their
insensibility to blows; tickle them with a bludgeon and they laugh
with a platitude.  The Dullards came originally from Boeotia, whence
they were driven by stress of starvation, their dullness having
blighted the crops.  For some centuries they infested Philistia, and
many of them are called Philistines to this day.  In the turbulent
times of the Crusades they withdrew thence and gradually overspread
all Europe, occupying most of the high places in politics, art,
literature, science and theology.  Since a detachment of Dullards came
over with the Pilgrims in the _Mayflower_ and made a favorable report
of the country, their increase by birth, immigration, and conversion
has been rapid and steady.  According to the most trustworthy
statistics the number of adult Dullards in the United States is but
little short of thirty millions, including the statisticians.  The
intellectual centre of the race is somewhere about Peoria, Illinois,
but the New England Dullard is the most shockingly moral.

DUTY, n.  That which sternly impels us in the direction of profit,
along the line of desire.

  Sir Lavender Portwine, in favor at court,
  Was wroth at his master, who'd kissed Lady Port.
  His anger provoked him to take the king's head,
  But duty prevailed, and he took the king's bread,
          Instead.

G.J.





E



EAT, v.i.  To perform successively (and successfully) the functions of
mastication, humectation, and deglutition.

"I was in the drawing-room, enjoying my dinner," said Brillat-Savarin,
beginning an anecdote.  "What!" interrupted Rochebriant; "eating dinner
in a drawing-room?"  "I must beg you to observe, monsieur," explained
the great gastronome, "that I did not say I was eating my dinner, but
enjoying it.  I had dined an hour before."

EAVESDROP, v.i.  Secretly to overhear a catalogue of the crimes and
vices of another or yourself.

  A lady with one of her ears applied
  To an open keyhole heard, inside,
  Two female gossips in converse free--
  The subject engaging them was she.
  "I think," said one, "and my husband thinks
  That she's a prying, inquisitive minx!"
  As soon as no more of it she could hear
  The lady, indignant, removed her ear.
  "I will not stay," she said, with a pout,
  "To hear my character lied about!"

Gopete Sherany


ECCENTRICITY, n.  A method of distinction so cheap that fools employ
it to accentuate their incapacity.

ECONOMY, n.  Purchasing the barrel of whiskey that you do not need for
the price of the cow that you cannot afford.

EDIBLE, adj.  Good to eat, and wholesome to digest, as a worm to a
toad, a toad to a snake, a snake to a pig, a pig to a man, and a man
to a worm.

EDITOR, n.  A person who combines the judicial functions of Minos,
Rhadamanthus and Aeacus, but is placable with an obolus; a severely
virtuous censor, but so charitable withal that he tolerates the
virtues of others and the vices of himself; who flings about him the
splintering lightning and sturdy thunders of admonition till he
resembles a bunch of firecrackers petulantly uttering his mind at the
tail of a dog; then straightway murmurs a mild, melodious lay, soft as
the cooing of a donkey intoning its prayer to the evening star.
Master of mysteries and lord of law, high-pinnacled upon the throne of
thought, his face suffused with the dim splendors of the
Transfiguration, his legs intertwisted and his tongue a-cheek, the
editor spills his will along the paper and cuts it off in lengths to
suit.  And at intervals from behind the veil of the temple is heard
the voice of the foreman demanding three inches of wit and six lines
of religious meditation, or bidding him turn off the wisdom and whack
up some pathos.

  O, the Lord of Law on the Throne of Thought,
      A gilded impostor is he.
  Of shreds and patches his robes are wrought,
              His crown is brass,
              Himself an ass,
      And his power is fiddle-dee-dee.
  Prankily, crankily prating of naught,
  Silly old quilly old Monarch of Thought.
      Public opinion's camp-follower he,
      Thundering, blundering, plundering free.
                  Affected,
                      Ungracious,
                  Suspected,
                      Mendacious,
  Respected contemporaree!
                                                    J.H. Bumbleshook

EDUCATION, n. That which discloses to the wise and disguises from the
foolish their lack of understanding.

EFFECT, n.  The second of two phenomena which always occur together in
the same order.  The first, called a Cause, is said to generate the
other--which is no more sensible than it would be for one who has
never seen a dog except in the pursuit of a rabbit to declare the
rabbit the cause of a dog.

EGOTIST, n.  A person of low taste, more interested in himself than in me.

  Megaceph, chosen to serve the State
  In the halls of legislative debate,
  One day with all his credentials came
  To the capitol's door and announced his name.
  The doorkeeper looked, with a comical twist
  Of the face, at the eminent egotist,
  And said:  "Go away, for we settle here
  All manner of questions, knotty and queer,
  And we cannot have, when the speaker demands
  To be told how every member stands,
  A man who to all things under the sky
  Assents by eternally voting 'I'."

EJECTION, n.  An approved remedy for the disease of garrulity.  It is
also much used in cases of extreme poverty.

ELECTOR, n.  One who enjoys the sacred privilege of voting for the man
of another man's choice.

ELECTRICITY, n.  The power that causes all natural phenomena not known
to be caused by something else.  It is the same thing as lightning,
and its famous attempt to strike Dr. Franklin is one of the most
picturesque incidents in that great and good man's career.  The memory
of Dr. Franklin is justly held in great reverence, particularly in
France, where a waxen effigy of him was recently on exhibition,
bearing the following touching account of his life and services to
science:

      "Monsieur Franqulin, inventor of electricity.  This
  illustrious savant, after having made several voyages around the
  world, died on the Sandwich Islands and was devoured by savages,
  of whom not a single fragment was ever recovered."

  Electricity seems destined to play a most important part in the
arts and industries.  The question of its economical application to
some purposes is still unsettled, but experiment has already proved
that it will propel a street car better than a gas jet and give more
light than a horse.

ELEGY, n.  A composition in verse, in which, without employing any of
the methods of humor, the writer aims to produce in the reader's mind
the dampest kind of dejection.  The most famous English example begins
somewhat like this:

  The cur foretells the knell of parting day;
      The loafing herd winds slowly o'er the lea;
  The wise man homeward plods; I only stay
      To fiddle-faddle in a minor key.

ELOQUENCE, n.  The art of orally persuading fools that white is the
color that it appears to be.  It includes the gift of making any color
appear white.

ELYSIUM, n.  An imaginary delightful country which the ancients
foolishly believed to be inhabited by the spirits of the good.  This
ridiculous and mischievous fable was swept off the face of the earth
by the early Christians--may their souls be happy in Heaven!

EMANCIPATION, n.  A bondman's change from the tyranny of another to
the despotism of himself.

  He was a slave:  at word he went and came;
      His iron collar cut him to the bone.
  Then Liberty erased his owner's name,
      Tightened the rivets and inscribed his own.

G.J.


EMBALM, v.i.  To cheat vegetation by locking up the gases upon which
it feeds.  By embalming their dead and thereby deranging the natural
balance between animal and vegetable life, the Egyptians made their
once fertile and populous country barren and incapable of supporting
more than a meagre crew.  The modern metallic burial casket is a step
in the same direction, and many a dead man who ought now to be
ornamenting his neighbor's lawn as a tree, or enriching his table as a
bunch of radishes, is doomed to a long inutility.  We shall get him
after awhile if we are spared, but in the meantime the violet and rose
are languishing for a nibble at his _glutoeus maximus_.

EMOTION, n.  A prostrating disease caused by a determination of the
heart to the head.  It is sometimes accompanied by a copious discharge
of hydrated chloride of sodium from the eyes.

ENCOMIAST, n.  A special (but not particular) kind of liar.

END, n.  The position farthest removed on either hand from the
Interlocutor.

  The man was perishing apace
      Who played the tambourine;
  The seal of death was on his face--
      'Twas pallid, for 'twas clean.

  "This is the end," the sick man said
      In faint and failing tones.
  A moment later he was dead,
      And Tambourine was Bones.

Tinley Roquot


ENOUGH, pro.  All there is in the world if you like it.

  Enough is as good as a feast--for that matter
  Enougher's as good as a feast for the platter.

Arbely C. Strunk


ENTERTAINMENT, n.  Any kind of amusement whose inroads stop short of
death by injection.

ENTHUSIASM, n.  A distemper of youth, curable by small doses of
repentance in connection with outward applications of experience.
Byron, who recovered long enough to call it "entuzy-muzy," had a
relapse, which carried him off--to Missolonghi.

ENVELOPE, n.  The coffin of a document; the scabbard of a bill; the
husk of a remittance; the bed-gown of a love-letter.

ENVY, n.  Emulation adapted to the meanest capacity.

EPAULET, n.  An ornamented badge, serving to distinguish a military
officer from the enemy--that is to say, from the officer of lower
rank to whom his death would give promotion.

EPICURE, n.  An opponent of Epicurus, an abstemious philosopher who,
holding that pleasure should be the chief aim of man, wasted no time
in gratification from the senses.

EPIGRAM, n.  A short, sharp saying in prose or verse, frequently
characterize by acidity or acerbity and sometimes by wisdom.
Following are some of the more notable epigrams of the learned and
ingenious Dr. Jamrach Holobom:

      We know better the needs of ourselves than of others.  To
  serve oneself is economy of administration.

      In each human heart are a tiger, a pig, an ass and a
  nightingale.  Diversity of character is due to their unequal
  activity.

      There are three sexes; males, females and girls.

      Beauty in women and distinction in men are alike in this:
  they seem to be the unthinking a kind of credibility.
      Women in love are less ashamed than men.  They have less to be
  ashamed of.

      While your friend holds you affectionately by both your hands
  you are safe, for you can watch both his.

EPITAPH, n.  An inscription on a tomb, showing that virtues acquired
by death have a retroactive effect.  Following is a touching example:

  Here lie the bones of Parson Platt,
  Wise, pious, humble and all that,
  Who showed us life as all should live it;
  Let that be said--and God forgive it!

ERUDITION, n.  Dust shaken out of a book into an empty skull.

  So wide his erudition's mighty span,
  He knew Creation's origin and plan
  And only came by accident to grief--
  He thought, poor man, 'twas right to be a thief.

Romach Pute


ESOTERIC, adj.  Very particularly abstruse and consummately occult.
The ancient philosophies were of two kinds,--_exoteric_, those that
the philosophers themselves could partly understand, and _esoteric_,
those that nobody could understand.  It is the latter that have most
profoundly affected modern thought and found greatest acceptance in
our time.

ETHNOLOGY, n.  The science that treats of the various tribes of Man,
as robbers, thieves, swindlers, dunces, lunatics, idiots and
ethnologists.

EUCHARIST, n.  A sacred feast of the religious sect of Theophagi.
  A dispute once unhappily arose among the members of this sect as
to what it was that they ate.  In this controversy some five hundred
thousand have already been slain, and the question is still unsettled.

EULOGY, n.  Praise of a person who has either the advantages of wealth
and power, or the consideration to be dead.

EVANGELIST, n.  A bearer of good tidings, particularly (in a religious
sense) such as assure us of our own salvation and the damnation of
our neighbors.

EVERLASTING, adj.  Lasting forever.  It is with no small diffidence
that I venture to offer this brief and elementary definition, for I am
not unaware of the existence of a bulky volume by a sometime Bishop of
Worcester, entitled, _A Partial Definition of the Word "Everlasting,"
as Used in the Authorized Version of the Holy Scriptures_.  His book
was once esteemed of great authority in the Anglican Church, and is
still, I understand, studied with pleasure to the mind and profit of
the soul.

EXCEPTION, n.  A thing which takes the liberty to differ from other
things of its class, as an honest man, a truthful woman, etc.  "The
exception proves the rule" is an expression constantly upon the lips
of the ignorant, who parrot it from one another with never a thought
of its absurdity.  In the Latin, "_Exceptio probat regulam_" means
that the exception _tests_ the rule, puts it to the proof, not
_confirms_ it.  The malefactor who drew the meaning from this
excellent dictum and substituted a contrary one of his own exerted an
evil power which appears to be immortal.

EXCESS, n.  In morals, an indulgence that enforces by appropriate
penalties the law of moderation.

  Hail, high Excess--especially in wine,
      To thee in worship do I bend the knee
      Who preach abstemiousness unto me--
  My skull thy pulpit, as my paunch thy shrine.
  Precept on precept, aye, and line on line,
      Could ne'er persuade so sweetly to agree
      With reason as thy touch, exact and free,
  Upon my forehead and along my spine.
  At thy command eschewing pleasure's cup,
      With the hot grape I warm no more my wit;
      When on thy stool of penitence I sit
  I'm quite converted, for I can't get up.
  Ungrateful he who afterward would falter
  To make new sacrifices at thine altar!

EXCOMMUNICATION, n.

  This "excommunication" is a word
  In speech ecclesiastical oft heard,
  And means the damning, with bell, book and candle,
  Some sinner whose opinions are a scandal--
  A rite permitting Satan to enslave him
  Forever, and forbidding Christ to save him.

Gat Huckle


EXECUTIVE, n.  An officer of the Government, whose duty it is to
enforce the wishes of the legislative power until such time as the
judicial department shall be pleased to pronounce them invalid and of
no effect.  Following is an extract from an old book entitled, _The
Lunarian Astonished_--Pfeiffer & Co., Boston, 1803:

  LUNARIAN:  Then when your Congress has passed a law it goes
      directly to the Supreme Court in order that it may at once be
      known whether it is constitutional?
  TERRESTRIAN:  O no; it does not require the approval of the
      Supreme Court until having perhaps been enforced for many
      years somebody objects to its operation against himself--I
      mean his client.  The President, if he approves it, begins to
      execute it at once.
  LUNARIAN:  Ah, the executive power is a part of the legislative.
      Do your policemen also have to approve the local ordinances
      that they enforce?
  TERRESTRIAN:  Not yet--at least not in their character of
      constables.  Generally speaking, though, all laws require the
      approval of those whom they are intended to restrain.
  LUNARIAN:  I see.  The death warrant is not valid until signed by
      the murderer.
  TERRESTRIAN:  My friend, you put it too strongly; we are not so
      consistent.
  LUNARIAN:  But this system of maintaining an expensive judicial
      machinery to pass upon the validity of laws only after they
      have long been executed, and then only when brought before the
      court by some private person--does it not cause great
      confusion?
  TERRESTRIAN:  It does.
  LUNARIAN:  Why then should not your laws, previously to being
      executed, be validated, not by the signature of your
      President, but by that of the Chief Justice of the Supreme
      Court?
  TERRESTRIAN:  There is no precedent for any such course.
  LUNARIAN:  Precedent.  What is that?
  TERRESTRIAN:  It has been defined by five hundred lawyers in three
      volumes each.  So how can any one know?

EXHORT, v.t. In religious affairs, to put the conscience of another
upon the spit and roast it to a nut-brown discomfort.

EXILE, n.  One who serves his country by residing abroad, yet is not
an ambassador.

An English sea-captain being asked if he had read "The Exile of
Erin," replied:  "No, sir, but I should like to anchor on it."  Years
afterwards, when he had been hanged as a pirate after a career of
unparalleled atrocities, the following memorandum was found in the
ship's log that he had kept at the time of his reply:

  Aug. 3d, 1842.  Made a joke on the ex-Isle of Erin.  Coldly
  received.  War with the whole world!

EXISTENCE, n.

  A transient, horrible, fantastic dream,
  Wherein is nothing yet all things do seem:
  From which we're wakened by a friendly nudge
  Of our bedfellow Death, and cry:  "O fudge!"

EXPERIENCE, n.  The wisdom that enables us to recognize as an
undesirable old acquaintance the folly that we have already embraced.

  To one who, journeying through night and fog,
  Is mired neck-deep in an unwholesome bog,
  Experience, like the rising of the dawn,
  Reveals the path that he should not have gone.

Joel Frad Bink


EXPOSTULATION, n.  One of the many methods by which fools prefer to
lose their friends.

EXTINCTION, n.  The raw material out of which theology created the
future state.




F



FAIRY, n.  A creature, variously fashioned and endowed, that formerly
inhabited the meadows and forests.  It was nocturnal in its habits,
and somewhat addicted to dancing and the theft of children.  The
fairies are now believed by naturalist to be extinct, though a
clergyman of the Church of England saw three near Colchester as lately
as 1855, while passing through a park after dining with the lord of
the manor.  The sight greatly staggered him, and he was so affected
that his account of it was incoherent.  In the year 1807 a troop of
fairies visited a wood near Aix and carried off the daughter of a
peasant, who had been seen to enter it with a bundle of clothing.  The
son of a wealthy _bourgeois_ disappeared about the same time, but
afterward returned.  He had seen the abduction been in pursuit of the
fairies.  Justinian Gaux, a writer of the fourteenth century, avers
that so great is the fairies' power of transformation that he saw one
change itself into two opposing armies and fight a battle with great
slaughter, and that the next day, after it had resumed its original
shape and gone away, there were seven hundred bodies of the slain
which the villagers had to bury.  He does not say if any of the
wounded recovered.  In the time of Henry III, of England, a law was
made which prescribed the death penalty for "Kyllynge, wowndynge, or
mamynge" a fairy, and it was universally respected.

FAITH, n.  Belief without evidence in what is told by one who speaks
without knowledge, of things without parallel.

FAMOUS, adj.  Conspicuously miserable.

  Done to a turn on the iron, behold
      Him who to be famous aspired.
  Content?  Well, his grill has a plating of gold,
      And his twistings are greatly admired.

Hassan Brubuddy


FASHION, n.  A despot whom the wise ridicule and obey.

  A king there was who lost an eye
      In some excess of passion;
  And straight his courtiers all did try
      To follow the new fashion.

  Each dropped one eyelid when before
      The throne he ventured, thinking
  'Twould please the king.  That monarch swore
      He'd slay them all for winking.

  What should they do?  They were not hot
      To hazard such disaster;
  They dared not close an eye--dared not
      See better than their master.

  Seeing them lacrymose and glum,
      A leech consoled the weepers:
  He spread small rags with liquid gum
      And covered half their peepers.

  The court all wore the stuff, the flame
      Of royal anger dying.
  That's how court-plaster got its name
      Unless I'm greatly lying.

Naramy Oof


FEAST, n.  A festival.  A religious celebration usually signalized by
gluttony and drunkenness, frequently in honor of some holy person
distinguished for abstemiousness.  In the Roman Catholic Church
feasts are "movable" and "immovable," but the celebrants are uniformly
immovable until they are full.  In their earliest development these
entertainments took the form of feasts for the dead; such were held by
the Greeks, under the name _Nemeseia_, by the Aztecs and Peruvians,
as in modern times they are popular with the Chinese; though it is
believed that the ancient dead, like the modern, were light eaters.
Among the many feasts of the Romans was the _Novemdiale_, which was
held, according to Livy, whenever stones fell from heaven.

FELON, n.  A person of greater enterprise than discretion, who in
embracing an opportunity has formed an unfortunate attachment.

FEMALE, n.  One of the opposing, or unfair, sex.

  The Maker, at Creation's birth,
  With living things had stocked the earth.
  From elephants to bats and snails,
  They all were good, for all were males.
  But when the Devil came and saw
  He said:  "By Thine eternal law
  Of growth, maturity, decay,
  These all must quickly pass away
  And leave untenanted the earth
  Unless Thou dost establish birth"--
  Then tucked his head beneath his wing
  To laugh--he had no sleeve--the thing
  With deviltry did so accord,
  That he'd suggested to the Lord.
  The Master pondered this advice,
  Then shook and threw the fateful dice
  Wherewith all matters here below
  Are ordered, and observed the throw;
  Then bent His head in awful state,
  Confirming the decree of Fate.
  From every part of earth anew
  The conscious dust consenting flew,
  While rivers from their courses rolled
  To make it plastic for the mould.
  Enough collected (but no more,
  For niggard Nature hoards her store)
  He kneaded it to flexible clay,
  While Nick unseen threw some away.
  And then the various forms He cast,
  Gross organs first and finer last;
  No one at once evolved, but all
  By even touches grew and small
  Degrees advanced, till, shade by shade,
  To match all living things He'd made
  Females, complete in all their parts
  Except (His clay gave out) the hearts.
  "No matter," Satan cried; "with speed
  I'll fetch the very hearts they need"--
  So flew away and soon brought back
  The number needed, in a sack.
  That night earth range with sounds of strife--
  Ten million males each had a wife;
  That night sweet Peace her pinions spread
  O'er Hell--ten million devils dead!

G.J.


FIB, n.  A lie that has not cut its teeth.  An habitual liar's nearest
approach to truth:  the perigee of his eccentric orbit.

  When David said:  "All men are liars," Dave,
      Himself a liar, fibbed like any thief.
      Perhaps he thought to weaken disbelief
  By proof that even himself was not a slave
  To Truth; though I suspect the aged knave
      Had been of all her servitors the chief
      Had he but known a fig's reluctant leaf
  Is more than e'er she wore on land or wave.
  No, David served not Naked Truth when he
      Struck that sledge-hammer blow at all his race;
          Nor did he hit the nail upon the head:
  For reason shows that it could never be,
      And the facts contradict him to his face.
          Men are not liars all, for some are dead.

Bartle Quinker


FICKLENESS, n.  The iterated satiety of an enterprising affection.

FIDDLE, n.  An instrument to tickle human ears by friction of a
horse's tail on the entrails of a cat.

  To Rome said Nero:  "If to smoke you turn
  I shall not cease to fiddle while you burn."
  To Nero Rome replied:  "Pray do your worst,
  'Tis my excuse that you were fiddling first."

Orm Pludge


FIDELITY, n.  A virtue peculiar to those who are about to be betrayed.

FINANCE, n.  The art or science of managing revenues and resources for
the best advantage of the manager.  The pronunciation of this word
with the i long and the accent on the first syllable is one of
America's most precious discoveries and possessions.

FLAG, n.  A colored rag borne above troops and hoisted on forts and
ships.  It appears to serve the same purpose as certain signs that one
sees and vacant lots in London--"Rubbish may be shot here."

FLESH, n.  The Second Person of the secular Trinity.

FLOP, v.  Suddenly to change one's opinions and go over to another
party.  The most notable flop on record was that of Saul of Tarsus,
who has been severely criticised as a turn-coat by some of our
partisan journals.

FLY-SPECK, n.  The prototype of punctuation.  It is observed by
Garvinus that the systems of punctuation in use by the various
literary nations depended originally upon the social habits and
general diet of the flies infesting the several countries.  These
creatures, which have always been distinguished for a neighborly and
companionable familiarity with authors, liberally or niggardly
embellish the manuscripts in process of growth under the pen,
according to their bodily habit, bringing out the sense of the work by
a species of interpretation superior to, and independent of, the
writer's powers.  The "old masters" of literature--that is to say,
the early writers whose work is so esteemed by later scribes and
critics in the same language--never punctuated at all, but worked
right along free-handed, without that abruption of the thought which
comes from the use of points.  (We observe the same thing in children
to-day, whose usage in this particular is a striking and beautiful
instance of the law that the infancy of individuals reproduces the
methods and stages of development characterizing the infancy of
races.)  In the work of these primitive scribes all the punctuation is
found, by the modern investigator with his optical instruments and
chemical tests, to have been inserted by the writers' ingenious and
serviceable collaborator, the common house-fly--_Musca maledicta_.
In transcribing these ancient MSS, for the purpose of either making
the work their own or preserving what they naturally regard as divine
revelations, later writers reverently and accurately copy whatever
marks they find upon the papyrus or parchment, to the unspeakable
enhancement of the lucidity of the thought and value of the work.
Writers contemporary with the copyists naturally avail themselves of
the obvious advantages of these marks in their own work, and with such
assistance as the flies of their own household may be willing to
grant, frequently rival and sometimes surpass the older compositions,
in respect at least of punctuation, which is no small glory.  Fully to
understand the important services that flies perform to literature it
is only necessary to lay a page of some popular novelist alongside a
saucer of cream-and-molasses in a sunny room and observe "how the wit
brightens and the style refines" in accurate proportion to the
duration of exposure.

FOLLY, n.  That "gift and faculty divine" whose creative and
controlling energy inspires Man's mind, guides his actions and adorns
his life.

  Folly! although Erasmus praised thee once
      In a thick volume, and all authors known,
      If not thy glory yet thy power have shown,
  Deign to take homage from thy son who hunts
  Through all thy maze his brothers, fool and dunce,
      To mend their lives and to sustain his own,
      However feebly be his arrows thrown,

  Howe'er each hide the flying weapons blunts.
  All-Father Folly! be it mine to raise,
      With lusty lung, here on his western strand
      With all thine offspring thronged from every land,
  Thyself inspiring me, the song of praise.
  And if too weak, I'll hire, to help me bawl,
  Dick Watson Gilder, gravest of us all.

Aramis Loto Frope


FOOL, n.  A person who pervades the domain of intellectual speculation
and diffuses himself through the channels of moral activity.  He is
omnific, omniform, omnipercipient, omniscience, omnipotent.  He it was
who invented letters, printing, the railroad, the steamboat, the
telegraph, the platitude and the circle of the sciences.  He created
patriotism and taught the nations war--founded theology, philosophy,
law, medicine and Chicago.  He established monarchical and republican
government.  He is from everlasting to everlasting--such as
creation's dawn beheld he fooleth now.  In the morning of time he sang
upon primitive hills, and in the noonday of existence headed the
procession of being.  His grandmotherly hand was warmly tucked-in the
set sun of civilization, and in the twilight he prepares Man's evening
meal of milk-and-morality and turns down the covers of the universal
grave.  And after the rest of us shall have retired for the night of
eternal oblivion he will sit up to write a history of human
civilization.

FORCE, n.

  "Force is but might," the teacher said--
      "That definition's just."
  The boy said naught but thought instead,
  Remembering his pounded head:
      "Force is not might but must!"

FOREFINGER, n.  The finger commonly used in pointing out two
malefactors.

FOREORDINATION, n.  This looks like an easy word to define, but when I
consider that pious and learned theologians have spent long lives in
explaining it, and written libraries to explain their explanations;
when I remember the nations have been divided and bloody battles
caused by the difference between foreordination and predestination,
and that millions of treasure have been expended in the effort to
prove and disprove its compatibility with freedom of the will and the
efficacy of prayer, praise, and a religious life,--recalling these
awful facts in the history of the word, I stand appalled before the
mighty problem of its signification, abase my spiritual eyes, fearing
to contemplate its portentous magnitude, reverently uncover and humbly
refer it to His Eminence Cardinal Gibbons and His Grace Bishop Potter.

FORGETFULNESS, n.  A gift of God bestowed upon doctors in compensation
for their destitution of conscience.

FORK, n.  An instrument used chiefly for the purpose of putting dead
animals into the mouth.  Formerly the knife was employed for this
purpose, and by many worthy persons is still thought to have many
advantages over the other tool, which, however, they do not altogether
reject, but use to assist in charging the knife.  The immunity of
these persons from swift and awful death is one of the most striking
proofs of God's mercy to those that hate Him.

FORMA PAUPERIS.  [Latin]  In the character of a poor person--a
method by which a litigant without money for lawyers is considerately
permitted to lose his case.

  When Adam long ago in Cupid's awful court
      (For Cupid ruled ere Adam was invented)
  Sued for Eve's favor, says an ancient law report,
      He stood and pleaded unhabilimented.

  "You sue _in forma pauperis_, I see," Eve cried;
      "Actions can't here be that way prosecuted."
  So all poor Adam's motions coldly were denied:
      He went away--as he had come--nonsuited.

G.J.


FRANKALMOIGNE, n.  The tenure by which a religious corporation holds
lands on condition of praying for the soul of the donor.  In mediaeval
times many of the wealthiest fraternities obtained their estates in
this simple and cheap manner, and once when Henry VIII of England sent
an officer to confiscate certain vast possessions which a fraternity
of monks held by frankalmoigne, "What!" said the Prior, "would you
master stay our benefactor's soul in Purgatory?"  "Ay," said the
officer, coldly, "an ye will not pray him thence for naught he must
e'en roast."  "But look you, my son," persisted the good man, "this
act hath rank as robbery of God!"  "Nay, nay, good father, my master
the king doth but deliver him from the manifold temptations of too
great wealth."

FREEBOOTER, n.  A conqueror in a small way of business, whose
annexations lack of the sanctifying merit of magnitude.

FREEDOM, n.  Exemption from the stress of authority in a beggarly half
dozen of restraint's infinite multitude of methods.  A political
condition that every nation supposes itself to enjoy in virtual
monopoly.  Liberty.  The distinction between freedom and liberty is
not accurately known; naturalists have never been able to find a
living specimen of either.

  Freedom, as every schoolboy knows,
      Once shrieked as Kosciusko fell;
  On every wind, indeed, that blows
          I hear her yell.

  She screams whenever monarchs meet,
      And parliaments as well,
  To bind the chains about her feet
          And toll her knell.

  And when the sovereign people cast
      The votes they cannot spell,
  Upon the pestilential blast
          Her clamors swell.

  For all to whom the power's given
      To sway or to compel,
  Among themselves apportion Heaven
          And give her Hell.

Blary O'Gary


FREEMASONS, n.  An order with secret rites, grotesque ceremonies and
fantastic costumes, which, originating in the reign of Charles II,
among working artisans of London, has been joined successively by the
dead of past centuries in unbroken retrogression until now it embraces
all the generations of man on the hither side of Adam and is drumming
up distinguished recruits among the pre-Creational inhabitants of
Chaos and Formless Void.  The order was founded at different times by
Charlemagne, Julius Caesar, Cyrus, Solomon, Zoroaster, Confucious,
Thothmes, and Buddha.  Its emblems and symbols have been found in the
Catacombs of Paris and Rome, on the stones of the Parthenon and the
Chinese Great Wall, among the temples of Karnak and Palmyra and in the
Egyptian Pyramids--always by a Freemason.

FRIENDLESS, adj.  Having no favors to bestow.  Destitute of fortune.
Addicted to utterance of truth and common sense.

FRIENDSHIP, n.  A ship big enough to carry two in fair weather, but
only one in foul.

  The sea was calm and the sky was blue;
  Merrily, merrily sailed we two.
      (High barometer maketh glad.)
  On the tipsy ship, with a dreadful shout,
  The tempest descended and we fell out.
      (O the walking is nasty bad!)

Armit Huff Bettle


FROG, n.  A reptile with edible legs.  The first mention of frogs in
profane literature is in Homer's narrative of the war between them and
the mice.  Skeptical persons have doubted Homer's authorship of the
work, but the learned, ingenious and industrious Dr. Schliemann has
set the question forever at rest by uncovering the bones of the slain
frogs.  One of the forms of moral suasion by which Pharaoh was
besought to favor the Israelities was a plague of frogs, but Pharaoh,
who liked them _fricasees_, remarked, with truly oriental stoicism,
that he could stand it as long as the frogs and the Jews could; so the
programme was changed.  The frog is a diligent songster, having a good
voice but no ear.  The libretto of his favorite opera, as written by
Aristophanes, is brief, simple and effective--"brekekex-koax"; the
music is apparently by that eminent composer, Richard Wagner.  Horses
have a frog in each hoof--a thoughtful provision of nature, enabling
them to shine in a hurdle race.

FRYING-PAN, n.  One part of the penal apparatus employed in that
punitive institution, a woman's kitchen.  The frying-pan was invented
by Calvin, and by him used in cooking span-long infants that had died
without baptism; and observing one day the horrible torment of a tramp
who had incautiously pulled a fried babe from the waste-dump and
devoured it, it occurred to the great divine to rob death of its
terrors by introducing the frying-pan into every household in Geneva.
Thence it spread to all corners of the world, and has been of
invaluable assistance in the propagation of his sombre faith.  The
following lines (said to be from the pen of his Grace Bishop Potter)
seem to imply that the usefulness of this utensil is not limited to
this world; but as the consequences of its employment in this life
reach over into the life to come, so also itself may be found on the
other side, rewarding its devotees:

  Old Nick was summoned to the skies.
      Said Peter:  "Your intentions
  Are good, but you lack enterprise
      Concerning new inventions.

  "Now, broiling in an ancient plan
      Of torment, but I hear it
  Reported that the frying-pan
      Sears best the wicked spirit.

  "Go get one--fill it up with fat--
      Fry sinners brown and good in't."
  "I know a trick worth two o' that,"
      Said Nick--"I'll cook their food in't."

FUNERAL, n.  A pageant whereby we attest our respect for the dead by
enriching the undertaker, and strengthen our grief by an expenditure
that deepens our groans and doubles our tears.

  The savage dies--they sacrifice a horse
  To bear to happy hunting-grounds the corse.
  Our friends expire--we make the money fly
  In hope their souls will chase it to the sky.

Jex Wopley


FUTURE, n.  That period of time in which our affairs prosper, our
friends are true and our happiness is assured.




G



GALLOWS, n.  A stage for the performance of miracle plays, in which
the leading actor is translated to heaven.  In this country the
gallows is chiefly remarkable for the number of persons who escape it.

  Whether on the gallows high
      Or where blood flows the reddest,
  The noblest place for man to die--
      Is where he died the deadest.

(Old play)


GARGOYLE, n.  A rain-spout projecting from the eaves of mediaeval
buildings, commonly fashioned into a grotesque caricature of some
personal enemy of the architect or owner of the building.  This was
especially the case in churches and ecclesiastical structures
generally, in which the gargoyles presented a perfect rogues' gallery
of local heretics and controversialists.  Sometimes when a new dean
and chapter were installed the old gargoyles were removed and others
substituted having a closer relation to the private animosities of the
new incumbents.

GARTHER, n.  An elastic band intended to keep a woman from coming out
of her stockings and desolating the country.

GENEROUS, adj.  Originally this word meant noble by birth and was
rightly applied to a great multitude of persons.  It now means noble
by nature and is taking a bit of a rest.

GENEALOGY, n.  An account of one's descent from an ancestor who did
not particularly care to trace his own.

GENTEEL, adj.  Refined, after the fashion of a gent.

  Observe with care, my son, the distinction I reveal:
  A gentleman is gentle and a gent genteel.
  Heed not the definitions your "Unabridged" presents,
  For dictionary makers are generally gents.

G.J.


GEOGRAPHER, n.  A chap who can tell you offhand the difference between
the outside of the world and the inside.

  Habeam, geographer of wide reknown,
  Native of Abu-Keber's ancient town,
  In passing thence along the river Zam
  To the adjacent village of Xelam,
  Bewildered by the multitude of roads,
  Got lost, lived long on migratory toads,
  Then from exposure miserably died,
  And grateful travelers bewailed their guide.

Henry Haukhorn


GEOLOGY, n.  The science of the earth's crust--to which, doubtless,
will be added that of its interior whenever a man shall come up
garrulous out of a well.  The geological formations of the globe
already noted are catalogued thus:  The Primary, or lower one,
consists of rocks, bones or mired mules, gas-pipes, miners' tools,
antique statues minus the nose, Spanish doubloons and ancestors.  The
Secondary is largely made up of red worms and moles.  The Tertiary
comprises railway tracks, patent pavements, grass, snakes, mouldy
boots, beer bottles, tomato cans, intoxicated citizens, garbage,
anarchists, snap-dogs and fools.

GHOST, n.  The outward and visible sign of an inward fear.

          He saw a ghost.
  It occupied--that dismal thing!--
  The path that he was following.
  Before he'd time to stop and fly,
  An earthquake trifled with the eye
          That saw a ghost.
  He fell as fall the early good;
  Unmoved that awful vision stood.
  The stars that danced before his ken
  He wildly brushed away, and then
          He saw a post.

Jared Macphester


Accounting for the uncommon behavior of ghosts, Heine mentions
somebody's ingenious theory to the effect that they are as much
afraid of us as we of them.  Not quite, if I may judge from such
tables of comparative speed as I am able to compile from memories of
my own experience.

There is one insuperable obstacle to a belief in ghosts.  A ghost
never comes naked:  he appears either in a winding-sheet or "in his
habit as he lived."  To believe in him, then, is to believe that not
only have the dead the power to make themselves visible after there is
nothing left of them, but that the same power inheres in textile
fabrics.  Supposing the products of the loom to have this ability,
what object would they have in exercising it?  And why does not the
apparition of a suit of clothes sometimes walk abroad without a ghost
in it?  These be riddles of significance.  They reach away down and
get a convulsive grip on the very tap-root of this flourishing faith.

GHOUL, n.  A demon addicted to the reprehensible habit of devouring
the dead.  The existence of ghouls has been disputed by that class of
controversialists who are more concerned to deprive the world of
comforting beliefs than to give it anything good in their place.  In
1640 Father Secchi saw one in a cemetery near Florence and frightened
it away with the sign of the cross.  He describes it as gifted with
many heads an an uncommon allowance of limbs, and he saw it in more
than one place at a time.  The good man was coming away from dinner at
the time and explains that if he had not been "heavy with eating" he
would have seized the demon at all hazards.  Atholston relates that a
ghoul was caught by some sturdy peasants in a churchyard at Sudbury
and ducked in a horsepond.  (He appears to think that so distinguished
a criminal should have been ducked in a tank of rosewater.)  The water
turned at once to blood "and so contynues unto ys daye."  The pond has
since been bled with a ditch.  As late as the beginning of the
fourteenth century a ghoul was cornered in the crypt of the cathedral
at Amiens and the whole population surrounded the place.  Twenty armed
men with a priest at their head, bearing a crucifix, entered and
captured the ghoul, which, thinking to escape by the stratagem, had
transformed itself to the semblance of a well known citizen, but was
nevertheless hanged, drawn and quartered in the midst of hideous
popular orgies.  The citizen whose shape the demon had assumed was so
affected by the sinister occurrence that he never again showed himself
in Amiens and his fate remains a mystery.

GLUTTON, n.  A person who escapes the evils of moderation by
committing dyspepsia.

GNOME, n.  In North-European mythology, a dwarfish imp inhabiting the
interior parts of the earth and having special custody of mineral
treasures.  Bjorsen, who died in 1765, says gnomes were common enough
in the southern parts of Sweden in his boyhood, and he frequently saw
them scampering on the hills in the evening twilight.  Ludwig
Binkerhoof saw three as recently as 1792, in the Black Forest, and
Sneddeker avers that in 1803 they drove a party of miners out of a
Silesian mine.  Basing our computations upon data supplied by these
statements, we find that the gnomes were probably extinct as early as
1764.

GNOSTICS, n.  A sect of philosophers who tried to engineer a fusion
between the early Christians and the Platonists.  The former would not
go into the caucus and the combination failed, greatly to the chagrin
of the fusion managers.

GNU, n.  An animal of South Africa, which in its domesticated state
resembles a horse, a buffalo and a stag.  In its wild condition it is
something like a thunderbolt, an earthquake and a cyclone.

  A hunter from Kew caught a distant view
      Of a peacefully meditative gnu,
  And he said:  "I'll pursue, and my hands imbrue
      In its blood at a closer interview."
  But that beast did ensue and the hunter it threw
      O'er the top of a palm that adjacent grew;
  And he said as he flew:  "It is well I withdrew
      Ere, losing my temper, I wickedly slew
      That really meritorious gnu."

Jarn Leffer


GOOD, adj.  Sensible, madam, to the worth of this present writer.
Alive, sir, to the advantages of letting him alone.

GOOSE, n.  A bird that supplies quills for writing.  These, by some
occult process of nature, are penetrated and suffused with various
degrees of the bird's intellectual energies and emotional character,
so that when inked and drawn mechanically across paper by a person
called an "author," there results a very fair and accurate transcript
of the fowl's thought and feeling.  The difference in geese, as
discovered by this ingenious method, is considerable:  many are found
to have only trivial and insignificant powers, but some are seen to be
very great geese indeed.

GORGON, n.

  The Gorgon was a maiden bold
  Who turned to stone the Greeks of old
  That looked upon her awful brow.
  We dig them out of ruins now,
  And swear that workmanship so bad
  Proves all the ancient sculptors mad.

GOUT, n.  A physician's name for the rheumatism of a rich patient.

GRACES, n.  Three beautiful goddesses, Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosyne,
who attended upon Venus, serving without salary.  They were at no
expense for board and clothing, for they ate nothing to speak of and
dressed according to the weather, wearing whatever breeze happened to
be blowing.

GRAMMAR, n.  A system of pitfalls thoughtfully prepared for the feet
for the self-made man, along the path by which he advances to
distinction.

GRAPE, n.

  Hail noble fruit!--by Homer sung,
      Anacreon and Khayyam;
  Thy praise is ever on the tongue
      Of better men than I am.

  The lyre in my hand has never swept,
      The song I cannot offer:
  My humbler service pray accept--
      I'll help to kill the scoffer.
  The water-drinkers and the cranks
      Who load their skins with liquor--
  I'll gladly bear their belly-tanks
      And tap them with my sticker.

  Fill up, fill up, for wisdom cools
      When e'er we let the wine rest.
  Here's death to Prohibition's fools,
      And every kind of vine-pest!

Jamrach Holobom


GRAPESHOT, n.  An argument which the future is preparing in answer to
the demands of American Socialism.

GRAVE, n.  A place in which the dead are laid to await the coming of
the medical student.

  Beside a lonely grave I stood--
      With brambles 'twas encumbered;
  The winds were moaning in the wood,
      Unheard by him who slumbered,

  A rustic standing near, I said:
      "He cannot hear it blowing!"
  "'Course not," said he:  "the feller's dead--
      He can't hear nowt [sic] that's going."

  "Too true," I said; "alas, too true--
      No sound his sense can quicken!"
  "Well, mister, wot is that to you?--
      The deadster ain't a-kickin'."

  I knelt and prayed:  "O Father, smile
      On him, and mercy show him!"
  That countryman looked on the while,
      And said:  "Ye didn't know him."

Pobeter Dunko


GRAVITATION, n.  The tendency of all bodies to approach one another
with a strength proportion to the quantity of matter they contain--
the quantity of matter they contain being ascertained by the strength
of their tendency to approach one another.  This is a lovely and
edifying illustration of how science, having made A the proof of B,
makes B the proof of A.

GREAT, adj.

  "I'm great," the Lion said--"I reign
  The monarch of the wood and plain!"

  The Elephant replied:  "I'm great--
  No quadruped can match my weight!"

  "I'm great--no animal has half
  So long a neck!" said the Giraffe.

  "I'm great," the Kangaroo said--"see
  My femoral muscularity!"

  The 'Possum said:  "I'm great--behold,
  My tail is lithe and bald and cold!"

  An Oyster fried was understood
  To say:  "I'm great because I'm good!"

  Each reckons greatness to consist
  In that in which he heads the list,

  And Vierick thinks he tops his class
  Because he is the greatest ass.

Arion Spurl Doke


GUILLOTINE, n.  A machine which makes a Frenchman shrug his shoulders
with good reason.

In his great work on _Divergent Lines of Racial Evolution_, the
learned Professor Brayfugle argues from the prevalence of this gesture
--the shrug--among Frenchmen, that they are descended from turtles
and it is simply a survival of the habit of retracing the head inside
the shell.  It is with reluctance that I differ with so eminent an
authority, but in my judgment (as more elaborately set forth and
enforced in my work entitled _Hereditary Emotions_--lib. II, c. XI)
the shrug is a poor foundation upon which to build so important a
theory, for previously to the Revolution the gesture was unknown.  I
have not a doubt that it is directly referable to the terror inspired
by the guillotine during the period of that instrument's activity.

GUNPOWDER, n.  An agency employed by civilized nations for the
settlement of disputes which might become troublesome if left
unadjusted.  By most writers the invention of gunpowder is ascribed to
the Chinese, but not upon very convincing evidence.  Milton says it
was invented by the devil to dispel angels with, and this opinion
seems to derive some support from the scarcity of angels.  Moreover,
it has the hearty concurrence of the Hon. James Wilson, Secretary of
Agriculture.

Secretary Wilson became interested in gunpowder through an event
that occurred on the Government experimental farm in the District of
Columbia.  One day, several years ago, a rogue imperfectly reverent of
the Secretary's profound attainments and personal character presented
him with a sack of gunpowder, representing it as the sed of the
_Flashawful flabbergastor_, a Patagonian cereal of great commercial
value, admirably adapted to this climate.  The good Secretary was
instructed to spill it along in a furrow and afterward inhume it with
soil.  This he at once proceeded to do, and had made a continuous line
of it all the way across a ten-acre field, when he was made to look
backward by a shout from the generous donor, who at once dropped a
lighted match into the furrow at the starting-point.  Contact with the
earth had somewhat dampened the powder, but the startled functionary
saw himself pursued by a tall moving pillar of fire and smoke and
fierce evolution.  He stood for a moment paralyzed and speechless,
then he recollected an engagement and, dropping all, absented himself
thence with such surprising celerity that to the eyes of spectators
along the route selected he appeared like a long, dim streak
prolonging itself with inconceivable rapidity through seven villages,
and audibly refusing to be comforted.  "Great Scott! what is that?"
cried a surveyor's chainman, shading his eyes and gazing at the fading
line of agriculturist which bisected his visible horizon.  "That,"
said the surveyor, carelessly glancing at the phenomenon and again
centering his attention upon his instrument, "is the Meridian of
Washington."




H



HABEAS CORPUS.  A writ by which a man may be taken out of jail when
confined for the wrong crime.

HABIT, n.  A shackle for the free.

HADES, n.  The lower world; the residence of departed spirits; the
place where the dead live.

Among the ancients the idea of Hades was not synonymous with our
Hell, many of the most respectable men of antiquity residing there in
a very comfortable kind of way.  Indeed, the Elysian Fields themselves
were a part of Hades, though they have since been removed to Paris.
When the Jacobean version of the New Testament was in process of
evolution the pious and learned men engaged in the work insisted by a
majority vote on translating the Greek word "Aides" as "Hell"; but a
conscientious minority member secretly possessed himself of the record
and struck out the objectional word wherever he could find it.  At the
next meeting, the Bishop of Salisbury, looking over the work, suddenly
sprang to his feet and said with considerable excitement:  "Gentlemen,
somebody has been razing 'Hell' here!"  Years afterward the good
prelate's death was made sweet by the reflection that he had been the
means (under Providence) of making an important, serviceable and
immortal addition to the phraseology of the English tongue.

HAG, n.  An elderly lady whom you do not happen to like; sometimes
called, also, a hen, or cat.  Old witches, sorceresses, etc., were
called hags from the belief that their heads were surrounded by a kind
of baleful lumination or nimbus--hag being the popular name of that
peculiar electrical light sometimes observed in the hair.  At one time
hag was not a word of reproach:  Drayton speaks of a "beautiful hag,
all smiles," much as Shakespeare said, "sweet wench."  It would not
now be proper to call your sweetheart a hag--that compliment is
reserved for the use of her grandchildren.

HALF, n.  One of two equal parts into which a thing may be divided, or
considered as divided.  In the fourteenth century a heated discussion
arose among theologists and philosophers as to whether Omniscience
could part an object into three halves; and the pious Father
Aldrovinus publicly prayed in the cathedral at Rouen that God would
demonstrate the affirmative of the proposition in some signal and
unmistakable way, and particularly (if it should please Him) upon the
body of that hardy blasphemer, Manutius Procinus, who maintained the
negative.  Procinus, however, was spared to die of the bite of a
viper.

HALO, n.  Properly, a luminous ring encircling an astronomical body,
but not infrequently confounded with "aureola," or "nimbus," a
somewhat similar phenomenon worn as a head-dress by divinities and
saints.  The halo is a purely optical illusion, produced by moisture
in the air, in the manner of a rainbow; but the aureola is conferred
as a sign of superior sanctity, in the same way as a bishop's mitre,
or the Pope's tiara.  In the painting of the Nativity, by Szedgkin, a
pious artist of Pesth, not only do the Virgin and the Child wear the
nimbus, but an ass nibbling hay from the sacred manger is similarly
decorated and, to his lasting honor be it said, appears to bear his
unaccustomed dignity with a truly saintly grace.

HAND, n.  A singular instrument worn at the end of the human arm and
commonly thrust into somebody's pocket.

HANDKERCHIEF, n.  A small square of silk or linen, used in various
ignoble offices about the face and especially serviceable at funerals
to conceal the lack of tears.  The handkerchief is of recent
invention; our ancestors knew nothing of it and intrusted its duties
to the sleeve.  Shakespeare's introducing it into the play of
"Othello" is an anachronism:  Desdemona dried her nose with her skirt,
as Dr. Mary Walker and other reformers have done with their coattails
in our own day--an evidence that revolutions sometimes go backward.

HANGMAN, n.  An officer of the law charged with duties of the highest
dignity and utmost gravity, and held in hereditary disesteem by a
populace having a criminal ancestry.  In some of the American States
his functions are now performed by an electrician, as in New Jersey,
where executions by electricity have recently been ordered--the
first instance known to this lexicographer of anybody questioning the
expediency of hanging Jerseymen.

HAPPINESS, n.  An agreeable sensation arising from contemplating the
misery of another.

HARANGUE, n.  A speech by an opponent, who is known as an
harrangue-outang.

HARBOR, n.  A place where ships taking shelter from stores are exposed
to the fury of the customs.

HARMONISTS, n.  A sect of Protestants, now extinct, who came from
Europe in the beginning of the last century and were distinguished for
the bitterness of their internal controversies and dissensions.

HASH, x.  There is no definition for this word--nobody knows what
hash is.

HATCHET, n.  A young axe, known among Indians as a Thomashawk.

  "O bury the hatchet, irascible Red,
  For peace is a blessing," the White Man said.
      The Savage concurred, and that weapon interred,
  With imposing rites, in the White Man's head.

John Lukkus


HATRED, n.  A sentiment appropriate to the occasion of another's
superiority.

HEAD-MONEY, n.  A capitation tax, or poll-tax.

  In ancient times there lived a king
  Whose tax-collectors could not wring
  From all his subjects gold enough
  To make the royal way less rough.
  For pleasure's highway, like the dames
  Whose premises adjoin it, claims
  Perpetual repairing.  So
  The tax-collectors in a row
  Appeared before the throne to pray
  Their master to devise some way
  To swell the revenue.  "So great,"
  Said they, "are the demands of state
  A tithe of all that we collect
  Will scarcely meet them.  Pray reflect:
  How, if one-tenth we must resign,
  Can we exist on t'other nine?"
  The monarch asked them in reply:
  "Has it occurred to you to try
  The advantage of economy?"
  "It has," the spokesman said:  "we sold
  All of our gray garrotes of gold;
  With plated-ware we now compress
  The necks of those whom we assess.
  Plain iron forceps we employ
  To mitigate the miser's joy
  Who hoards, with greed that never tires,
  That which your Majesty requires."
  Deep lines of thought were seen to plow
  Their way across the royal brow.
  "Your state is desperate, no question;
  Pray favor me with a suggestion."
  "O King of Men," the spokesman said,
  "If you'll impose upon each head
  A tax, the augmented revenue
  We'll cheerfully divide with you."
  As flashes of the sun illume
  The parted storm-cloud's sullen gloom,
  The king smiled grimly.  "I decree
  That it be so--and, not to be
  In generosity outdone,
  Declare you, each and every one,
  Exempted from the operation
  Of this new law of capitation.
  But lest the people censure me
  Because they're bound and you are free,
  'Twere well some clever scheme were laid
  By you this poll-tax to evade.
  I'll leave you now while you confer
  With my most trusted minister."
  The monarch from the throne-room walked
  And straightway in among them stalked
  A silent man, with brow concealed,
  Bare-armed--his gleaming axe revealed!

G.J.


HEARSE, n.  Death's baby-carriage.

HEART, n.  An automatic, muscular blood-pump.  Figuratively, this
useful organ is said to be the seat of emotions and sentiments--a
very pretty fancy which, however, is nothing but a survival of a once
universal belief.  It is now known that the sentiments and emotions
reside in the stomach, being evolved from food by chemical action of
the gastric fluid.  The exact process by which a beefsteak becomes a
feeling--tender or not, according to the age of the animal from
which it was cut; the successive stages of elaboration through which a
caviar sandwich is transmuted to a quaint fancy and reappears as a
pungent epigram; the marvelous functional methods of converting a
hard-boiled egg into religious contrition, or a cream-puff into a sigh
of sensibility--these things have been patiently ascertained by M.
Pasteur, and by him expounded with convincing lucidity.  (See, also,
my monograph, _The Essential Identity of the Spiritual Affections and
Certain Intestinal Gases Freed in Digestion_--4to, 687 pp.)  In a
scientific work entitled, I believe, _Delectatio Demonorum_ (John
Camden Hotton, London, 1873) this view of the sentiments receives a
striking illustration; and for further light consult Professor Dam's
famous treatise on _Love as a Product of Alimentary Maceration_.

HEAT, n.

  Heat, says Professor Tyndall, is a mode
      Of motion, but I know now how he's proving
  His point; but this I know--hot words bestowed
      With skill will set the human fist a-moving,
  And where it stops the stars burn free and wild.
  _Crede expertum_--I have seen them, child.

Gorton Swope


HEATHEN, n.  A benighted creature who has the folly to worship
something that he can see and feel.  According to Professor Howison,
of the California State University, Hebrews are heathens.

  "The Hebrews are heathens!" says Howison.  He's
      A Christian philosopher.  I'm
  A scurril agnostical chap, if you please,
      Addicted too much to the crime
      Of religious discussion in my rhyme.

  Though Hebrew and Howison cannot agree
      On a _modus vivendi_--not they!--
  Yet Heaven has had the designing of me,
      And I haven't been reared in a way
      To joy in the thick of the fray.

  For this of my creed is the soul and the gist,
      And the truth of it I aver:
  Who differs from me in his faith is an 'ist,
      And 'ite, an 'ie, or an 'er--
      And I'm down upon him or her!

  Let Howison urge with perfunctory chin
      Toleration--that's all very well,
  But a roast is "nuts" to his nostril thin,
      And he's running--I know by the smell--
      A secret and personal Hell!

Bissell Gip


HEAVEN, n.  A place where the wicked cease from troubling you with
talk of their personal affairs, and the good listen with attention
while you expound your own.

HEBREW, n.  A male Jew, as distinguished from the Shebrew, an
altogether superior creation.

HELPMATE, n.  A wife, or bitter half.

  "Now, why is yer wife called a helpmate, Pat?"
      Says the priest.  "Since the time 'o yer wooin'
  She's niver [sic] assisted in what ye were at--
      For it's naught ye are ever doin'."

  "That's true of yer Riverence [sic]," Patrick replies,
      And no sign of contrition envices;
  "But, bedad, it's a fact which the word implies,
      For she helps to mate the expinses [sic]!"

Marley Wottel


HEMP, n.  A plant from whose fibrous bark is made an article of
neckwear which is frequently put on after public speaking in the open
air and prevents the wearer from taking cold.

HERMIT, n.  A person whose vices and follies are not sociable.

HERS, pron.  His.

HIBERNATE, v.i.  To pass the winter season in domestic seclusion.
There have been many singular popular notions about the hibernation of
various animals.  Many believe that the bear hibernates during the
whole winter and subsists by mechanically sucking its paws.  It is
admitted that it comes out of its retirement in the spring so lean
that it had to try twice before it can cast a shadow.  Three or four
centuries ago, in England, no fact was better attested than that
swallows passed the winter months in the mud at the bottom of their
brooks, clinging together in globular masses.  They have apparently
been compelled to give up the custom and account of the foulness of
the brooks.  Sotus Ecobius discovered in Central Asia a whole nation
of people who hibernate.  By some investigators, the fasting of Lent
is supposed to have been originally a modified form of hibernation, to
which the Church gave a religious significance; but this view was
strenuously opposed by that eminent authority, Bishop Kip, who did not
wish any honors denied to the memory of the Founder of his family.

HIPPOGRIFF, n.  An animal (now extinct) which was half horse and half
griffin.  The griffin was itself a compound creature, half lion and
half eagle.  The hippogriff was actually, therefore, a one-quarter
eagle, which is two dollars and fifty cents in gold.  The study of
zoology is full of surprises.

HISTORIAN, n.  A broad-gauge gossip.

HISTORY, n.  An account mostly false, of events mostly unimportant,
which are brought about by rulers mostly knaves, and soldiers mostly
fools.

  Of Roman history, great Niebuhr's shown
  'Tis nine-tenths lying.  Faith, I wish 'twere known,
  Ere we accept great Niebuhr as a guide,
  Wherein he blundered and how much he lied.

Salder Bupp


HOG, n.  A bird remarkable for the catholicity of its appetite and
serving to illustrate that of ours.  Among the Mahometans and Jews,
the hog is not in favor as an article of diet, but is respected for
the delicacy and the melody of its voice.  It is chiefly as a songster
that the fowl is esteemed; the cage of him in full chorus has been
known to draw tears from two persons at once.  The scientific name of
this dicky-bird is _Porcus Rockefelleri_.  Mr. Rockefeller did not
discover the hog, but it is considered his by right of resemblance.

HOMOEOPATHIST, n.  The humorist of the medical profession.

HOMOEOPATHY, n.  A school of medicine midway between Allopathy and
Christian Science.  To the last both the others are distinctly
inferior, for Christian Science will cure imaginary diseases, and they
can not.

HOMICIDE, n.  The slaying of one human being by another.  There are
four kinds of homocide:  felonious, excusable, justifiable, and
praiseworthy, but it makes no great difference to the person slain
whether he fell by one kind or another--the classification is for
advantage of the lawyers.

HOMILETICS, n.  The science of adapting sermons to the spiritual
needs, capacities and conditions of the congregation.

  So skilled the parson was in homiletics
  That all his normal purges and emetics
  To medicine the spirit were compounded
  With a most just discrimination founded
  Upon a rigorous examination
  Of tongue and pulse and heart and respiration.
  Then, having diagnosed each one's condition,
  His scriptural specifics this physician
  Administered--his pills so efficacious
  And pukes of disposition so vivacious
  That souls afflicted with ten kinds of Adam
  Were convalescent ere they knew they had 'em.
  But Slander's tongue--itself all coated--uttered
  Her bilious mind and scandalously muttered
  That in the case of patients having money
  The pills were sugar and the pukes were honey.

_Biography of Bishop Potter_


HONORABLE, adj.  Afflicted with an impediment in one's reach.  In
legislative bodies it is customary to mention all members as
honorable; as, "the honorable gentleman is a scurvy cur."

HOPE, n.  Desire and expectation rolled into one.

  Delicious Hope! when naught to man it left--
  Of fortune destitute, of friends bereft;
  When even his dog deserts him, and his goat
  With tranquil disaffection chews his coat
  While yet it hangs upon his back; then thou,
  The star far-flaming on thine angel brow,
  Descendest, radiant, from the skies to hint
  The promise of a clerkship in the Mint.

Fogarty Weffing


HOSPITALITY, n.  The virtue which induces us to feed and lodge certain
persons who are not in need of food and lodging.

HOSTILITY, n.  A peculiarly sharp and specially applied sense of the
earth's overpopulation.  Hostility is classified as active and
passive; as (respectively) the feeling of a woman for her female
friends, and that which she entertains for all the rest of her sex.

HOURI, n.  A comely female inhabiting the Mohammedan Paradise to make
things cheery for the good Mussulman, whose belief in her existence
marks a noble discontent with his earthly spouse, whom he denies a
soul.  By that good lady the Houris are said to be held in deficient
esteem.

HOUSE, n.  A hollow edifice erected for the habitation of man, rat,
mouse, beetle, cockroach, fly, mosquito, flea, bacillus and microbe.
_House of Correction_, a place of reward for political and personal
service, and for the detention of offenders and appropriations.
_House of God_, a building with a steeple and a mortgage on it.
_House-dog_, a pestilent beast kept on domestic premises to insult
persons passing by and appal the hardy visitor.  _House-maid_, a
youngerly person of the opposing sex employed to be variously
disagreeable and ingeniously unclean in the station in which it has
pleased God to place her.

HOUSELESS, adj.  Having paid all taxes on household goods.

HOVEL, n.  The fruit of a flower called the Palace.

      Twaddle had a hovel,
          Twiddle had a palace;
      Twaddle said:  "I'll grovel
          Or he'll think I bear him malice"--
  A sentiment as novel
      As a castor on a chalice.

      Down upon the middle
          Of his legs fell Twaddle
      And astonished Mr. Twiddle,
          Who began to lift his noddle.
      Feed upon the fiddle-
          Faddle flummery, unswaddle
  A new-born self-sufficiency and think himself a [mockery.]

G.J.


HUMANITY, n.  The human race, collectively, exclusive of the
anthropoid poets.

HUMORIST, n.  A plague that would have softened down the hoar
austerity of Pharaoh's heart and persuaded him to dismiss Israel with
his best wishes, cat-quick.

  Lo! the poor humorist, whose tortured mind
  See jokes in crowds, though still to gloom inclined--
  Whose simple appetite, untaught to stray,
  His brains, renewed by night, consumes by day.
  He thinks, admitted to an equal sty,
  A graceful hog would bear his company.

Alexander Poke


HURRICANE, n.  An atmospheric demonstration once very common but now
generally abandoned for the tornado and cyclone.  The hurricane is
still in popular use in the West Indies and is preferred by certain
old-fashioned sea-captains.  It is also used in the construction of
the upper decks of steamboats, but generally speaking, the hurricane's
usefulness has outlasted it.

HURRY, n.  The dispatch of bunglers.

HUSBAND, n.  One who, having dined, is charged with the care of the
plate.

HYBRID, n.  A pooled issue.

HYDRA, n.  A kind of animal that the ancients catalogued under many
heads.

HYENA, n.  A beast held in reverence by some oriental nations from its
habit of frequenting at night the burial-places of the dead.  But the
medical student does that.

HYPOCHONDRIASIS, n.  Depression of one's own spirits.

  Some heaps of trash upon a vacant lot
  Where long the village rubbish had been shot
  Displayed a sign among the stuff and stumps--
  "Hypochondriasis."  It meant The Dumps.

Bogul S. Purvy


HYPOCRITE, n.  One who, profession virtues that he does not respect
secures the advantage of seeming to be what he despises.




I



I is the first letter of the alphabet, the first word of the language,
the first thought of the mind, the first object of affection.  In
grammar it is a pronoun of the first person and singular number.  Its
plural is said to be _We_, but how there can be more than one myself
is doubtless clearer the grammarians than it is to the author of this
incomparable dictionary.  Conception of two myselfs is difficult, but
fine.  The frank yet graceful use of "I" distinguishes a good writer
from a bad; the latter carries it with the manner of a thief trying to
cloak his loot.

ICHOR, n.  A fluid that serves the gods and goddesses in place of
blood.

  Fair Venus, speared by Diomed,
  Restrained the raging chief and said:
  "Behold, rash mortal, whom you've bled--
  Your soul's stained white with ichorshed!"

Mary Doke


ICONOCLAST, n.  A breaker of idols, the worshipers whereof are
imperfectly gratified by the performance, and most strenuously protest
that he unbuildeth but doth not reedify, that he pulleth down but
pileth not up.  For the poor things would have other idols in place of
those he thwacketh upon the mazzard and dispelleth.  But the
iconoclast saith:  "Ye shall have none at all, for ye need them not;
and if the rebuilder fooleth round hereabout, behold I will depress
the head of him and sit thereon till he squawk it."

IDIOT, n.  A member of a large and powerful tribe whose influence in
human affairs has always been dominant and controlling.  The Idiot's
activity is not confined to any special field of thought or action,
but "pervades and regulates the whole."  He has the last word in
everything; his decision is unappealable.  He sets the fashions and
opinion of taste, dictates the limitations of speech and circumscribes
conduct with a dead-line.

IDLENESS, n.  A model farm where the devil experiments with seeds of
new sins and promotes the growth of staple vices.

IGNORAMUS, n.  A person unacquainted with certain kinds of knowledge
familiar to yourself, and having certain other kinds that you know
nothing about.

  Dumble was an ignoramus,
  Mumble was for learning famous.
  Mumble said one day to Dumble:
  "Ignorance should be more humble.
  Not a spark have you of knowledge
  That was got in any college."
  Dumble said to Mumble:  "Truly
  You're self-satisfied unduly.
  Of things in college I'm denied
  A knowledge--you of all beside."

Borelli


ILLUMINATI, n.  A sect of Spanish heretics of the latter part of the
sixteenth century; so called because they were light weights--
_cunctationes illuminati_.

ILLUSTRIOUS, adj.  Suitably placed for the shafts of malice, envy and
detraction.

IMAGINATION, n.  A warehouse of facts, with poet and liar in joint
ownership.

IMBECILITY, n.  A kind of divine inspiration, or sacred fire affecting
censorious critics of this dictionary.

IMMIGRANT, n.  An unenlightened person who thinks one country better
than another.

IMMODEST, adj.  Having a strong sense of one's own merit, coupled with
a feeble conception of worth in others.

  There was once a man in Ispahan
      Ever and ever so long ago,
  And he had a head, the phrenologists said,
      That fitted him for a show.

  For his modesty's bump was so large a lump
      (Nature, they said, had taken a freak)
  That its summit stood far above the wood
      Of his hair, like a mountain peak.

  So modest a man in all Ispahan,
      Over and over again they swore--
  So humble and meek, you would vainly seek;
      None ever was found before.

  Meantime the hump of that awful bump
      Into the heavens contrived to get
  To so great a height that they called the wight
      The man with the minaret.

  There wasn't a man in all Ispahan
      Prouder, or louder in praise of his chump:
  With a tireless tongue and a brazen lung
      He bragged of that beautiful bump

  Till the Shah in a rage sent a trusty page
      Bearing a sack and a bow-string too,
  And that gentle child explained as he smiled:
      "A little present for you."

  The saddest man in all Ispahan,
      Sniffed at the gift, yet accepted the same.
  "If I'd lived," said he, "my humility
      Had given me deathless fame!"

Sukker Uffro


IMMORAL, adj.  Inexpedient.  Whatever in the long run and with regard
to the greater number of instances men find to be generally
inexpedient comes to be considered wrong, wicked, immoral.  If man's
notions of right and wrong have any other basis than this of
expediency; if they originated, or could have originated, in any other
way; if actions have in themselves a moral character apart from, and
nowise dependent on, their consequences--then all philosophy is a
lie and reason a disorder of the mind.

IMMORTALITY, n.

  A toy which people cry for,
  And on their knees apply for,
  Dispute, contend and lie for,
      And if allowed
      Would be right proud
  Eternally to die for.

G.J.


IMPALE, v.t.  In popular usage to pierce with any weapon which remains
fixed in the wound.  This, however, is inaccurate; to impale is,
properly, to put to death by thrusting an upright sharp stake into the
body, the victim being left in a sitting position.  This was a common
mode of punishment among many of the nations of antiquity, and is
still in high favor in China and other parts of Asia.  Down to the
beginning of the fifteenth century it was widely employed in
"churching" heretics and schismatics.  Wolecraft calls it the "stoole
of repentynge," and among the common people it was jocularly known as
"riding the one legged horse."  Ludwig Salzmann informs us that in
Thibet impalement is considered the most appropriate punishment for
crimes against religion; and although in China it is sometimes awarded
for secular offences, it is most frequently adjudged in cases of
sacrilege.  To the person in actual experience of impalement it must
be a matter of minor importance by what kind of civil or religious
dissent he was made acquainted with its discomforts; but doubtless he
would feel a certain satisfaction if able to contemplate himself in
the character of a weather-cock on the spire of the True Church.

IMPARTIAL, adj.  Unable to perceive any promise of personal advantage
from espousing either side of a controversy or adopting either of two
conflicting opinions.

IMPENITENCE, n.  A state of mind intermediate in point of time between
sin and punishment.

IMPIETY, n.  Your irreverence toward my deity.

IMPOSITION, n.  The act of blessing or consecrating by the laying on
of hands--a ceremony common to many ecclesiastical systems, but
performed with the frankest sincerity by the sect known as Thieves.

  "Lo! by the laying on of hands,"
      Say parson, priest and dervise,
  "We consecrate your cash and lands
      To ecclesiastical service.
  No doubt you'll swear till all is blue
  At such an imposition.  Do."

Pollo Doncas


IMPOSTOR n.  A rival aspirant to public honors.

IMPROBABILITY, n.

  His tale he told with a solemn face
  And a tender, melancholy grace.
      Improbable 'twas, no doubt,
      When you came to think it out,
      But the fascinated crowd
      Their deep surprise avowed
  And all with a single voice averred
  'Twas the most amazing thing they'd heard--
  All save one who spake never a word,
      But sat as mum
      As if deaf and dumb,
  Serene, indifferent and unstirred.
      Then all the others turned to him
      And scrutinized him limb from limb--
      Scanned him alive;
      But he seemed to thrive
      And tranquiler grow each minute,
      As if there were nothing in it.
  "What! what!" cried one, "are you not amazed
  At what our friend has told?"  He raised
  Soberly then his eyes and gazed
      In a natural way
      And proceeded to say,
  As he crossed his feet on the mantel-shelf:
  "O no--not at all; I'm a liar myself."

IMPROVIDENCE, n.  Provision for the needs of to-day from the revenues
of to-morrow.

IMPUNITY, n.  Wealth.

INADMISSIBLE, adj.  Not competent to be considered.  Said of certain
kinds of testimony which juries are supposed to be unfit to be
entrusted with, and which judges, therefore, rule out, even of
proceedings before themselves alone.  Hearsay evidence is inadmissible
because the person quoted was unsworn and is not before the court for
examination; yet most momentous actions, military, political,
commercial and of every other kind, are daily undertaken on hearsay
evidence.  There is no religion in the world that has any other basis
than hearsay evidence.  Revelation is hearsay evidence; that the
Scriptures are the word of God we have only the testimony of men long
dead whose identity is not clearly established and who are not known
to have been sworn in any sense.  Under the rules of evidence as they
now exist in this country, no single assertion in the Bible has in its
support any evidence admissible in a court of law.  It cannot be
proved that the battle of Blenheim ever was fought, that there was
such as person as Julius Caesar, such an empire as Assyria.

But as records of courts of justice are admissible, it can easily
be proved that powerful and malevolent magicians once existed and were
a scourge to mankind.  The evidence (including confession) upon which
certain women were convicted of witchcraft and executed was without a
flaw; it is still unimpeachable.  The judges' decisions based on it
were sound in logic and in law.  Nothing in any existing court was
ever more thoroughly proved than the charges of witchcraft and sorcery
for which so many suffered death.  If there were no witches, human
testimony and human reason are alike destitute of value.

INAUSPICIOUSLY, adv.  In an unpromising manner, the auspices being
unfavorable.  Among the Romans it was customary before undertaking any
important action or enterprise to obtain from the augurs, or state
prophets, some hint of its probable outcome; and one of their favorite
and most trustworthy modes of divination consisted in observing the
flight of birds--the omens thence derived being called _auspices_.
Newspaper reporters and certain miscreant lexicographers have decided
that the word--always in the plural--shall mean "patronage" or
"management"; as, "The festivities were under the auspices of the
Ancient and Honorable Order of Body-Snatchers"; or, "The hilarities
were auspicated by the Knights of Hunger."

  A Roman slave appeared one day
  Before the Augur.  "Tell me, pray,
  If--" here the Augur, smiling, made
  A checking gesture and displayed
  His open palm, which plainly itched,
  For visibly its surface twitched.
  A _denarius_ (the Latin nickel)
  Successfully allayed the tickle,
  And then the slave proceeded:  "Please
  Inform me whether Fate decrees
  Success or failure in what I
  To-night (if it be dark) shall try.
  Its nature?  Never mind--I think
  'Tis writ on this"--and with a wink
  Which darkened half the earth, he drew
  Another denarius to view,
  Its shining face attentive scanned,
  Then slipped it into the good man's hand,
  Who with great gravity said:  "Wait
  While I retire to question Fate."
  That holy person then withdrew
  His scared clay and, passing through
  The temple's rearward gate, cried "Shoo!"
  Waving his robe of office.  Straight
  Each sacred peacock and its mate
  (Maintained for Juno's favor) fled
  With clamor from the trees o'erhead,
  Where they were perching for the night.
  The temple's roof received their flight,
  For thither they would always go,
  When danger threatened them below.
  Back to the slave the Augur went:
  "My son, forecasting the event
  By flight of birds, I must confess
  The auspices deny success."
  That slave retired, a sadder man,
  Abandoning his secret plan--
  Which was (as well the craft seer
  Had from the first divined) to clear
  The wall and fraudulently seize
  On Juno's poultry in the trees.

G.J.


INCOME, n.  The natural and rational gauge and measure of
respectability, the commonly accepted standards being artificial,
arbitrary and fallacious; for, as "Sir Sycophas Chrysolater" in the
play has justly remarked, "the true use and function of property (in
whatsoever it consisteth--coins, or land, or houses, or merchant-stuff,
or anything which may be named as holden of right to one's own
subservience) as also of honors, titles, preferments and place, and
all favor and acquaintance of persons of quality or ableness, are but
to get money.  Hence it followeth that all things are truly to be
rated as of worth in measure of their serviceableness to that end; and
their possessors should take rank in agreement thereto, neither the
lord of an unproducing manor, howsoever broad and ancient, nor he who
bears an unremunerate dignity, nor yet the pauper favorite of a king,
being esteemed of level excellency with him whose riches are of daily
accretion; and hardly should they whose wealth is barren claim and
rightly take more honor than the poor and unworthy."

INCOMPATIBILITY, n.  In matrimony a similarity of tastes, particularly
the taste for domination.  Incompatibility may, however, consist of a
meek-eyed matron living just around the corner.  It has even been
known to wear a moustache.

INCOMPOSSIBLE, adj.  Unable to exist if something else exists.  Two
things are incompossible when the world of being has scope enough for
one of them, but not enough for both--as Walt Whitman's poetry and
God's mercy to man.  Incompossibility, it will be seen, is only
incompatibility let loose.  Instead of such low language as "Go heel
yourself--I mean to kill you on sight," the words, "Sir, we are
incompossible," would convey and equally significant intimation and in
stately courtesy are altogether superior.

INCUBUS, n.  One of a race of highly improper demons who, though
probably not wholly extinct, may be said to have seen their best
nights.  For a complete account of _incubi_ and _succubi_, including
_incubae_ and _succubae_, see the _Liber Demonorum_ of Protassus
(Paris, 1328), which contains much curious information that would be
out of place in a dictionary intended as a text-book for the public
schools.

Victor Hugo relates that in the Channel Islands Satan himself--
tempted more than elsewhere by the beauty of the women, doubtless--
sometimes plays at _incubus_, greatly to the inconvenience and alarm
of the good dames who wish to be loyal to their marriage vows,
generally speaking.  A certain lady applied to the parish priest to
learn how they might, in the dark, distinguish the hardy intruder from
their husbands.  The holy man said they must feel his brown for horns;
but Hugo is ungallant enough to hint a doubt of the efficacy of the
test.

INCUMBENT, n.  A person of the liveliest interest to the outcumbents.

INDECISION, n.  The chief element of success; "for whereas," saith Sir
Thomas Brewbold, "there is but one way to do nothing and divers way to
do something, whereof, to a surety, only one is the right way, it
followeth that he who from indecision standeth still hath not so many
chances of going astray as he who pusheth forwards"--a most clear
and satisfactory exposition on the matter.

"Your prompt decision to attack," said Genera Grant on a certain
occasion to General Gordon Granger, "was admirable; you had but five
minutes to make up your mind in."

"Yes, sir," answered the victorious subordinate, "it is a great
thing to be know exactly what to do in an emergency.  When in doubt
whether to attack or retreat I never hesitate a moment--I toss us a
copper."

"Do you mean to say that's what you did this time?"

"Yes, General; but for Heaven's sake don't reprimand me:  I
disobeyed the coin."

INDIFFERENT, adj.  Imperfectly sensible to distinctions among things.

  "You tiresome man!" cried Indolentio's wife,
  "You've grown indifferent to all in life."
  "Indifferent?" he drawled with a slow smile;
  "I would be, dear, but it is not worth while."

Apuleius M. Gokul


INDIGESTION, n.  A disease which the patient and his friends
frequently mistake for deep religious conviction and concern for the
salvation of mankind.  As the simple Red Man of the western wild put
it, with, it must be confessed, a certain force:  "Plenty well, no
pray; big bellyache, heap God."

INDISCRETION, n.  The guilt of woman.

INEXPEDIENT, adj.  Not calculated to advance one's interests.

INFANCY, n.  The period of our lives when, according to Wordsworth,
"Heaven lies about us."  The world begins lying about us pretty soon
afterward.

INFERIAE, n.  [Latin]  Among the Greeks and Romans, sacrifices for
propitiation of the _Dii Manes_, or souls of the dead heroes; for the
pious ancients could not invent enough gods to satisfy their spiritual
needs, and had to have a number of makeshift deities, or, as a sailor
might say, jury-gods, which they made out of the most unpromising
materials.  It was while sacrificing a bullock to the spirit of
Agamemnon that Laiaides, a priest of Aulis, was favored with an
audience of that illustrious warrior's shade, who prophetically
recounted to him the birth of Christ and the triumph of Christianity,
giving him also a rapid but tolerably complete review of events down
to the reign of Saint Louis.  The narrative ended abruptly at the
point, owing to the inconsiderate crowing of a cock, which compelled
the ghosted King of Men to scamper back to Hades.  There is a fine
mediaeval flavor to this story, and as it has not been traced back
further than Pere Brateille, a pious but obscure writer at the court
of Saint Louis, we shall probably not err on the side of presumption
in considering it apocryphal, though Monsignor Capel's judgment of the
matter might be different; and to that I bow--wow.

INFIDEL, n.  In New York, one who does not believe in the Christian
religion; in Constantinople, one who does.  (See GIAOUR.)  A kind of
scoundrel imperfectly reverent of, and niggardly contributory to,
divines, ecclesiastics, popes, parsons, canons, monks, mollahs,
voodoos, presbyters, hierophants, prelates, obeah-men, abbes, nuns,
missionaries, exhorters, deacons, friars, hadjis, high-priests,
muezzins, brahmins, medicine-men, confessors, eminences, elders,
primates, prebendaries, pilgrims, prophets, imaums, beneficiaries,
clerks, vicars-choral, archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors,
preachers, padres, abbotesses, caloyers, palmers, curates, patriarchs,
bonezs, santons, beadsmen, canonesses, residentiaries, diocesans,
deans, subdeans, rural deans, abdals, charm-sellers, archdeacons,
hierarchs, class-leaders, incumbents, capitulars, sheiks, talapoins,
postulants, scribes, gooroos, precentors, beadles, fakeers, sextons,
reverences, revivalists, cenobites, perpetual curates, chaplains,
mudjoes, readers, novices, vicars, pastors, rabbis, ulemas, lamas,
sacristans, vergers, dervises, lectors, church wardens, cardinals,
prioresses, suffragans, acolytes, rectors, cures, sophis, mutifs and
pumpums.

INFLUENCE, n.  In politics, a visionary _quo_ given in exchange for a
substantial _quid_.

INFRALAPSARIAN, n.  One who ventures to believe that Adam need not have
sinned unless he had a mind to--in opposition to the Supralapsarians,
who hold that that luckless person's fall was decreed from the
beginning.  Infralapsarians are sometimes called Sublapsarians without
material effect upon the importance and lucidity of their views about
Adam.

  Two theologues once, as they wended their way
  To chapel, engaged in colloquial fray--
  An earnest logomachy, bitter as gall,
  Concerning poor Adam and what made him fall.
  "'Twas Predestination," cried one--"for the Lord
  Decreed he should fall of his own accord."
  "Not so--'twas Free will," the other maintained,
  "Which led him to choose what the Lord had ordained."
  So fierce and so fiery grew the debate
  That nothing but bloodshed their dudgeon could sate;
  So off flew their cassocks and caps to the ground
  And, moved by the spirit, their hands went round.
  Ere either had proved his theology right
  By winning, or even beginning, the fight,
  A gray old professor of Latin came by,
  A staff in his hand and a scowl in his eye,
  And learning the cause of their quarrel (for still
  As they clumsily sparred they disputed with skill
  Of foreordination freedom of will)
  Cried:  "Sirrahs! this reasonless warfare compose:
  Atwixt ye's no difference worthy of blows.
  The sects ye belong to--I'm ready to swear
  Ye wrongly interpret the names that they bear.
  _You_--Infralapsarian son of a clown!--
  Should only contend that Adam slipped down;
  While _you_--you Supralapsarian pup!--
  Should nothing aver but that Adam slipped up.
  It's all the same whether up or down
  You slip on a peel of banana brown.
  Even Adam analyzed not his blunder,
  But thought he had slipped on a peal of thunder!

G.J.


INGRATE, n.  One who receives a benefit from another, or is otherwise
an object of charity.

  "All men are ingrates," sneered the cynic.  "Nay,"
      The good philanthropist replied;
  "I did great service to a man one day
  Who never since has cursed me to repay,
              Nor vilified."

  "Ho!" cried the cynic, "lead me to him straight--
      With veneration I am overcome,
  And fain would have his blessing."  "Sad your fate--
  He cannot bless you, for AI grieve to state
              This man is dumb."

Ariel Selp


INJURY, n.  An offense next in degree of enormity to a slight.

INJUSTICE, n.  A burden which of all those that we load upon others
and carry ourselves is lightest in the hands and heaviest upon the
back.

INK, n.  A villainous compound of tannogallate of iron, gum-arabic and
water, chiefly used to facilitate the infection of idiocy and promote
intellectual crime.  The properties of ink are peculiar and
contradictory:  it may be used to make reputations and unmake them; to
blacken them and to make them white; but it is most generally and
acceptably employed as a mortar to bind together the stones of an
edifice of fame, and as a whitewash to conceal afterward the rascal
quality of the material.  There are men called journalists who have
established ink baths which some persons pay money to get into, others
to get out of.  Not infrequently it occurs that a person who has paid
to get in pays twice as much to get out.

INNATE, adj.  Natural, inherent--as innate ideas, that is to say,
ideas that we are born with, having had them previously imparted to
us.  The doctrine of innate ideas is one of the most admirable faiths
of philosophy, being itself an innate idea and therefore inaccessible
to disproof, though Locke foolishly supposed himself to have given it
"a black eye."  Among innate ideas may be mentioned the belief in
one's ability to conduct a newspaper, in the greatness of one's
country, in the superiority of one's civilization, in the importance
of one's personal affairs and in the interesting nature of one's
diseases.

IN'ARDS, n.  The stomach, heart, soul and other bowels.  Many eminent
investigators do not class the soul as an in'ard, but that acute
observer and renowned authority, Dr. Gunsaulus, is persuaded that the
mysterious organ known as the spleen is nothing less than our
important part.  To the contrary, Professor Garrett P. Servis holds
that man's soul is that prolongation of his spinal marrow which forms
the pith of his no tail; and for demonstration of his faith points
confidently to the fact that no tailed animals have no souls.
Concerning these two theories, it is best to suspend judgment by
believing both.

INSCRIPTION, n.  Something written on another thing.  Inscriptions are
of many kinds, but mostly memorial, intended to commemorate the fame
of some illustrious person and hand down to distant ages the record of
his services and virtues.  To this class of inscriptions belongs the
name of John Smith, penciled on the Washington monument.  Following
are examples of memorial inscriptions on tombstones:  (See EPITAPH.)

  "In the sky my soul is found,
  And my body in the ground.
  By and by my body'll rise
  To my spirit in the skies,
  Soaring up to Heaven's gate.
          1878."

  "Sacred to the memory of Jeremiah Tree.  Cut down May 9th, 1862,
aged 27 yrs. 4 mos. and 12 ds.  Indigenous."

      "Affliction sore long time she boar,
          Phisicians was in vain,
      Till Deth released the dear deceased
          And left her a remain.
  Gone to join Ananias in the regions of bliss."

  "The clay that rests beneath this stone
  As Silas Wood was widely known.
  Now, lying here, I ask what good
  It was to let me be S. Wood.
  O Man, let not ambition trouble you,
  Is the advice of Silas W."

  "Richard Haymon, of Heaven.  Fell to Earth Jan. 20, 1807, and had
the dust brushed off him Oct. 3, 1874."

INSECTIVORA, n.

  "See," cries the chorus of admiring preachers,
  "How Providence provides for all His creatures!"
  "His care," the gnat said, "even the insects follows:
  For us He has provided wrens and swallows."

Sempen Railey


INSURANCE, n.  An ingenious modern game of chance in which the player
is permitted to enjoy the comfortable conviction that he is beating
the man who keeps the table.

  INSURANCE AGENT:  My dear sir, that is a fine house--pray let me
      insure it.
  HOUSE OWNER:  With pleasure.  Please make the annual premium so
      low that by the time when, according to the tables of your
      actuary, it will probably be destroyed by fire I will have
      paid you considerably less than the face of the policy.
  INSURANCE AGENT:  O dear, no--we could not afford to do that.
      We must fix the premium so that you will have paid more.
  HOUSE OWNER:  How, then, can _I_ afford _that_?
  INSURANCE AGENT:  Why, your house may burn down at any time.
      There was Smith's house, for example, which--
  HOUSE OWNER:  Spare me--there were Brown's house, on the
      contrary, and Jones's house, and Robinson's house, which--
  INSURANCE AGENT:  Spare _me_!
  HOUSE OWNER:  Let us understand each other.  You want me to pay
      you money on the supposition that something will occur
      previously to the time set by yourself for its occurrence.  In
      other words, you expect me to bet that my house will not last
      so long as you say that it will probably last.
  INSURANCE AGENT:  But if your house burns without insurance it
      will be a total loss.
  HOUSE OWNER:  Beg your pardon--by your own actuary's tables I
      shall probably have saved, when it burns, all the premiums I
      would otherwise have paid to you--amounting to more than the
      face of the policy they would have bought.  But suppose it to
      burn, uninsured, before the time upon which your figures are
      based.  If I could not afford that, how could you if it were
      insured?
  INSURANCE AGENT:  O, we should make ourselves whole from our
      luckier ventures with other clients.  Virtually, they pay your
      loss.
  HOUSE OWNER:  And virtually, then, don't I help to pay their
      losses?  Are not their houses as likely as mine to burn before
      they have paid you as much as you must pay them?  The case
      stands this way:  you expect to take more money from your
      clients than you pay to them, do you not?
  INSURANCE AGENT:  Certainly; if we did not--
  HOUSE OWNER:  I would not trust you with my money.  Very well
      then.  If it is _certain_, with reference to the whole body of
      your clients, that they lose money on you it is _probable_,
      with reference to any one of them, that _he_ will.  It is
      these individual probabilities that make the aggregate
      certainty.
  INSURANCE AGENT:  I will not deny it--but look at the figures in
      this pamph--
  HOUSE OWNER:  Heaven forbid!
  INSURANCE AGENT:  You spoke of saving the premiums which you would
      otherwise pay to me.  Will you not be more likely to squander
      them?  We offer you an incentive to thrift.
  HOUSE OWNER:  The willingness of A to take care of B's money is
      not peculiar to insurance, but as a charitable institution you
      command esteem.  Deign to accept its expression from a
      Deserving Object.

INSURRECTION, n.  An unsuccessful revolution.  Disaffection's failure
to substitute misrule for bad government.

INTENTION, n.  The mind's sense of the prevalence of one set of
influences over another set; an effect whose cause is the imminence,
immediate or remote, of the performance of an involuntary act.

INTERPRETER, n.  One who enables two persons of different languages to
understand each other by repeating to each what it would have been to
the interpreter's advantage for the other to have said.

INTERREGNUM, n.  The period during which a monarchical country is
governed by a warm spot on the cushion of the throne.  The experiment
of letting the spot grow cold has commonly been attended by most
unhappy results from the zeal of many worthy persons to make it warm
again.

INTIMACY, n.  A relation into which fools are providentially drawn for
their mutual destruction.

  Two Seidlitz powders, one in blue
  And one in white, together drew
  And having each a pleasant sense
  Of t'other powder's excellence,
  Forsook their jackets for the snug
  Enjoyment of a common mug.
  So close their intimacy grew
  One paper would have held the two.
  To confidences straight they fell,
  Less anxious each to hear than tell;
  Then each remorsefully confessed
  To all the virtues he possessed,
  Acknowledging he had them in
  So high degree it was a sin.
  The more they said, the more they felt
  Their spirits with emotion melt,
  Till tears of sentiment expressed
  Their feelings.  Then they effervesced!
  So Nature executes her feats
  Of wrath on friends and sympathetes
  The good old rule who don't apply,
  That you are you and I am I.

INTRODUCTION, n.  A social ceremony invented by the devil for the
gratification of his servants and the plaguing of his enemies.  The
introduction attains its most malevolent development in this century,
being, indeed, closely related to our political system.  Every
American being the equal of every other American, it follows that
everybody has the right to know everybody else, which implies the
right to introduce without request or permission.  The Declaration of
Independence should have read thus:

      "We hold these truths to be self-evident:  that all men are
  created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
  inalienable rights; that among these are life, and the right to
  make that of another miserable by thrusting upon him an
  incalculable quantity of acquaintances; liberty, particularly the
  liberty to introduce persons to one another without first
  ascertaining if they are not already acquainted as enemies; and
  the pursuit of another's happiness with a running pack of
  strangers."

INVENTOR, n.  A person who makes an ingenious arrangement of wheels,
levers and springs, and believes it civilization.

IRRELIGION, n.  The principal one of the great faiths of the world.

ITCH, n.  The patriotism of a Scotchman.




J



J is a consonant in English, but some nations use it as a vowel--
than which nothing could be more absurd.  Its original form, which has
been but slightly modified, was that of the tail of a subdued dog, and
it was not a letter but a character, standing for a Latin verb,
_jacere_, "to throw," because when a stone is thrown at a dog the
dog's tail assumes that shape.  This is the origin of the letter, as
expounded by the renowned Dr. Jocolpus Bumer, of the University of
Belgrade, who established his conclusions on the subject in a work of
three quarto volumes and committed suicide on being reminded that the
j in the Roman alphabet had originally no curl.

JEALOUS, adj.  Unduly concerned about the preservation of that which
can be lost only if not worth keeping.

JESTER, n.  An officer formerly attached to a king's household, whose
business it was to amuse the court by ludicrous actions and
utterances, the absurdity being attested by his motley costume.  The
king himself being attired with dignity, it took the world some
centuries to discover that his own conduct and decrees were
sufficiently ridiculous for the amusement not only of his court but of
all mankind.  The jester was commonly called a fool, but the poets and
romancers have ever delighted to represent him as a singularly wise
and witty person.  In the circus of to-day the melancholy ghost of the
court fool effects the dejection of humbler audiences with the same
jests wherewith in life he gloomed the marble hall, panged the
patrician sense of humor and tapped the tank of royal tears.

  The widow-queen of Portugal
      Had an audacious jester
  Who entered the confessional
      Disguised, and there confessed her.

  "Father," she said, "thine ear bend down--
      My sins are more than scarlet:
  I love my fool--blaspheming clown,
      And common, base-born varlet."

  "Daughter," the mimic priest replied,
      "That sin, indeed, is awful:
  The church's pardon is denied
      To love that is unlawful.
  "But since thy stubborn heart will be
      For him forever pleading,
  Thou'dst better make him, by decree,
      A man of birth and breeding."

  She made the fool a duke, in hope
      With Heaven's taboo to palter;
  Then told a priest, who told the Pope,
      Who damned her from the altar!

Barel Dort


JEWS-HARP, n.  An unmusical instrument, played by holding it fast with
the teeth and trying to brush it away with the finger.

JOSS-STICKS, n.  Small sticks burned by the Chinese in their pagan
tomfoolery, in imitation of certain sacred rites of our holy religion.

JUSTICE, n.  A commodity which is a more or less adulterated condition
the State sells to the citizen as a reward for his allegiance, taxes
and personal service.




K



K is a consonant that we get from the Greeks, but it can be traced
away back beyond them to the Cerathians, a small commercial nation
inhabiting the peninsula of Smero.  In their tongue it was called
_Klatch_, which means "destroyed."  The form of the letter was
originally precisely that of our H, but the erudite Dr. Snedeker
explains that it was altered to its present shape to commemorate the
destruction of the great temple of Jarute by an earthquake, _circa_
730 B.C.  This building was famous for the two lofty columns of its
portico, one of which was broken in half by the catastrophe, the other
remaining intact.  As the earlier form of the letter is supposed to
have been suggested by these pillars, so, it is thought by the great
antiquary, its later was adopted as a simple and natural--not to say
touching--means of keeping the calamity ever in the national memory.
It is not known if the name of the letter was altered as an additional
mnemonic, or if the name was always _Klatch_ and the destruction one
of nature's puns.  As each theory seems probable enough, I see no
objection to believing both--and Dr. Snedeker arrayed himself on
that side of the question.

KEEP, v.t.

  He willed away his whole estate,
      And then in death he fell asleep,
  Murmuring:  "Well, at any rate,
      My name unblemished I shall keep."
  But when upon the tomb 'twas wrought
  Whose was it?--for the dead keep naught.

Durang Gophel Arn


KILL, v.t.  To create a vacancy without nominating a successor.

KILT, n.  A costume sometimes worn by Scotchmen in America and
Americans in Scotland.

KINDNESS, n.  A brief preface to ten volumes of exaction.

KING, n.  A male person commonly known in America as a "crowned head,"
although he never wears a crown and has usually no head to speak of.

  A king, in times long, long gone by,
      Said to his lazy jester:
  "If I were you and you were I
  My moments merrily would fly--
      Nor care nor grief to pester."

  "The reason, Sire, that you would thrive,"
      The fool said--"if you'll hear it--
  Is that of all the fools alive
  Who own you for their sovereign, I've
      The most forgiving spirit."

Oogum Bem


KING'S EVIL, n.  A malady that was formerly cured by the touch of the
sovereign, but has now to be treated by the physicians.  Thus "the
most pious Edward" of England used to lay his royal hand upon the
ailing subjects and make them whole--

                  a crowd of wretched souls
  That stay his cure:  their malady convinces
  The great essay of art; but at his touch,
  Such sanctity hath Heaven given his hand,
  They presently amend,

as the "Doctor" in _Macbeth_ hath it.  This useful property of the
royal hand could, it appears, be transmitted along with other crown
properties; for according to "Malcolm,"

                          'tis spoken
  To the succeeding royalty he leaves
  The healing benediction.

But the gift somewhere dropped out of the line of succession:  the
later sovereigns of England have not been tactual healers, and the
disease once honored with the name "king's evil" now bears the humbler
one of "scrofula," from _scrofa_, a sow.  The date and author of the
following epigram are known only to the author of this dictionary, but
it is old enough to show that the jest about Scotland's national
disorder is not a thing of yesterday.

  Ye Kynge his evill in me laye,
  Wh. he of Scottlande charmed awaye.
  He layde his hand on mine and sayd:
  "Be gone!"  Ye ill no longer stayd.
  But O ye wofull plyght in wh.
  I'm now y-pight:  I have ye itche!

The superstition that maladies can be cured by royal taction is
dead, but like many a departed conviction it has left a monument of
custom to keep its memory green.  The practice of forming a line and
shaking the President's hand had no other origin, and when that great
dignitary bestows his healing salutation on

                      strangely visited people,
  All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
  The mere despair of surgery,

he and his patients are handing along an extinguished torch which once
was kindled at the altar-fire of a faith long held by all classes of
men.  It is a beautiful and edifying "survival"--one which brings
the sainted past close home in our "business and bosoms."

KISS, n.  A word invented by the poets as a rhyme for "bliss."  It is
supposed to signify, in a general way, some kind of rite or ceremony
appertaining to a good understanding; but the manner of its
performance is unknown to this lexicographer.

KLEPTOMANIAC, n.  A rich thief.

KNIGHT, n.

  Once a warrior gentle of birth,
  Then a person of civic worth,
  Now a fellow to move our mirth.
  Warrior, person, and fellow--no more:
  We must knight our dogs to get any lower.
  Brave Knights Kennelers then shall be,
  Noble Knights of the Golden Flea,
  Knights of the Order of St. Steboy,
  Knights of St. Gorge and Sir Knights Jawy.
  God speed the day when this knighting fad
  Shall go to the dogs and the dogs go mad.

KORAN, n.  A book which the Mohammedans foolishly believe to have been
written by divine inspiration, but which Christians know to be a
wicked imposture, contradictory to the Holy Scriptures.




L



LABOR, n.  One of the processes by which A acquires property for B.

LAND, n.  A part of the earth's surface, considered as property.  The
theory that land is property subject to private ownership and control
is the foundation of modern society, and is eminently worthy of the
superstructure.  Carried to its logical conclusion, it means that some
have the right to prevent others from living; for the right to own
implies the right exclusively to occupy; and in fact laws of trespass
are enacted wherever property in land is recognized.  It follows that
if the whole area of _terra firma_ is owned by A, B and C, there will
be no place for D, E, F and G to be born, or, born as trespassers, to
exist.

  A life on the ocean wave,
      A home on the rolling deep,
  For the spark the nature gave
      I have there the right to keep.

  They give me the cat-o'-nine
      Whenever I go ashore.
  Then ho! for the flashing brine--
      I'm a natural commodore!

Dodle


LANGUAGE, n.  The music with which we charm the serpents guarding
another's treasure.

LAOCOON, n.  A famous piece of antique scripture representing a priest
of that name and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents.
The skill and diligence with which the old man and lads support the
serpents and keep them up to their work have been justly regarded as
one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human
intelligence over brute inertia.

LAP, n.  One of the most important organs of the female system--an
admirable provision of nature for the repose of infancy, but chiefly
useful in rural festivities to support plates of cold chicken and
heads of adult males.  The male of our species has a rudimentary lap,
imperfectly developed and in no way contributing to the animal's
substantial welfare.

LAST, n.  A shoemaker's implement, named by a frowning Providence as
opportunity to the maker of puns.

  Ah, punster, would my lot were cast,
      Where the cobbler is unknown,
  So that I might forget his last
      And hear your own.

Gargo Repsky


LAUGHTER, n.  An interior convulsion, producing a distortion of the
features and accompanied by inarticulate noises.  It is infectious
and, though intermittent, incurable.  Liability to attacks of laughter
is one of the characteristics distinguishing man from the animals--
these being not only inaccessible to the provocation of his example,
but impregnable to the microbes having original jurisdiction in
bestowal of the disease.  Whether laughter could be imparted to
animals by inoculation from the human patient is a question that has
not been answered by experimentation.  Dr. Meir Witchell holds that
the infection character of laughter is due to the instantaneous
fermentation of _sputa_ diffused in a spray.  From this peculiarity he
names the disorder _Convulsio spargens_.

LAUREATE, adj.  Crowned with leaves of the laurel.  In England the
Poet Laureate is an officer of the sovereign's court, acting as
dancing skeleton at every royal feast and singing-mute at every royal
funeral.  Of all incumbents of that high office, Robert Southey had
the most notable knack at drugging the Samson of public joy and
cutting his hair to the quick; and he had an artistic color-sense
which enabled him so to blacken a public grief as to give it the
aspect of a national crime.

LAUREL, n.  The _laurus_, a vegetable dedicated to Apollo, and
formerly defoliated to wreathe the brows of victors and such poets as
had influence at court.  (_Vide supra._)

LAW, n.

  Once Law was sitting on the bench,
      And Mercy knelt a-weeping.
  "Clear out!" he cried, "disordered wench!
      Nor come before me creeping.
  Upon your knees if you appear,
  'Tis plain your have no standing here."

  Then Justice came.  His Honor cried:
      "_Your_ status?--devil seize you!"
  "_Amica curiae,_" she replied--
      "Friend of the court, so please you."
  "Begone!" he shouted--"there's the door--
  I never saw your face before!"

G.J.


LAWFUL, adj.  Compatible with the will of a judge having jurisdiction.

LAWYER, n.  One skilled in circumvention of the law.

LAZINESS, n.  Unwarranted repose of manner in a person of low degree.

LEAD, n.  A heavy blue-gray metal much used in giving stability to
light lovers--particularly to those who love not wisely but other
men's wives.  Lead is also of great service as a counterpoise to an
argument of such weight that it turns the scale of debate the wrong
way.  An interesting fact in the chemistry of international
controversy is that at the point of contact of two patriotisms lead is
precipitated in great quantities.

  Hail, holy Lead!--of human feuds the great
      And universal arbiter; endowed
      With penetration to pierce any cloud
  Fogging the field of controversial hate,
  And with a sift, inevitable, straight,
      Searching precision find the unavowed
      But vital point.  Thy judgment, when allowed
  By the chirurgeon, settles the debate.
  O useful metal!--were it not for thee
      We'd grapple one another's ears alway:
  But when we hear thee buzzing like a bee
      We, like old Muhlenberg, "care not to stay."
  And when the quick have run away like pellets
  Jack Satan smelts the dead to make new bullets.

LEARNING, n.  The kind of ignorance distinguishing the studious.

LECTURER, n.  One with his hand in your pocket, his tongue in your ear
and his faith in your patience.

LEGACY, n.  A gift from one who is legging it out of this vale of
tears.

LEONINE, adj.  Unlike a menagerie lion.  Leonine verses are those in
which a word in the middle of a line rhymes with a word at the end, as
in this famous passage from Bella Peeler Silcox:

  The electric light invades the dunnest deep of Hades.
  Cries Pluto, 'twixt his snores:  "O tempora! O mores!"

It should be explained that Mrs. Silcox does not undertake to
teach pronunciation of the Greek and Latin tongues.  Leonine verses
are so called in honor of a poet named Leo, whom prosodists appear to
find a pleasure in believing to have been the first to discover that a
rhyming couplet could be run into a single line.

LETTUCE, n.  An herb of the genus _Lactuca_, "Wherewith," says that
pious gastronome, Hengist Pelly, "God has been pleased to reward the
good and punish the wicked.  For by his inner light the righteous man
has discerned a manner of compounding for it a dressing to the
appetency whereof a multitude of gustible condiments conspire, being
reconciled and ameliorated with profusion of oil, the entire
comestible making glad the heart of the godly and causing his face to
shine.  But the person of spiritual unworth is successfully tempted to
the Adversary to eat of lettuce with destitution of oil, mustard, egg,
salt and garlic, and with a rascal bath of vinegar polluted with
sugar.  Wherefore the person of spiritual unworth suffers an
intestinal pang of strange complexity and raises the song."

LEVIATHAN, n.  An enormous aquatic animal mentioned by Job.  Some
suppose it to have been the whale, but that distinguished
ichthyologer, Dr. Jordan, of Stanford University, maintains with
considerable heat that it was a species of gigantic Tadpole (_Thaddeus
Polandensis_) or Polliwig--_Maria pseudo-hirsuta_.  For an
exhaustive description and history of the Tadpole consult the famous
monograph of Jane Potter, _Thaddeus of Warsaw_.

LEXICOGRAPHER, n.  A pestilent fellow who, under the pretense of
recording some particular stage in the development of a language, does
what he can to arrest its growth, stiffen its flexibility and
mechanize its methods.  For your lexicographer, having written his
dictionary, comes to be considered "as one having authority," whereas
his function is only to make a record, not to give a law.  The natural
servility of the human understanding having invested him with judicial
power, surrenders its right of reason and submits itself to a
chronicle as if it were a statue.  Let the dictionary (for example)
mark a good word as "obsolete" or "obsolescent" and few men
thereafter venture to use it, whatever their need of it and however
desirable its restoration to favor--whereby the process of
impoverishment is accelerated and speech decays.  On the contrary,
recognizing the truth that language must grow by innovation if it grow
at all, makes new words and uses the old in an unfamiliar sense, has
no following and is tartly reminded that "it isn't in the dictionary"
--although down to the time of the first lexicographer (Heaven
forgive him!) no author ever had used a word that _was_ in the
dictionary.  In the golden prime and high noon of English speech; when
from the lips of the great Elizabethans fell words that made their own
meaning and carried it in their very sound; when a Shakespeare and a
Bacon were possible, and the language now rapidly perishing at one end
and slowly renewed at the other was in vigorous growth and hardy
preservation--sweeter than honey and stronger than a lion--the
lexicographer was a person unknown, the dictionary a creation which
his Creator had not created him to create.

  God said:  "Let Spirit perish into Form,"
  And lexicographers arose, a swarm!
  Thought fled and left her clothing, which they took,
  And catalogued each garment in a book.
  Now, from her leafy covert when she cries:
  "Give me my clothes and I'll return," they rise
  And scan the list, and say without compassion:
  "Excuse us--they are mostly out of fashion."

Sigismund Smith


LIAR, n.  A lawyer with a roving commission.

LIBERTY, n.  One of Imagination's most precious possessions.

  The rising People, hot and out of breath,
  Roared around the palace:  "Liberty or death!"
  "If death will do," the King said, "let me reign;
  You'll have, I'm sure, no reason to complain."

Martha Braymance


LICKSPITTLE, n.  A useful functionary, not infrequently found editing
a newspaper.  In his character of editor he is closely allied to the
blackmailer by the tie of occasional identity; for in truth the
lickspittle is only the blackmailer under another aspect, although the
latter is frequently found as an independent species.  Lickspittling
is more detestable than blackmailing, precisely as the business of a
confidence man is more detestable than that of a highway robber; and
the parallel maintains itself throughout, for whereas few robbers will
cheat, every sneak will plunder if he dare.

LIFE, n.  A spiritual pickle preserving the body from decay.  We live
in daily apprehension of its loss; yet when lost it is not missed.
The question, "Is life worth living?" has been much discussed;
particularly by those who think it is not, many of whom have written
at great length in support of their view and by careful observance of
the laws of health enjoyed for long terms of years the honors of
successful controversy.

  "Life's not worth living, and that's the truth,"
  Carelessly caroled the golden youth.
  In manhood still he maintained that view
  And held it more strongly the older he grew.
  When kicked by a jackass at eighty-three,
  "Go fetch me a surgeon at once!" cried he.

Han Soper


LIGHTHOUSE, n.  A tall building on the seashore in which the
government maintains a lamp and the friend of a politician.

LIMB, n.  The branch of a tree or the leg of an American woman.

  'Twas a pair of boots that the lady bought,
      And the salesman laced them tight
      To a very remarkable height--
  Higher, indeed, than I think he ought--
      Higher than _can_ be right.
  For the Bible declares--but never mind:
      It is hardly fit
  To censure freely and fault to find
  With others for sins that I'm not inclined
      Myself to commit.
  Each has his weakness, and though my own
      Is freedom from every sin,
      It still were unfair to pitch in,
  Discharging the first censorious stone.
  Besides, the truth compels me to say,
  The boots in question were _made_ that way.
  As he drew the lace she made a grimace,
      And blushingly said to him:
  "This boot, I'm sure, is too high to endure,
  It hurts my--hurts my--limb."
  The salesman smiled in a manner mild,
  Like an artless, undesigning child;
  Then, checking himself, to his face he gave
  A look as sorrowful as the grave,
      Though he didn't care two figs
  For her paints and throes,
  As he stroked her toes,
  Remarking with speech and manner just
  Befitting his calling:  "Madam, I trust
      That it doesn't hurt your twigs."

B. Percival Dike


LINEN, n.  "A kind of cloth the making of which, when made of hemp,
entails a great waste of hemp."--Calcraft the Hangman.

LITIGANT, n.  A person about to give up his skin for the hope of
retaining his bones.

LITIGATION, n.  A machine which you go into as a pig and come out of
as a sausage.

LIVER, n.  A large red organ thoughtfully provided by nature to be
bilious with.  The sentiments and emotions which every literary
anatomist now knows to haunt the heart were anciently believed to
infest the liver; and even Gascoygne, speaking of the emotional side
of human nature, calls it "our hepaticall parte."  It was at one time
considered the seat of life; hence its name--liver, the thing we
live with.  The liver is heaven's best gift to the goose; without it
that bird would be unable to supply us with the Strasbourg _pate_.

LL.D.  Letters indicating the degree _Legumptionorum Doctor_, one
learned in laws, gifted with legal gumption.  Some suspicion is cast
upon this derivation by the fact that the title was formerly _LL.d._,
and conferred only upon gentlemen distinguished for their wealth.  At
the date of this writing Columbia University is considering the
expediency of making another degree for clergymen, in place of the old
D.D.--_Damnator Diaboli_.  The new honor will be known as _Sanctorum
Custus_, and written _$$c_.  The name of the Rev. John Satan has been
suggested as a suitable recipient by a lover of consistency, who
points out that Professor Harry Thurston Peck has long enjoyed the
advantage of a degree.

LOCK-AND-KEY, n.  The distinguishing device of civilization and
enlightenment.

LODGER, n.  A less popular name for the Second Person of that
delectable newspaper Trinity, the Roomer, the Bedder, and the Mealer.

LOGIC, n.  The art of thinking and reasoning in strict accordance with
the limitations and incapacities of the human misunderstanding.  The
basic of logic is the syllogism, consisting of a major and a minor
premise and a conclusion--thus:

_Major Premise_:  Sixty men can do a piece of work sixty times as
quickly as one man.

_Minor Premise_:  One man can dig a posthole in sixty seconds;
therefore--

_Conclusion_:  Sixty men can dig a posthole in one second.

This may be called the syllogism arithmetical, in which, by
combining logic and mathematics, we obtain a double certainty and are
twice blessed.

LOGOMACHY, n.  A war in which the weapons are words and the wounds
punctures in the swim-bladder of self-esteem--a kind of contest in
which, the vanquished being unconscious of defeat, the victor is
denied the reward of success.

  'Tis said by divers of the scholar-men
  That poor Salmasius died of Milton's pen.
  Alas! we cannot know if this is true,
  For reading Milton's wit we perish too.

LONGANIMITY, n.  The disposition to endure injury with meek forbearance
while maturing a plan of revenge.

LONGEVITY, n.  Uncommon extension of the fear of death.

LOOKING-GLASS, n.  A vitreous plane upon which to display a fleeting
show for man's disillusion given.

The King of Manchuria had a magic looking-glass, whereon whoso
looked saw, not his own image, but only that of the king.  A certain
courtier who had long enjoyed the king's favor and was thereby
enriched beyond any other subject of the realm, said to the king:
"Give me, I pray, thy wonderful mirror, so that when absent out of
thine august presence I may yet do homage before thy visible shadow,
prostrating myself night and morning in the glory of thy benign
countenance, as which nothing has so divine splendor, O Noonday Sun of
the Universe!"

Please with the speech, the king commanded that the mirror be
conveyed to the courtier's palace; but after, having gone thither
without apprisal, he found it in an apartment where was naught but
idle lumber.  And the mirror was dimmed with dust and overlaced with
cobwebs.  This so angered him that he fisted it hard, shattering the
glass, and was sorely hurt.  Enraged all the more by this mischance,
he commanded that the ungrateful courtier be thrown into prison, and
that the glass be repaired and taken back to his own palace; and this
was done.  But when the king looked again on the mirror he saw not his
image as before, but only the figure of a crowned ass, having a bloody
bandage on one of its hinder hooves--as the artificers and all who
had looked upon it had before discerned but feared to report.  Taught
wisdom and charity, the king restored his courtier to liberty, had the
mirror set into the back of the throne and reigned many years with
justice and humility; and one day when he fell asleep in death while
on the throne, the whole court saw in the mirror the luminous figure
of an angel, which remains to this day.

LOQUACITY, n.  A disorder which renders the sufferer unable to curb
his tongue when you wish to talk.

LORD, n.  In American society, an English tourist above the state of a
costermonger, as, lord 'Aberdasher, Lord Hartisan and so forth.  The
traveling Briton of lesser degree is addressed as "Sir," as, Sir 'Arry
Donkiboi, or 'Amstead 'Eath.  The word "Lord" is sometimes used, also,
as a title of the Supreme Being; but this is thought to be rather
flattery than true reverence.

  Miss Sallie Ann Splurge, of her own accord,
  Wedded a wandering English lord--
  Wedded and took him to dwell with her "paw,"
  A parent who throve by the practice of Draw.
  Lord Cadde I don't hesitate to declare
  Unworthy the father-in-legal care
  Of that elderly sport, notwithstanding the truth
  That Cadde had renounced all the follies of youth;
  For, sad to relate, he'd arrived at the stage
  Of existence that's marked by the vices of age.
  Among them, cupidity caused him to urge
  Repeated demands on the pocket of Splurge,
  Till, wrecked in his fortune, that gentleman saw
  Inadequate aid in the practice of Draw,
  And took, as a means of augmenting his pelf,
  To the business of being a lord himself.
  His neat-fitting garments he wilfully shed
  And sacked himself strangely in checks instead;
  Denuded his chin, but retained at each ear
  A whisker that looked like a blasted career.
  He painted his neck an incarnadine hue
  Each morning and varnished it all that he knew.
  The moony monocular set in his eye
  Appeared to be scanning the Sweet Bye-and-Bye.
  His head was enroofed with a billycock hat,
  And his low-necked shoes were aduncous and flat.
  In speech he eschewed his American ways,
  Denying his nose to the use of his A's
  And dulling their edge till the delicate sense
  Of a babe at their temper could take no offence.
  His H's--'twas most inexpressibly sweet,
  The patter they made as they fell at his feet!
  Re-outfitted thus, Mr. Splurge without fear
  Began as Lord Splurge his recouping career.
  Alas, the Divinity shaping his end
  Entertained other views and decided to send
  His lordship in horror, despair and dismay
  From the land of the nobleman's natural prey.
  For, smit with his Old World ways, Lady Cadde
  Fell--suffering Caesar!--in love with her dad!

G.J.


LORE, n.  Learning--particularly that sort which is not derived from
a regular course of instruction but comes of the reading of occult
books, or by nature.  This latter is commonly designated as folk-lore
and embraces popularly myths and superstitions.  In Baring-Gould's
_Curious Myths of the Middle Ages_ the reader will find many of these
traced backward, through various people son converging lines, toward a
common origin in remote antiquity.  Among these are the fables of
"Teddy the Giant Killer," "The Sleeping John Sharp Williams," "Little
Red Riding Hood and the Sugar Trust," "Beauty and the Brisbane," "The
Seven Aldermen of Ephesus," "Rip Van Fairbanks," and so forth.  The
fable with Goethe so affectingly relates under the title of "The
Erl-King" was known two thousand years ago in Greece as "The Demos and
the Infant Industry."  One of the most general and ancient of these
myths is that Arabian tale of "Ali Baba and the Forty Rockefellers."

LOSS, n.  Privation of that which we had, or had not.  Thus, in the
latter sense, it is said of a defeated candidate that he "lost his
election"; and of that eminent man, the poet Gilder, that he has "lost
his mind."  It is in the former and more legitimate sense, that the
word is used in the famous epitaph:

  Here Huntington's ashes long have lain
  Whose loss is our eternal gain,
  For while he exercised all his powers
  Whatever he gained, the loss was ours.

LOVE, n.  A temporary insanity curable by marriage or by removal of
the patient from the influences under which he incurred the disorder.
This disease, like _caries_ and many other ailments, is prevalent only
among civilized races living under artificial conditions; barbarous
nations breathing pure air and eating simple food enjoy immunity from
its ravages.  It is sometimes fatal, but more frequently to the
physician than to the patient.

LOW-BRED, adj.  "Raised" instead of brought up.

LUMINARY, n.  One who throws light upon a subject; as an editor by not
writing about it.

LUNARIAN, n.  An inhabitant of the moon, as distinguished from
Lunatic, one whom the moon inhabits.  The Lunarians have been
described by Lucian, Locke and other observers, but without much
agreement.  For example, Bragellos avers their anatomical identity
with Man, but Professor Newcomb says they are more like the hill
tribes of Vermont.

LYRE, n.  An ancient instrument of torture.  The word is now used in a
figurative sense to denote the poetic faculty, as in the following
fiery lines of our great poet, Ella Wheeler Wilcox:

  I sit astride Parnassus with my lyre,
  And pick with care the disobedient wire.
  That stupid shepherd lolling on his crook
  With deaf attention scarcely deigns to look.
  I bide my time, and it shall come at length,
  When, with a Titan's energy and strength,
  I'll grab a fistful of the strings, and O,
  The word shall suffer when I let them go!

Farquharson Harris





M



MACE, n.  A staff of office signifying authority.  Its form, that of a
heavy club, indicates its original purpose and use in dissuading from
dissent.

MACHINATION, n.  The method employed by one's opponents in baffling
one's open and honorable efforts to do the right thing.

  So plain the advantages of machination
  It constitutes a moral obligation,
  And honest wolves who think upon't with loathing
  Feel bound to don the sheep's deceptive clothing.
  So prospers still the diplomatic art,
  And Satan bows, with hand upon his heart.

R.S.K.


MACROBIAN, n.  One forgotten of the gods and living to a great age.
History is abundantly supplied with examples, from Methuselah to Old
Parr, but some notable instances of longevity are less well known.  A
Calabrian peasant named Coloni, born in 1753, lived so long that he
had what he considered a glimpse of the dawn of universal peace.
Scanavius relates that he knew an archbishop who was so old that he
could remember a time when he did not deserve hanging.  In 1566 a
linen draper of Bristol, England, declared that he had lived five
hundred years, and that in all that time he had never told a lie.
There are instances of longevity (_macrobiosis_) in our own country.
Senator Chauncey Depew is old enough to know better.  The editor of
_The American_, a newspaper in New York City, has a memory that goes
back to the time when he was a rascal, but not to the fact.  The
President of the United States was born so long ago that many of the
friends of his youth have risen to high political and military
preferment without the assistance of personal merit.  The verses
following were written by a macrobian:

  When I was young the world was fair
      And amiable and sunny.
  A brightness was in all the air,
      In all the waters, honey.
      The jokes were fine and funny,
  The statesmen honest in their views,
      And in their lives, as well,
  And when you heard a bit of news
      'Twas true enough to tell.
  Men were not ranting, shouting, reeking,
  Nor women "generally speaking."

  The Summer then was long indeed:
      It lasted one whole season!
  The sparkling Winter gave no heed
      When ordered by Unreason
      To bring the early peas on.
  Now, where the dickens is the sense
      In calling that a year
  Which does no more than just commence
      Before the end is near?
  When I was young the year extended
  From month to month until it ended.
  I know not why the world has changed
      To something dark and dreary,
  And everything is now arranged
      To make a fellow weary.
      The Weather Man--I fear he
  Has much to do with it, for, sure,
      The air is not the same:
  It chokes you when it is impure,
      When pure it makes you lame.
  With windows closed you are asthmatic;
  Open, neuralgic or sciatic.

  Well, I suppose this new regime
      Of dun degeneration
  Seems eviler than it would seem
      To a better observation,
      And has for compensation
  Some blessings in a deep disguise
      Which mortal sight has failed
  To pierce, although to angels' eyes
      They're visible unveiled.
  If Age is such a boon, good land!
  He's costumed by a master hand!

Venable Strigg


MAD, adj.  Affected with a high degree of intellectual independence;
not conforming to standards of thought, speech and action derived by
the conformants from study of themselves; at odds with the majority;
in short, unusual.  It is noteworthy that persons are pronounced mad
by officials destitute of evidence that themselves are sane.  For
illustration, this present (and illustrious) lexicographer is no
firmer in the faith of his own sanity than is any inmate of any
madhouse in the land; yet for aught he knows to the contrary, instead
of the lofty occupation that seems to him to be engaging his powers he
may really be beating his hands against the window bars of an asylum
and declaring himself Noah Webster, to the innocent delight of many
thoughtless spectators.

MAGDALENE, n.  An inhabitant of Magdala.  Popularly, a woman found
out.  This definition of the word has the authority of ignorance, Mary
of Magdala being another person than the penitent woman mentioned by
St. Luke.  It has also the official sanction of the governments of
Great Britain and the United States.  In England the word is
pronounced Maudlin, whence maudlin, adjective, unpleasantly
sentimental.  With their Maudlin for Magdalene, and their Bedlam for
Bethlehem, the English may justly boast themselves the greatest of
revisers.

MAGIC, n.  An art of converting superstition into coin.  There are
other arts serving the same high purpose, but the discreet
lexicographer does not name them.

MAGNET, n.  Something acted upon by magnetism.

MAGNETISM, n.  Something acting upon a magnet.

The two definitions immediately foregoing are condensed from the
works of one thousand eminent scientists, who have illuminated the
subject with a great white light, to the inexpressible advancement of
human knowledge.

MAGNIFICENT, adj.  Having a grandeur or splendor superior to that to
which the spectator is accustomed, as the ears of an ass, to a rabbit,
or the glory of a glowworm, to a maggot.

MAGNITUDE, n.  Size.  Magnitude being purely relative, nothing is
large and nothing small.  If everything in the universe were increased
in bulk one thousand diameters nothing would be any larger than it was
before, but if one thing remain unchanged all the others would be
larger than they had been.  To an understanding familiar with the
relativity of magnitude and distance the spaces and masses of the
astronomer would be no more impressive than those of the microscopist.
For anything we know to the contrary, the visible universe may be a
small part of an atom, with its component ions, floating in the
life-fluid (luminiferous ether) of some animal.  Possibly the wee
creatures peopling the corpuscles of our own blood are overcome with the
proper emotion when contemplating the unthinkable distance from one of
these to another.

MAGPIE, n.  A bird whose thievish disposition suggested to someone
that it might be taught to talk.

MAIDEN, n.  A young person of the unfair sex addicted to clewless
conduct and views that madden to crime.  The genus has a wide
geographical distribution, being found wherever sought and deplored
wherever found.  The maiden is not altogether unpleasing to the eye,
nor (without her piano and her views) insupportable to the ear, though
in respect to comeliness distinctly inferior to the rainbow, and, with
regard to the part of her that is audible, bleating out of the field
by the canary--which, also, is more portable.

  A lovelorn maiden she sat and sang--
      This quaint, sweet song sang she;
  "It's O for a youth with a football bang
      And a muscle fair to see!
              The Captain he
              Of a team to be!
  On the gridiron he shall shine,
  A monarch by right divine,
      And never to roast on it--me!"

Opoline Jones


MAJESTY, n.  The state and title of a king.  Regarded with a just
contempt by the Most Eminent Grand Masters, Grand Chancellors, Great
Incohonees and Imperial Potentates of the ancient and honorable orders
of republican America.

MALE, n.  A member of the unconsidered, or negligible sex.  The male
of the human race is commonly known (to the female) as Mere Man.  The
genus has two varieties:  good providers and bad providers.

MALEFACTOR, n.  The chief factor in the progress of the human race.

MALTHUSIAN, adj.  Pertaining to Malthus and his doctrines.  Malthus
believed in artificially limiting population, but found that it could
not be done by talking.  One of the most practical exponents of the
Malthusian idea was Herod of Judea, though all the famous soldiers
have been of the same way of thinking.

MAMMALIA, n.pl.  A family of vertebrate animals whose females in a
state of nature suckle their young, but when civilized and enlightened
put them out to nurse, or use the bottle.

MAMMON, n.  The god of the world's leading religion.  The chief temple
is in the holy city of New York.

  He swore that all other religions were gammon,
  And wore out his knees in the worship of Mammon.

Jared Oopf


MAN, n.  An animal so lost in rapturous contemplation of what he
thinks he is as to overlook what he indubitably ought to be.  His
chief occupation is extermination of other animals and his own
species, which, however, multiplies with such insistent rapidity as to
infest the whole habitable earth and Canada.

  When the world was young and Man was new,
      And everything was pleasant,
  Distinctions Nature never drew
      'Mongst kings and priest and peasant.
      We're not that way at present,
  Save here in this Republic, where
      We have that old regime,
  For all are kings, however bare
      Their backs, howe'er extreme
  Their hunger.  And, indeed, each has a voice
  To accept the tyrant of his party's choice.

  A citizen who would not vote,
      And, therefore, was detested,
  Was one day with a tarry coat
      (With feathers backed and breasted)
      By patriots invested.
  "It is your duty," cried the crowd,
      "Your ballot true to cast
  For the man o' your choice."  He humbly bowed,
      And explained his wicked past:
  "That's what I very gladly would have done,
  Dear patriots, but he has never run."

Apperton Duke


MANES, n.  The immortal parts of dead Greeks and Romans.  They were in
a state of dull discomfort until the bodies from which they had
exhaled were buried and burned; and they seem not to have been
particularly happy afterward.

MANICHEISM, n.  The ancient Persian doctrine of an incessant warfare
between Good and Evil.  When Good gave up the fight the Persians
joined the victorious Opposition.

MANNA, n.  A food miraculously given to the Israelites in the
wilderness.  When it was no longer supplied to them they settled
down and tilled the soil, fertilizing it, as a rule, with the bodies
of the original occupants.

MARRIAGE, n.  The state or condition of a community consisting of a
master, a mistress and two slaves, making in all, two.

MARTYR, n.  One who moves along the line of least reluctance to a
desired death.

MATERIAL, adj.  Having an actual existence, as distinguished from an
imaginary one.  Important.

  Material things I know, or fell, or see;
  All else is immaterial to me.

Jamrach Holobom


MAUSOLEUM, n.  The final and funniest folly of the rich.

MAYONNAISE, n.  One of the sauces which serve the French in place of a
state religion.

ME, pro.  The objectionable case of I.  The personal pronoun in
English has three cases, the dominative, the objectionable and the
oppressive.  Each is all three.

MEANDER, n.  To proceed sinuously and aimlessly.  The word is the
ancient name of a river about one hundred and fifty miles south of
Troy, which turned and twisted in the effort to get out of hearing
when the Greeks and Trojans boasted of their prowess.

MEDAL, n.  A small metal disk given as a reward for virtues,
attainments or services more or less authentic.

It is related of Bismark, who had been awarded a medal for
gallantly rescuing a drowning person, that, being asked the meaning of
the medal, he replied:  "I save lives sometimes."  And sometimes he
didn't.

MEDICINE, n.  A stone flung down the Bowery to kill a dog in Broadway.

MEEKNESS, n.  Uncommon patience in planning a revenge that is worth
while.

  M is for Moses,
      Who slew the Egyptian.
  As sweet as a rose is
  The meekness of Moses.
  No monument shows his
      Post-mortem inscription,
  But M is for Moses
      Who slew the Egyptian.

_The Biographical Alphabet_

MEERSCHAUM, n.  (Literally, seafoam, and by many erroneously supposed
to be made of it.)  A fine white clay, which for convenience in
coloring it brown is made into tobacco pipes and smoked by the workmen
engaged in that industry.  The purpose of coloring it has not been
disclosed by the manufacturers.

  There was a youth (you've heard before,
      This woeful tale, may be),
  Who bought a meerschaum pipe and swore
      That color it would he!

  He shut himself from the world away,
      Nor any soul he saw.
  He smoke by night, he smoked by day,
      As hard as he could draw.

  His dog died moaning in the wrath
      Of winds that blew aloof;
  The weeds were in the gravel path,
      The owl was on the roof.

  "He's gone afar, he'll come no more,"
      The neighbors sadly say.
  And so they batter in the door
      To take his goods away.

  Dead, pipe in mouth, the youngster lay,
      Nut-brown in face and limb.
  "That pipe's a lovely white," they say,
      "But it has colored him!"

  The moral there's small need to sing--
      'Tis plain as day to you:
  Don't play your game on any thing
      That is a gamester too.

Martin Bulstrode


MENDACIOUS, adj.  Addicted to rhetoric.

MERCHANT, n.  One engaged in a commercial pursuit.  A commercial
pursuit is one in which the thing pursued is a dollar.

MERCY, n.  An attribute beloved of detected offenders.

MESMERISM, n.  Hypnotism before it wore good clothes, kept a carriage
and asked Incredulity to dinner.

METROPOLIS, n.  A stronghold of provincialism.

MILLENNIUM, n.  The period of a thousand years when the lid is to be
screwed down, with all reformers on the under side.

MIND, n.  A mysterious form of matter secreted by the brain.  Its
chief activity consists in the endeavor to ascertain its own nature,
the futility of the attempt being due to the fact that it has nothing
but itself to know itself with.  From the Latin _mens_, a fact unknown
to that honest shoe-seller, who, observing that his learned competitor
over the way had displayed the motto "_Mens conscia recti_,"
emblazoned his own front with the words "Men's, women's and children's
conscia recti."

MINE, adj.  Belonging to me if I can hold or seize it.

MINISTER, n.  An agent of a higher power with a lower responsibility.
In diplomacy and officer sent into a foreign country as the visible
embodiment of his sovereign's hostility.  His principal qualification
is a degree of plausible inveracity next below that of an ambassador.

MINOR, adj.  Less objectionable.

MINSTREL, adj.  Formerly a poet, singer or musician; now a nigger with
a color less than skin deep and a humor more than flesh and blood can
bear.

MIRACLE, n.  An act or event out of the order of nature and
unaccountable, as beating a normal hand of four kings and an ace with
four aces and a king.

MISCREANT, n.  A person of the highest degree of unworth.
Etymologically, the word means unbeliever, and its present
signification may be regarded as theology's noblest contribution to
the development of our language.

MISDEMEANOR, n.  An infraction of the law having less dignity than a
felony and constituting no claim to admittance into the best criminal
society.

  By misdemeanors he essays to climb
  Into the aristocracy of crime.
  O, woe was him!--with manner chill and grand
  "Captains of industry" refused his hand,
  "Kings of finance" denied him recognition
  And "railway magnates" jeered his low condition.
  He robbed a bank to make himself respected.
  They still rebuffed him, for he was detected.

S.V. Hanipur


MISERICORDE, n.  A dagger which in mediaeval warfare was used by the
foot soldier to remind an unhorsed knight that he was mortal.

MISFORTUNE, n.  The kind of fortune that never misses.

MISS, n.  The title with which we brand unmarried women to indicate
that they are in the market.  Miss, Missis (Mrs.) and Mister (Mr.) are
the three most distinctly disagreeable words in the language, in sound
and sense.  Two are corruptions of Mistress, the other of Master.  In
the general abolition of social titles in this our country they
miraculously escaped to plague us.  If we must have them let us be
consistent and give one to the unmarried man.  I venture to suggest
Mush, abbreviated to Mh.

MOLECULE, n.  The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  It is
distinguished from the corpuscle, also the ultimate, indivisible unit
of matter, by a closer resemblance to the atom, also the ultimate,
indivisible unit of matter.  Three great scientific theories of the
structure of the universe are the molecular, the corpuscular and the
atomic.  A fourth affirms, with Haeckel, the condensation of
precipitation of matter from ether--whose existence is proved by the
condensation of precipitation.  The present trend of scientific
thought is toward the theory of ions.  The ion differs from the
molecule, the corpuscle and the atom in that it is an ion.  A fifth
theory is held by idiots, but it is doubtful if they know any more
about the matter than the others.

MONAD, n.  The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  (See
_Molecule_.)  According to Leibnitz, as nearly as he seems willing to
be understood, the monad has body without bulk, and mind without
manifestation--Leibnitz knows him by the innate power of
considering.  He has founded upon him a theory of the universe, which
the creature bears without resentment, for the monad is a gentleman.
Small as he is, the monad contains all the powers and possibilities
needful to his evolution into a German philosopher of the first class
--altogether a very capable little fellow.  He is not to be
confounded with the microbe, or bacillus; by its inability to discern
him, a good microscope shows him to be of an entirely distinct
species.

MONARCH, n.  A person engaged in reigning.  Formerly the monarch
ruled, as the derivation of the word attests, and as many subjects
have had occasion to learn.  In Russia and the Orient the monarch has
still a considerable influence in public affairs and in the
disposition of the human head, but in western Europe political
administration is mostly entrusted to his ministers, he being
somewhat preoccupied with reflections relating to the status of his
own head.

MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT, n.  Government.

MONDAY, n.  In Christian countries, the day after the baseball game.

MONEY, n.  A blessing that is of no advantage to us excepting when we
part with it.  An evidence of culture and a passport to polite
society.  Supportable property.

MONKEY, n.  An arboreal animal which makes itself at home in
genealogical trees.

MONOSYLLABIC, adj.  Composed of words of one syllable, for literary
babes who never tire of testifying their delight in the vapid compound
by appropriate googoogling.  The words are commonly Saxon--that is
to say, words of a barbarous people destitute of ideas and incapable
of any but the most elementary sentiments and emotions.

  The man who writes in Saxon
  Is the man to use an ax on

Judibras


MONSIGNOR, n.  A high ecclesiastical title, of which the Founder of
our religion overlooked the advantages.

MONUMENT, n.  A structure intended to commemorate something which
either needs no commemoration or cannot be commemorated.

  The bones of Agammemnon are a show,
  And ruined is his royal monument,

but Agammemnon's fame suffers no diminution in consequence.  The
monument custom has its _reductiones ad absurdum_ in monuments "to the
unknown dead"--that is to say, monuments to perpetuate the memory of
those who have left no memory.

MORAL, adj.  Conforming to a local and mutable standard of right.
Having the quality of general expediency.

  It is sayd there be a raunge of mountaynes in the Easte, on
  one syde of the which certayn conducts are immorall, yet on the other
  syde they are holden in good esteeme; wherebye the mountayneer is much
  conveenyenced, for it is given to him to goe downe eyther way and act
  as it shall suite his moode, withouten offence.

  _Gooke's Meditations_


MORE, adj.  The comparative degree of too much.

MOUSE, n.  An animal which strews its path with fainting women.  As in
Rome Christians were thrown to the lions, so centuries earlier in
Otumwee, the most ancient and famous city of the world, female
heretics were thrown to the mice.  Jakak-Zotp, the historian, the only
Otumwump whose writings have descended to us, says that these martyrs
met their death with little dignity and much exertion.  He even
attempts to exculpate the mice (such is the malice of bigotry) by
declaring that the unfortunate women perished, some from exhaustion,
some of broken necks from falling over their own feet, and some from
lack of restoratives.  The mice, he avers, enjoyed the pleasures of
the chase with composure.  But if "Roman history is nine-tenths
lying," we can hardly expect a smaller proportion of that rhetorical
figure in the annals of a people capable of so incredible cruelty to a
lovely women; for a hard heart has a false tongue.

MOUSQUETAIRE, n.  A long glove covering a part of the arm.  Worn in
New Jersey.  But "mousquetaire" is a might poor way to spell
muskeeter.

MOUTH, n.  In man, the gateway to the soul; in woman, the outlet of
the heart.

MUGWUMP, n.  In politics one afflicted with self-respect and addicted
to the vice of independence.  A term of contempt.

MULATTO, n.  A child of two races, ashamed of both.

MULTITUDE, n.  A crowd; the source of political wisdom and virtue.  In
a republic, the object of the statesman's adoration.  "In a multitude
of counsellors there is wisdom," saith the proverb.  If many men of
equal individual wisdom are wiser than any one of them, it must be
that they acquire the excess of wisdom by the mere act of getting
together.  Whence comes it?  Obviously from nowhere--as well say
that a range of mountains is higher than the single mountains
composing it.  A multitude is as wise as its wisest member if it obey
him; if not, it is no wiser than its most foolish.

MUMMY, n.  An ancient Egyptian, formerly in universal use among modern
civilized nations as medicine, and now engaged in supplying art with
an excellent pigment.  He is handy, too, in museums in gratifying the
vulgar curiosity that serves to distinguish man from the lower
animals.

  By means of the Mummy, mankind, it is said,
  Attests to the gods its respect for the dead.
  We plunder his tomb, be he sinner or saint,
  Distil him for physic and grind him for paint,
  Exhibit for money his poor, shrunken frame,
  And with levity flock to the scene of the shame.
  O, tell me, ye gods, for the use of my rhyme:
  For respecting the dead what's the limit of time?

Scopas Brune


MUSTANG, n.  An indocile horse of the western plains.  In English
society, the American wife of an English nobleman.

MYRMIDON, n.  A follower of Achilles--particularly when he didn't
lead.

MYTHOLOGY, n.  The body of a primitive people's beliefs concerning its
origin, early history, heroes, deities and so forth, as distinguished
from the true accounts which it invents later.




N



NECTAR, n.  A drink served at banquets of the Olympian deities.  The
secret of its preparation is lost, but the modern Kentuckians believe
that they come pretty near to a knowledge of its chief ingredient.

  Juno drank a cup of nectar,
  But the draught did not affect her.
  Juno drank a cup of rye--
  Then she bad herself good-bye.

J.G.


NEGRO, n.  The _piece de resistance_ in the American political
problem.  Representing him by the letter n, the Republicans begin to
build their equation thus:  "Let n = the white man."  This, however,
appears to give an unsatisfactory solution.

NEIGHBOR, n.  One whom we are commanded to love as ourselves, and who
does all he knows how to make us disobedient.

NEPOTISM, n.  Appointing your grandmother to office for the good of
the party.

NEWTONIAN, adj.  Pertaining to a philosophy of the universe invented
by Newton, who discovered that an apple will fall to the ground, but
was unable to say why.  His successors and disciples have advanced so
far as to be able to say when.

NIHILIST, n.  A Russian who denies the existence of anything but
Tolstoi.  The leader of the school is Tolstoi.

NIRVANA, n.  In the Buddhist religion, a state of pleasurable
annihilation awarded to the wise, particularly to those wise enough to
understand it.

NOBLEMAN, n.  Nature's provision for wealthy American minds ambitious
to incur social distinction and suffer high life.

NOISE, n.  A stench in the ear.  Undomesticated music.  The chief
product and authenticating sign of civilization.

NOMINATE, v.  To designate for the heaviest political assessment.  To
put forward a suitable person to incur the mudgobbling and deadcatting
of the opposition.

NOMINEE, n.  A modest gentleman shrinking from the distinction of
private life and diligently seeking the honorable obscurity of public
office.

NON-COMBATANT, n.  A dead Quaker.

NONSENSE, n.  The objections that are urged against this excellent
dictionary.

NOSE, n.  The extreme outpost of the face.  From the circumstance that
great conquerors have great noses, Getius, whose writings antedate the
age of humor, calls the nose the organ of quell.  It has been observed
that one's nose is never so happy as when thrust into the affairs of
others, from which some physiologists have drawn the inference that
the nose is devoid of the sense of smell.

      There's a man with a Nose,
      And wherever he goes
  The people run from him and shout:
      "No cotton have we
      For our ears if so be
  He blow that interminous snout!"

      So the lawyers applied
      For injunction.  "Denied,"
  Said the Judge:  "the defendant prefixion,
      Whate'er it portend,
      Appears to transcend
  The bounds of this court's jurisdiction."

Arpad Singiny


NOTORIETY, n.  The fame of one's competitor for public honors.  The
kind of renown most accessible and acceptable to mediocrity.  A
Jacob's-ladder leading to the vaudeville stage, with angels ascending
and descending.

NOUMENON, n.  That which exists, as distinguished from that which
merely seems to exist, the latter being a phenomenon.  The noumenon is
a bit difficult to locate; it can be apprehended only be a process of
reasoning--which is a phenomenon.  Nevertheless, the discovery and
exposition of noumena offer a rich field for what Lewes calls "the
endless variety and excitement of philosophic thought."  Hurrah
(therefore) for the noumenon!

NOVEL, n.  A short story padded.  A species of composition bearing the
same relation to literature that the panorama bears to art.  As it is
too long to be read at a sitting the impressions made by its
successive parts are successively effaced, as in the panorama.  Unity,
totality of effect, is impossible; for besides the few pages last read
all that is carried in mind is the mere plot of what has gone before.
To the romance the novel is what photography is to painting.  Its
distinguishing principle, probability, corresponds to the literal
actuality of the photograph and puts it distinctly into the category
of reporting; whereas the free wing of the romancer enables him to
mount to such altitudes of imagination as he may be fitted to attain;
and the first three essentials of the literary art are imagination,
imagination and imagination.  The art of writing novels, such as it
was, is long dead everywhere except in Russia, where it is new.  Peace
to its ashes--some of which have a large sale.

NOVEMBER, n.  The eleventh twelfth of a weariness.




O



OATH, n.  In law, a solemn appeal to the Deity, made binding upon the
conscience by a penalty for perjury.

OBLIVION, n.  The state or condition in which the wicked cease from
struggling and the dreary are at rest.  Fame's eternal dumping ground.
Cold storage for high hopes.  A place where ambitious authors meet
their works without pride and their betters without envy.  A dormitory
without an alarm clock.

OBSERVATORY, n.  A place where astronomers conjecture away the guesses
of their predecessors.

OBSESSED, p.p.  Vexed by an evil spirit, like the Gadarene swine and
other critics.  Obsession was once more common than it is now.
Arasthus tells of a peasant who was occupied by a different devil for
every day in the week, and on Sundays by two.  They were frequently
seen, always walking in his shadow, when he had one, but were finally
driven away by the village notary, a holy man; but they took the
peasant with them, for he vanished utterly.  A devil thrown out of a
woman by the Archbishop of Rheims ran through the trees, pursued by a
hundred persons, until the open country was reached, where by a leap
higher than a church spire he escaped into a bird.  A chaplain in
Cromwell's army exorcised a soldier's obsessing devil by throwing the
soldier into the water, when the devil came to the surface.  The
soldier, unfortunately, did not.

OBSOLETE, adj.  No longer used by the timid.  Said chiefly of words.
A word which some lexicographer has marked obsolete is ever thereafter
an object of dread and loathing to the fool writer, but if it is a
good word and has no exact modern equivalent equally good, it is good
enough for the good writer.  Indeed, a writer's attitude toward
"obsolete" words is as true a measure of his literary ability as
anything except the character of his work.  A dictionary of obsolete
and obsolescent words would not only be singularly rich in strong and
sweet parts of speech; it would add large possessions to the
vocabulary of every competent writer who might not happen to be a
competent reader.

OBSTINATE, adj.  Inaccessible to the truth as it is manifest in the
splendor and stress of our advocacy.

The popular type and exponent of obstinacy is the mule, a most
intelligent animal.

OCCASIONAL, adj.  Afflicting us with greater or less frequency.  That,
however, is not the sense in which the word is used in the phrase
"occasional verses," which are verses written for an "occasion," such
as an anniversary, a celebration or other event.  True, they afflict
us a little worse than other sorts of verse, but their name has no
reference to irregular recurrence.

OCCIDENT, n.  The part of the world lying west (or east) of the
Orient.  It is largely inhabited by Christians, a powerful subtribe of
the Hypocrites, whose principal industries are murder and cheating,
which they are pleased to call "war" and "commerce."  These, also, are
the principal industries of the Orient.

OCEAN, n.  A body of water occupying about two-thirds of a world made
for man--who has no gills.

OFFENSIVE, adj.  Generating disagreeable emotions or sensations, as
the advance of an army against its enemy.

"Were the enemy's tactics offensive?" the king asked.  "I should
say so!" replied the unsuccessful general.  "The blackguard wouldn't
come out of his works!"

OLD, adj.  In that stage of usefulness which is not inconsistent with
general inefficiency, as an _old man_.  Discredited by lapse of time
and offensive to the popular taste, as an _old_ book.

  "Old books?  The devil take them!" Goby said.
  "Fresh every day must be my books and bread."
  Nature herself approves the Goby rule
  And gives us every moment a fresh fool.

Harley Shum


OLEAGINOUS, adj.  Oily, smooth, sleek.

Disraeli once described the manner of Bishop Wilberforce as
"unctuous, oleaginous, saponaceous."  And the good prelate was ever
afterward known as Soapy Sam.  For every man there is something in the
vocabulary that would stick to him like a second skin.  His enemies
have only to find it.

OLYMPIAN, adj.  Relating to a mountain in Thessaly, once inhabited by
gods, now a repository of yellowing newspapers, beer bottles and
mutilated sardine cans, attesting the presence of the tourist and his
appetite.

  His name the smirking tourist scrawls
  Upon Minerva's temple walls,
  Where thundered once Olympian Zeus,
  And marks his appetite's abuse.

Averil Joop


OMEN, n.  A sign that something will happen if nothing happens.

ONCE, adv.  Enough.

OPERA, n.  A play representing life in another world, whose
inhabitants have no speech but song, no motions but gestures and no
postures but attitudes.  All acting is simulation, and the word
_simulation_ is from _simia_, an ape; but in opera the actor takes for
his model _Simia audibilis_ (or _Pithecanthropos stentor_)--the ape
that howls.

  The actor apes a man--at least in shape;
  The opera performer apes and ape.

OPIATE, n.  An unlocked door in the prison of Identity.  It leads into
the jail yard.

OPPORTUNITY, n.  A favorable occasion for grasping a disappointment.

OPPOSE, v.  To assist with obstructions and objections.

  How lonely he who thinks to vex
  With bandinage the Solemn Sex!
  Of levity, Mere Man, beware;
  None but the Grave deserve the Unfair.

Percy P. Orminder


OPPOSITION, n.  In politics the party that prevents the Government from
running amuck by hamstringing it.

The King of Ghargaroo, who had been abroad to study the science of
government, appointed one hundred of his fattest subjects as members
of a parliament to make laws for the collection of revenue.  Forty of
these he named the Party of Opposition and had his Prime Minister
carefully instruct them in their duty of opposing every royal measure.
Nevertheless, the first one that was submitted passed unanimously.
Greatly displeased, the King vetoed it, informing the Opposition that
if they did that again they would pay for their obstinacy with their
heads.  The entire forty promptly disemboweled themselves.

"What shall we do now?" the King asked.  "Liberal institutions
cannot be maintained without a party of Opposition."

"Splendor of the universe," replied the Prime Minister, "it is
true these dogs of darkness have no longer their credentials, but all
is not lost.  Leave the matter to this worm of the dust."

So the Minister had the bodies of his Majesty's Opposition
embalmed and stuffed with straw, put back into the seats of power and
nailed there.  Forty votes were recorded against every bill and the
nation prospered.  But one day a bill imposing a tax on warts was
defeated--the members of the Government party had not been nailed to
their seats!  This so enraged the King that the Prime Minister was put
to death, the parliament was dissolved with a battery of artillery,
and government of the people, by the people, for the people perished
from Ghargaroo.

OPTIMISM, n.  The doctrine, or belief, that everything is beautiful,
including what is ugly, everything good, especially the bad, and
everything right that is wrong.  It is held with greatest tenacity by
those most accustomed to the mischance of falling into adversity, and
is most acceptably expounded with the grin that apes a smile.  Being a
blind faith, it is inaccessible to the light of disproof--an
intellectual disorder, yielding to no treatment but death.  It is
hereditary, but fortunately not contagious.

OPTIMIST, n.  A proponent of the doctrine that black is white.

A pessimist applied to God for relief.

"Ah, you wish me to restore your hope and cheerfulness," said God.

"No," replied the petitioner, "I wish you to create something that
would justify them."

"The world is all created," said God, "but you have overlooked
something--the mortality of the optimist."

ORATORY, n.  A conspiracy between speech and action to cheat the
understanding.  A tyranny tempered by stenography.

ORPHAN, n.  A living person whom death has deprived of the power of
filial ingratitude--a privation appealing with a particular
eloquence to all that is sympathetic in human nature.  When young the
orphan is commonly sent to an asylum, where by careful cultivation of
its rudimentary sense of locality it is taught to know its place.  It
is then instructed in the arts of dependence and servitude and
eventually turned loose to prey upon the world as a bootblack or
scullery maid.

ORTHODOX, n.  An ox wearing the popular religious joke.

ORTHOGRAPHY, n.  The science of spelling by the eye instead of the
ear.  Advocated with more heat than light by the outmates of every
asylum for the insane.  They have had to concede a few things since
the time of Chaucer, but are none the less hot in defence of those to
be conceded hereafter.

  A spelling reformer indicted
  For fudge was before the court cicted.
      The judge said:  "Enough--
      His candle we'll snough,
  And his sepulchre shall not be whicted."

OSTRICH, n.  A large bird to which (for its sins, doubtless) nature
has denied that hinder toe in which so many pious naturalists have
seen a conspicuous evidence of design.  The absence of a good working
pair of wings is no defect, for, as has been ingeniously pointed out,
the ostrich does not fly.

OTHERWISE, adv.  No better.

OUTCOME, n.  A particular type of disappointment.  By the kind of
intelligence that sees in an exception a proof of the rule the wisdom
of an act is judged by the outcome, the result.  This is immortal
nonsense; the wisdom of an act is to be juded by the light that the
doer had when he performed it.

OUTDO, v.t.  To make an enemy.

OUT-OF-DOORS, n.  That part of one's environment upon which no
government has been able to collect taxes.  Chiefly useful to inspire
poets.

  I climbed to the top of a mountain one day
      To see the sun setting in glory,
  And I thought, as I looked at his vanishing ray,
      Of a perfectly splendid story.

  'Twas about an old man and the ass he bestrode
      Till the strength of the beast was o'ertested;
  Then the man would carry him miles on the road
      Till Neddy was pretty well rested.

  The moon rising solemnly over the crest
      Of the hills to the east of my station
  Displayed her broad disk to the darkening west
      Like a visible new creation.

  And I thought of a joke (and I laughed till I cried)
      Of an idle young woman who tarried
  About a church-door for a look at the bride,
      Although 'twas herself that was married.

  To poets all Nature is pregnant with grand
      Ideas--with thought and emotion.
  I pity the dunces who don't understand
      The speech of earth, heaven and ocean.

Stromboli Smith


OVATION, n.  n ancient Rome, a definite, formal pageant in honor of
one who had been disserviceable to the enemies of the nation.  A
lesser "triumph."  In modern English the word is improperly used to
signify any loose and spontaneous expression of popular homage to the
hero of the hour and place.

  "I had an ovation!" the actor man said,
      But I thought it uncommonly queer,
  That people and critics by him had been led
          By the ear.

  The Latin lexicon makes his absurd
      Assertion as plain as a peg;
  In "ovum" we find the true root of the word.
          It means egg.

Dudley Spink


OVEREAT, v.  To dine.

  Hail, Gastronome, Apostle of Excess,
  Well skilled to overeat without distress!
  Thy great invention, the unfatal feast,
  Shows Man's superiority to Beast.

John Boop


OVERWORK, n.  A dangerous disorder affecting high public functionaries
who want to go fishing.

OWE, v.  To have (and to hold) a debt.  The word formerly signified
not indebtedness, but possession; it meant "own," and in the minds of
debtors there is still a good deal of confusion between assets and
liabilities.

OYSTER, n.  A slimy, gobby shellfish which civilization gives men the
hardihood to eat without removing its entrails!  The shells are
sometimes given to the poor.




P



PAIN, n.  An uncomfortable frame of mind that may have a physical
basis in something that is being done to the body, or may be purely
mental, caused by the good fortune of another.

PAINTING, n.  The art of protecting flat surfaces from the weather and
exposing them to the critic.

Formerly, painting and sculpture were combined in the same work:
the ancients painted their statues.  The only present alliance between
the two arts is that the modern painter chisels his patrons.

PALACE, n.  A fine and costly residence, particularly that of a great
official.  The residence of a high dignitary of the Christian Church
is called a palace; that of the Founder of his religion was known as a
field, or wayside.  There is progress.

PALM, n.  A species of tree having several varieties, of which the
familiar "itching palm" (_Palma hominis_) is most widely distributed
and sedulously cultivated.  This noble vegetable exudes a kind of
invisible gum, which may be detected by applying to the bark a piece
of gold or silver.  The metal will adhere with remarkable tenacity.
The fruit of the itching palm is so bitter and unsatisfying that a
considerable percentage of it is sometimes given away in what are known
as "benefactions."

PALMISTRY, n.  The 947th method (according to Mimbleshaw's
classification) of obtaining money by false pretences.  It consists in
"reading character" in the wrinkles made by closing the hand.  The
pretence is not altogether false; character can really be read very
accurately in this way, for the wrinkles in every hand submitted
plainly spell the word "dupe."  The imposture consists in not reading
it aloud.

PANDEMONIUM, n.  Literally, the Place of All the Demons.  Most of them
have escaped into politics and finance, and the place is now used as a
lecture hall by the Audible Reformer.  When disturbed by his voice the
ancient echoes clamor appropriate responses most gratifying to his
pride of distinction.

PANTALOONS, n.  A nether habiliment of the adult civilized male.  The
garment is tubular and unprovided with hinges at the points of
flexion.  Supposed to have been invented by a humorist.  Called
"trousers" by the enlightened and "pants" by the unworthy.

PANTHEISM, n.  The doctrine that everything is God, in
contradistinction to the doctrine that God is everything.

PANTOMIME, n.  A play in which the story is told without violence to
the language.  The least disagreeable form of dramatic action.

PARDON, v.  To remit a penalty and restore to the life of crime.  To
add to the lure of crime the temptation of ingratitude.

PASSPORT, n.  A document treacherously inflicted upon a citizen going
abroad, exposing him as an alien and pointing him out for special
reprobation and outrage.

PAST, n.  That part of Eternity with some small fraction of which we
have a slight and regrettable acquaintance.  A moving line called the
Present parts it from an imaginary period known as the Future.  These
two grand divisions of Eternity, of which the one is continually
effacing the other, are entirely unlike.  The one is dark with sorrow
and disappointment, the other bright with prosperity and joy.  The
Past is the region of sobs, the Future is the realm of song.  In the
one crouches Memory, clad in sackcloth and ashes, mumbling penitential
prayer; in the sunshine of the other Hope flies with a free wing,
beckoning to temples of success and bowers of ease.  Yet the Past is
the Future of yesterday, the Future is the Past of to-morrow.  They
are one--the knowledge and the dream.

PASTIME, n.  A device for promoting dejection.  Gentle exercise for
intellectual debility.

PATIENCE, n.  A minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue.

PATRIOT, n.  One to whom the interests of a part seem superior to
those of the whole.  The dupe of statesmen and the tool of conquerors.

PATRIOTISM, n.  Combustible rubbish read to the torch of any one
ambitious to illuminate his name.

In Dr. Johnson's famous dictionary patriotism is defined as the
last resort of a scoundrel.  With all due respect to an enlightened
but inferior lexicographer I beg to submit that it is the first.

PEACE, n.  In international affairs, a period of cheating between two
periods of fighting.

  O, what's the loud uproar assailing
      Mine ears without cease?
  'Tis the voice of the hopeful, all-hailing
      The horrors of peace.

  Ah, Peace Universal; they woo it--
      Would marry it, too.
  If only they knew how to do it
      'Twere easy to do.

  They're working by night and by day
      On their problem, like moles.
  Have mercy, O Heaven, I pray,
      On their meddlesome souls!

Ro Amil


PEDESTRIAN, n.  The variable (an audible) part of the roadway for an
automobile.

PEDIGREE, n.  The known part of the route from an arboreal ancestor
with a swim bladder to an urban descendant with a cigarette.

PENITENT, adj.  Undergoing or awaiting punishment.

PERFECTION, n.  An imaginary state of quality distinguished from the
actual by an element known as excellence; an attribute of the critic.

The editor of an English magazine having received a letter
pointing out the erroneous nature of his views and style, and signed
"Perfection," promptly wrote at the foot of the letter:  "I don't
agree with you," and mailed it to Matthew Arnold.

PERIPATETIC, adj.  Walking about.  Relating to the philosophy of
Aristotle, who, while expounding it, moved from place to place in
order to avoid his pupil's objections.  A needless precaution--they
knew no more of the matter than he.

PERORATION, n.  The explosion of an oratorical rocket.  It dazzles,
but to an observer having the wrong kind of nose its most conspicuous
peculiarity is the smell of the several kinds of powder used in
preparing it.

PERSEVERANCE, n.  A lowly virtue whereby mediocrity achieves an
inglorious success.

  "Persevere, persevere!" cry the homilists all,
  Themselves, day and night, persevering to bawl.
  "Remember the fable of tortoise and hare--
  The one at the goal while the other is--where?"
  Why, back there in Dreamland, renewing his lease
  Of life, all his muscles preserving the peace,
  The goal and the rival forgotten alike,
  And the long fatigue of the needless hike.
  His spirit a-squat in the grass and the dew
  Of the dogless Land beyond the Stew,
  He sleeps, like a saint in a holy place,
  A winner of all that is good in a race.

Sukker Uffro


PESSIMISM, n.  A philosophy forced upon the convictions of the
observer by the disheartening prevalence of the optimist with his
scarecrow hope and his unsightly smile.

PHILANTHROPIST, n.  A rich (and usually bald) old gentleman who has
trained himself to grin while his conscience is picking his pocket.

PHILISTINE, n.  One whose mind is the creature of its environment,
following the fashion in thought, feeling and sentiment.  He is
sometimes learned, frequently prosperous, commonly clean and always
solemn.

PHILOSOPHY, n.  A route of many roads leading from nowhere to nothing.

PHOENIX, n.  The classical prototype of the modern "small hot bird."

PHONOGRAPH, n.  An irritating toy that restores life to dead noises.

PHOTOGRAPH, n.  A picture painted by the sun without instruction in
art.  It is a little better than the work of an Apache, but not quite
so good as that of a Cheyenne.

PHRENOLOGY, n.  The science of picking the pocket through the scalp.
It consists in locating and exploiting the organ that one is a dupe
with.

PHYSICIAN, n.  One upon whom we set our hopes when ill and our dogs
when well.

PHYSIOGNOMY, n.  The art of determining the character of another by
the resemblances and differences between his face and our own, which
is the standard of excellence.

  "There is no art," says Shakespeare, foolish man,
      "To read the mind's construction in the face."
  The physiognomists his portrait scan,
      And say:  "How little wisdom here we trace!
  He knew his face disclosed his mind and heart,
  So, in his own defence, denied our art."

Lavatar Shunk


PIANO, n.  A parlor utensil for subduing the impenitent visitor.  It
is operated by pressing the keys of the machine and the spirits of the
audience.

PICKANINNY, n.  The young of the _Procyanthropos_, or _Americanus
dominans_.  It is small, black and charged with political fatalities.

PICTURE, n.  A representation in two dimensions of something wearisome
in three.

  "Behold great Daubert's picture here on view--
  Taken from Life."  If that description's true,
  Grant, heavenly Powers, that I be taken, too.

Jali Hane


PIE, n.  An advance agent of the reaper whose name is Indigestion.

  Cold pie was highly esteemed by the remains.

Rev. Dr. Mucker

(in a funeral sermon over a British nobleman)

  Cold pie is a detestable
  American comestible.
  That's why I'm done--or undone--
  So far from that dear London.

(from the headstone of a British nobleman in Kalamazoo)


PIETY, n.  Reverence for the Supreme Being, based upon His supposed
resemblance to man.

  The pig is taught by sermons and epistles
  To think the God of Swine has snout and bristles.

Judibras


PIG, n.  An animal (_Porcus omnivorus_) closely allied to the human
race by the splendor and vivacity of its appetite, which, however, is
inferior in scope, for it sticks at pig.

PIGMY, n.  One of a tribe of very small men found by ancient travelers
in many parts of the world, but by modern in Central Africa only.  The
Pigmies are so called to distinguish them from the bulkier Caucasians
--who are Hogmies.

PILGRIM, n.  A traveler that is taken seriously.  A Pilgrim Father was
one who, leaving Europe in 1620 because not permitted to sing psalms
through his nose, followed it to Massachusetts, where he could
personate God according to the dictates of his conscience.

PILLORY, n.  A mechanical device for inflicting personal distinction
--prototype of the modern newspaper conducted by persons of austere
virtues and blameless lives.

PIRACY, n.  Commerce without its folly-swaddles, just as God made it.

PITIFUL, adj.  The state of an enemy of opponent after an imaginary
encounter with oneself.

PITY, n.  A failing sense of exemption, inspired by contrast.

PLAGIARISM, n.  A literary coincidence compounded of a discreditable
priority and an honorable subsequence.

PLAGIARIZE, v.  To take the thought or style of another writer whom
one has never, never read.

PLAGUE, n.  In ancient times a general punishment of the innocent for
admonition of their ruler, as in the familiar instance of Pharaoh the
Immune.  The plague as we of to-day have the happiness to know it is
merely Nature's fortuitous manifestation of her purposeless
objectionableness.

PLAN, v.t.  To bother about the best method of accomplishing an
accidental result.

PLATITUDE, n.  The fundamental element and special glory of popular
literature. A thought that snores in words that smoke.  The wisdom of
a million fools in the diction of a dullard.  A fossil sentiment in
artificial rock.  A moral without the fable.  All that is mortal of a
departed truth.  A demi-tasse of milk-and-mortality.  The Pope's-nose
of a featherless peacock.  A jelly-fish withering on the shore of the
sea of thought.  The cackle surviving the egg.  A desiccated epigram.

PLATONIC, adj.  Pertaining to the philosophy of Socrates.  Platonic
Love is a fool's name for the affection between a disability and a
frost.

PLAUDITS, n.  Coins with which the populace pays those who tickle and
devour it.

PLEASE, v.  To lay the foundation for a superstructure of imposition.

PLEASURE, n.  The least hateful form of dejection.

PLEBEIAN, n.  An ancient Roman who in the blood of his country stained
nothing but his hands.  Distinguished from the Patrician, who was a
saturated solution.

PLEBISCITE, n.  A popular vote to ascertain the will of the sovereign.

PLENIPOTENTIARY, adj.  Having full power.  A Minister Plenipotentiary
is a diplomatist possessing absolute authority on condition that he
never exert it.

PLEONASM, n.  An army of words escorting a corporal of thought.

PLOW, n.  An implement that cries aloud for hands accustomed to the
pen.

PLUNDER, v.  To take the property of another without observing the
decent and customary reticences of theft.  To effect a change of
ownership with the candid concomitance of a brass band.  To wrest the
wealth of A from B and leave C lamenting a vanishing opportunity.

POCKET, n.  The cradle of motive and the grave of conscience.  In
woman this organ is lacking; so she acts without motive, and her
conscience, denied burial, remains ever alive, confessing the sins of
others.

POETRY, n.  A form of expression peculiar to the Land beyond the
Magazines.

POKER, n.  A game said to be played with cards for some purpose to
this lexicographer unknown.

POLICE, n.  An armed force for protection and participation.

POLITENESS, n.  The most acceptable hypocrisy.

POLITICS, n.  A strife of interests masquerading as a contest of
principles.  The conduct of public affairs for private advantage.

POLITICIAN, n.  An eel in the fundamental mud upon which the
superstructure of organized society is reared.  When we wriggles he
mistakes the agitation of his tail for the trembling of the edifice.
As compared with the statesman, he suffers the disadvantage of being
alive.

POLYGAMY, n.  A house of atonement, or expiatory chapel, fitted with
several stools of repentance, as distinguished from monogamy, which
has but one.

POPULIST, n.  A fossil patriot of the early agricultural period, found
in the old red soapstone underlying Kansas; characterized by an
uncommon spread of ear, which some naturalists contend gave him the
power of flight, though Professors Morse and Whitney, pursuing
independent lines of thought, have ingeniously pointed out that had he
possessed it he would have gone elsewhere.  In the picturesque speech
of his period, some fragments of which have come down to us, he was
known as "The Matter with Kansas."

PORTABLE, adj.  Exposed to a mutable ownership through vicissitudes of
possession.

  His light estate, if neither he did make it
  Nor yet its former guardian forsake it,
  Is portable improperly, I take it.

Worgum Slupsky


PORTUGUESE, n.pl.  A species of geese indigenous to Portugal.  They
are mostly without feathers and imperfectly edible, even when stuffed
with garlic.

POSITIVE, adj.  Mistaken at the top of one's voice.

POSITIVISM, n.  A philosophy that denies our knowledge of the Real and
affirms our ignorance of the Apparent.  Its longest exponent is Comte,
its broadest Mill and its thickest Spencer.

POSTERITY, n.  An appellate court which reverses the judgment of a
popular author's contemporaries, the appellant being his obscure
competitor.

POTABLE, n.  Suitable for drinking.  Water is said to be potable;
indeed, some declare it our natural beverage, although even they find
it palatable only when suffering from the recurrent disorder known as
thirst, for which it is a medicine.  Upon nothing has so great and
diligent ingenuity been brought to bear in all ages and in all
countries, except the most uncivilized, as upon the invention of
substitutes for water.  To hold that this general aversion to that
liquid has no basis in the preservative instinct of the race is to be
unscientific--and without science we are as the snakes and toads.

POVERTY, n.  A file provided for the teeth of the rats of reform.  The
number of plans for its abolition equals that of the reformers who
suffer from it, plus that of the philosophers who know nothing about
it.  Its victims are distinguished by possession of all the virtues
and by their faith in leaders seeking to conduct them into a
prosperity where they believe these to be unknown.

PRAY, v.  To ask that the laws of the universe be annulled in behalf
of a single petitioner confessedly unworthy.

PRE-ADAMITE, n.  One of an experimental and apparently unsatisfactory
race of antedated Creation and lived under conditions not easily
conceived.  Melsius believed them to have inhabited "the Void" and to
have been something intermediate between fishes and birds.  Little its
known of them beyond the fact that they supplied Cain with a wife and
theologians with a controversy.

PRECEDENT, n.  In Law, a previous decision, rule or practice which, in
the absence of a definite statute, has whatever force and authority a
Judge may choose to give it, thereby greatly simplifying his task of
doing as he pleases.  As there are precedents for everything, he has
only to ignore those that make against his interest and accentuate
those in the line of his desire.  Invention of the precedent elevates
the trial-at-law from the low estate of a fortuitous ordeal to the
noble attitude of a dirigible arbitrament.

PRECIPITATE, adj.  Anteprandial.

  Precipitate in all, this sinner
  Took action first, and then his dinner.

Judibras


PREDESTINATION, n.  The doctrine that all things occur according to
programme.  This doctrine should not be confused with that of
foreordination, which means that all things are programmed, but does
not affirm their occurrence, that being only an implication from other
doctrines by which this is entailed.  The difference is great enough
to have deluged Christendom with ink, to say nothing of the gore.
With the distinction of the two doctrines kept well in mind, and a
reverent belief in both, one may hope to escape perdition if spared.

PREDICAMENT, n.  The wage of consistency.

PREDILECTION, n.  The preparatory stage of disillusion.

PRE-EXISTENCE, n.  An unnoted factor in creation.

PREFERENCE, n.  A sentiment, or frame of mind, induced by the
erroneous belief that one thing is better than another.

An ancient philosopher, expounding his conviction that life is no
better than death, was asked by a disciple why, then, he did not die.
"Because," he replied, "death is no better than life."

It is longer.

PREHISTORIC, adj.  Belonging to an early period and a museum.
Antedating the art and practice of perpetuating falsehood.

  He lived in a period prehistoric,
  When all was absurd and phantasmagoric.
  Born later, when Clio, celestial recorded,
  Set down great events in succession and order,
  He surely had seen nothing droll or fortuitous
  In anything here but the lies that she threw at us.

Orpheus Bowen


PREJUDICE, n.  A vagrant opinion without visible means of support.

PRELATE, n.  A church officer having a superior degree of holiness and
a fat preferment.  One of Heaven's aristocracy.  A gentleman of God.

PREROGATIVE, n.  A sovereign's right to do wrong.

PRESBYTERIAN, n.  One who holds the conviction that the government
authorities of the Church should be called presbyters.

PRESCRIPTION, n.  A physician's guess at what will best prolong the
situation with least harm to the patient.

PRESENT, n.  That part of eternity dividing the domain of
disappointment from the realm of hope.

PRESENTABLE, adj.  Hideously appareled after the manner of the time
and place.

In Boorioboola-Gha a man is presentable on occasions of ceremony
if he have his abdomen painted a bright blue and wear a cow's tail; in
New York he may, if it please him, omit the paint, but after sunset he
must wear two tails made of the wool of a sheep and dyed black.

PRESIDE, v.  To guide the action of a deliberative body to a desirable
result.  In Journalese, to perform upon a musical instrument; as, "He
presided at the piccolo."

  The Headliner, holding the copy in hand,
      Read with a solemn face:
  "The music was very uncommonly grand--
          The best that was every provided,
          For our townsman Brown presided
      At the organ with skill and grace."
  The Headliner discontinued to read,
      And, spread the paper down
  On the desk, he dashed in at the top of the screed:
      "Great playing by President Brown."

Orpheus Bowen


PRESIDENCY, n.  The greased pig in the field game of American
politics.

PRESIDENT, n.  The leading figure in a small group of men of whom--
and of whom only--it is positively known that immense numbers of
their countrymen did not want any of them for President.

  If that's an honor surely 'tis a greater
  To have been a simple and undamned spectator.
  Behold in me a man of mark and note
  Whom no elector e'er denied a vote!--
  An undiscredited, unhooted gent
  Who might, for all we know, be President
  By acclimation.  Cheer, ye varlets, cheer--
  I'm passing with a wide and open ear!

Jonathan Fomry


PREVARICATOR, n.  A liar in the caterpillar estate.

PRICE, n.  Value, plus a reasonable sum for the wear and tear of
conscience in demanding it.

PRIMATE, n.  The head of a church, especially a State church supported
by involuntary contributions.  The Primate of England is the
Archbishop of Canterbury, an amiable old gentleman, who occupies
Lambeth Palace when living and Westminster Abbey when dead.  He is
commonly dead.

PRISON, n.  A place of punishments and rewards.  The poet assures us
that--

  "Stone walls do not a prison make,"

but a combination of the stone wall, the political parasite and the
moral instructor is no garden of sweets.

PRIVATE, n.  A military gentleman with a field-marshal's baton in his
knapsack and an impediment in his hope.

PROBOSCIS, n.  The rudimentary organ of an elephant which serves him
in place of the knife-and-fork that Evolution has as yet denied him.
For purposes of humor it is popularly called a trunk.

Asked how he knew that an elephant was going on a journey, the
illustrious Jo. Miller cast a reproachful look upon his tormentor, and
answered, absently:  "When it is ajar," and threw himself from a high
promontory into the sea.  Thus perished in his pride the most famous
humorist of antiquity, leaving to mankind a heritage of woe!  No
successor worthy of the title has appeared, though Mr. Edward Bok, of
_The Ladies' Home Journal_, is much respected for the purity and
sweetness of his personal character.

PROJECTILE, n.  The final arbiter in international disputes.  Formerly
these disputes were settled by physical contact of the disputants,
with such simple arguments as the rudimentary logic of the times could
supply--the sword, the spear, and so forth.  With the growth of
prudence in military affairs the projectile came more and more into
favor, and is now held in high esteem by the most courageous.  Its
capital defect is that it requires personal attendance at the point of
propulsion.

PROOF, n.  Evidence having a shade more of plausibility than of
unlikelihood.  The testimony of two credible witnesses as opposed to
that of only one.

PROOF-READER, n.  A malefactor who atones for making your writing
nonsense by permitting the compositor to make it unintelligible.

PROPERTY, n.  Any material thing, having no particular value, that may
be held by A against the cupidity of B.  Whatever gratifies the
passion for possession in one and disappoints it in all others.  The
object of man's brief rapacity and long indifference.

PROPHECY, n.  The art and practice of selling one's credibility for
future delivery.

PROSPECT, n.  An outlook, usually forbidding.  An expectation, usually
forbidden.

  Blow, blow, ye spicy breezes--
      O'er Ceylon blow your breath,
  Where every prospect pleases,
      Save only that of death.

Bishop Sheber


PROVIDENTIAL, adj.  Unexpectedly and conspicuously beneficial to the
person so describing it.

PRUDE, n.  A bawd hiding behind the back of her demeanor.

PUBLISH, n.  In literary affairs, to become the fundamental element in
a cone of critics.

PUSH, n.  One of the two things mainly conducive to success,
especially in politics.  The other is Pull.

PYRRHONISM, n.  An ancient philosophy, named for its inventor.  It
consisted of an absolute disbelief in everything but Pyrrhonism.  Its
modern professors have added that.




Q



QUEEN, n.  A woman by whom the realm is ruled when there is a king,
and through whom it is ruled when there is not.

QUILL, n.  An implement of torture yielded by a goose and commonly
wielded by an ass.  This use of the quill is now obsolete, but its
modern equivalent, the steel pen, is wielded by the same everlasting
Presence.

QUIVER, n.  A portable sheath in which the ancient statesman and the
aboriginal lawyer carried their lighter arguments.

  He extracted from his quiver,
      Did the controversial Roman,
  An argument well fitted
  To the question as submitted,
  Then addressed it to the liver,
      Of the unpersuaded foeman.

Oglum P. Boomp


QUIXOTIC, adj.  Absurdly chivalric, like Don Quixote.  An insight into
the beauty and excellence of this incomparable adjective is unhappily
denied to him who has the misfortune to know that the gentleman's name
is pronounced Ke-ho-tay.

  When ignorance from out of our lives can banish
  Philology, 'tis folly to know Spanish.

Juan Smith


QUORUM, n.  A sufficient number of members of a deliberative body to
have their own way and their own way of having it.  In the United
States Senate a quorum consists of the chairman of the Committee on
Finance and a messenger from the White House; in the House of
Representatives, of the Speaker and the devil.

QUOTATION, n.  The act of repeating erroneously the words of another.
The words erroneously repeated.

  Intent on making his quotation truer,
  He sought the page infallible of Brewer,
  Then made a solemn vow that we would be
  Condemned eternally.  Ah, me, ah, me!

Stumpo Gaker


QUOTIENT, n.  A number showing how many times a sum of money belonging
to one person is contained in the pocket of another--usually about
as many times as it can be got there.




R



RABBLE, n.  In a republic, those who exercise a supreme authority
tempered by fraudulent elections.  The rabble is like the sacred
Simurgh, of Arabian fable--omnipotent on condition that it do
nothing.  (The word is Aristocratese, and has no exact equivalent in
our tongue, but means, as nearly as may be, "soaring swine.")

RACK, n.  An argumentative implement formerly much used in persuading
devotees of a false faith to embrace the living truth.  As a call to
the unconverted the rack never had any particular efficacy, and is now
held in light popular esteem.

RANK, n.  Relative elevation in the scale of human worth.

  He held at court a rank so high
  That other noblemen asked why.
  "Because," 'twas answered, "others lack
  His skill to scratch the royal back."

Aramis Jukes


RANSOM, n.  The purchase of that which neither belongs to the seller,
nor can belong to the buyer.  The most unprofitable of investments.

RAPACITY, n.  Providence without industry.  The thrift of power.

RAREBIT, n.  A Welsh rabbit, in the speech of the humorless, who point
out that it is not a rabbit.  To whom it may be solemnly explained
that the comestible known as toad-in-a-hole is really not a toad, and
that _riz-de-veau a la financiere_ is not the smile of a calf prepared
after the recipe of a she banker.

RASCAL, n.  A fool considered under another aspect.

RASCALITY, n.  Stupidity militant.  The activity of a clouded
intellect.

RASH, adj.  Insensible to the value of our advice.

  "Now lay your bet with mine, nor let
      These gamblers take your cash."
  "Nay, this child makes no bet."  "Great snakes!
      How can you be so rash?"

Bootle P. Gish


RATIONAL, adj.  Devoid of all delusions save those of observation,
experience and reflection.

RATTLESNAKE, n.  Our prostrate brother, _Homo ventrambulans_.

RAZOR, n.  An instrument used by the Caucasian to enhance his beauty,
by the Mongolian to make a guy of himself, and by the Afro-American to
affirm his worth.

REACH, n.  The radius of action of the human hand.  The area within
which it is possible (and customary) to gratify directly the
propensity to provide.

  This is a truth, as old as the hills,
      That life and experience teach:
  The poor man suffers that keenest of ills,
      An impediment of his reach.

G.J.


READING, n.  The general body of what one reads.  In our country it
consists, as a rule, of Indiana novels, short stories in "dialect" and
humor in slang.

  We know by one's reading
  His learning and breeding;
  By what draws his laughter
  We know his Hereafter.
  Read nothing, laugh never--
  The Sphinx was less clever!

Jupiter Muke


RADICALISM, n.  The conservatism of to-morrow injected into the
affairs of to-day.

RADIUM, n.  A mineral that gives off heat and stimulates the organ
that a scientist is a fool with.

RAILROAD, n.  The chief of many mechanical devices enabling us to get
away from where we are to where we are no better off.  For this purpose
the railroad is held in highest favor by the optimist, for it permits
him to make the transit with great expedition.

RAMSHACKLE, adj.  Pertaining to a certain order of architecture,
otherwise known as the Normal American.  Most of the public buildings
of the United States are of the Ramshackle order, though some of our
earlier architects preferred the Ironic.  Recent additions to the
White House in Washington are Theo-Doric, the ecclesiastic order of
the Dorians.  They are exceedingly fine and cost one hundred dollars a
brick.

REALISM, n.  The art of depicting nature as it is seen by toads.  The
charm suffusing a landscape painted by a mole, or a story written by a
measuring-worm.

REALITY, n.  The dream of a mad philosopher.  That which would remain
in the cupel if one should assay a phantom.  The nucleus of a vacuum.

REALLY, adv.  Apparently.

REAR, n.  In American military matters, that exposed part of the army
that is nearest to Congress.

REASON, v.i.  To weight probabilities in the scales of desire.

REASON, n.  Propensitate of prejudice.

REASONABLE, adj.  Accessible to the infection of our own opinions.
Hospitable to persuasion, dissuasion and evasion.

REBEL, n.  A proponent of a new misrule who has failed to establish
it.

RECOLLECT, v.  To recall with additions something not previously
known.

RECONCILIATION, n.  A suspension of hostilities.  An armed truce for
the purpose of digging up the dead.

RECONSIDER, v.  To seek a justification for a decision already made.

RECOUNT, n.  In American politics, another throw of the dice, accorded
to the player against whom they are loaded.

RECREATION, n.  A particular kind of dejection to relieve a general
fatigue.

RECRUIT, n.  A person distinguishable from a civilian by his uniform
and from a soldier by his gait.

  Fresh from the farm or factory or street,
  His marching, in pursuit or in retreat,
      Were an impressive martial spectacle
  Except for two impediments--his feet.

Thompson Johnson


RECTOR, n.  In the Church of England, the Third Person of the
parochial Trinity, the Cruate and the Vicar being the other two.

REDEMPTION, n.  Deliverance of sinners from the penalty of their sin,
through their murder of the deity against whom they sinned.  The
doctrine of Redemption is the fundamental mystery of our holy
religion, and whoso believeth in it shall not perish, but have
everlasting life in which to try to understand it.

  We must awake Man's spirit from his sin,
      And take some special measure for redeeming it;
  Though hard indeed the task to get it in
      Among the angels any way but teaming it,
      Or purify it otherwise than steaming it.
  I'm awkward at Redemption--a beginner:
  My method is to crucify the sinner.

Golgo Brone


REDRESS, n.  Reparation without satisfaction.

Among the Anglo-Saxon a subject conceiving himself wronged by the
king was permitted, on proving his injury, to beat a brazen image of
the royal offender with a switch that was afterward applied to his own
naked back.  The latter rite was performed by the public hangman, and
it assured moderation in the plaintiff's choice of a switch.

RED-SKIN, n.  A North American Indian, whose skin is not red--at
least not on the outside.

REDUNDANT, adj.  Superfluous; needless; _de trop_.

  The Sultan said:  "There's evidence abundant
  To prove this unbelieving dog redundant."
  To whom the Grand Vizier, with mien impressive,
  Replied:  "His head, at least, appears excessive."

Habeeb Suleiman


  Mr. Debs is a redundant citizen.

Theodore Roosevelt


REFERENDUM, n.  A law for submission of proposed legislation to a
popular vote to learn the nonsensus of public opinion.

REFLECTION, n.  An action of the mind whereby we obtain a clearer view
of our relation to the things of yesterday and are able to avoid the
perils that we shall not again encounter.

REFORM, v.  A thing that mostly satisfies reformers opposed to
reformation.

REFUGE, n.  Anything assuring protection to one in peril.  Moses and
Joshua provided six cities of refuge--Bezer, Golan, Ramoth, Kadesh,
Schekem and Hebron--to which one who had taken life inadvertently
could flee when hunted by relatives of the deceased.  This admirable
expedient supplied him with wholesome exercise and enabled them to
enjoy the pleasures of the chase; whereby the soul of the dead man was
appropriately honored by observations akin to the funeral games of
early Greece.

REFUSAL, n.  Denial of something desired; as an elderly maiden's hand
in marriage, to a rich and handsome suitor; a valuable franchise to a
rich corporation, by an alderman; absolution to an impenitent king, by
a priest, and so forth.  Refusals are graded in a descending scale of
finality thus:  the refusal absolute, the refusal condition, the
refusal tentative and the refusal feminine.  The last is called by
some casuists the refusal assentive.

REGALIA, n.  Distinguishing insignia, jewels and costume of such
ancient and honorable orders as Knights of Adam; Visionaries of
Detectable Bosh; the Ancient Order of Modern Troglodytes; the League
of Holy Humbug; the Golden Phalanx of Phalangers; the Genteel Society
of Expurgated Hoodlums; the Mystic Alliances of Georgeous Regalians;
Knights and Ladies of the Yellow Dog; the Oriental Order of Sons of
the West; the Blatherhood of Insufferable Stuff; Warriors of the Long
Bow; Guardians of the Great Horn Spoon; the Band of Brutes; the
Impenitent Order of Wife-Beaters; the Sublime Legion of Flamboyant
Conspicuants; Worshipers at the Electroplated Shrine; Shining
Inaccessibles; Fee-Faw-Fummers of the inimitable Grip; Jannissaries of
the Broad-Blown Peacock; Plumed Increscencies of the Magic Temple; the
Grand Cabal of Able-Bodied Sedentarians; Associated Deities of the
Butter Trade; the Garden of Galoots; the Affectionate Fraternity of
Men Similarly Warted; the Flashing Astonishers; Ladies of Horror;
Cooperative Association for Breaking into the Spotlight; Dukes of Eden;
Disciples Militant of the Hidden Faith; Knights-Champions of the
Domestic Dog; the Holy Gregarians; the Resolute Optimists; the Ancient
Sodality of Inhospitable Hogs; Associated Sovereigns of Mendacity;
Dukes-Guardian of the Mystic Cess-Pool; the Society for Prevention of
Prevalence; Kings of Drink; Polite Federation of Gents-Consequential;
the Mysterious Order of the Undecipherable Scroll; Uniformed Rank of
Lousy Cats; Monarchs of Worth and Hunger; Sons of the South Star;
Prelates of the Tub-and-Sword.

RELIGION, n.  A daughter of Hope and Fear, explaining to Ignorance the
nature of the Unknowable.

  "What is your religion my son?" inquired the Archbishop of Rheims.
  "Pardon, monseigneur," replied Rochebriant; "I am ashamed of it."
  "Then why do you not become an atheist?"
  "Impossible!  I should be ashamed of atheism."
  "In that case, monsieur, you should join the Protestants."

RELIQUARY, n.  A receptacle for such sacred objects as pieces of the
true cross, short-ribs of the saints, the ears of Balaam's ass, the
lung of the cock that called Peter to repentance and so forth.
Reliquaries are commonly of metal, and provided with a lock to prevent
the contents from coming out and performing miracles at unseasonable
times.  A feather from the wing of the Angel of the Annunciation once
escaped during a sermon in Saint Peter's and so tickled the noses of
the congregation that they woke and sneezed with great vehemence three
times each.  It is related in the "Gesta Sanctorum" that a sacristan
in the Canterbury cathedral surprised the head of Saint Dennis in the
library.  Reprimanded by its stern custodian, it explained that it was
seeking a body of doctrine.  This unseemly levity so raged the
diocesan that the offender was publicly anathematized, thrown into the
Stour and replaced by another head of Saint Dennis, brought from Rome.

RENOWN, n.  A degree of distinction between notoriety and fame--a
little more supportable than the one and a little more intolerable
than the other.  Sometimes it is conferred by an unfriendly and
inconsiderate hand.

  I touched the harp in every key,
      But found no heeding ear;
  And then Ithuriel touched me
      With a revealing spear.

  Not all my genius, great as 'tis,
      Could urge me out of night.
  I felt the faint appulse of his,
      And leapt into the light!

W.J. Candleton


REPARATION, n.  Satisfaction that is made for a wrong and deducted
from the satisfaction felt in committing it.

REPARTEE, n.  Prudent insult in retort.  Practiced by gentlemen with a
constitutional aversion to violence, but a strong disposition to
offend.  In a war of words, the tactics of the North American Indian.

REPENTANCE, n.  The faithful attendant and follower of Punishment.  It
is usually manifest in a degree of reformation that is not
inconsistent with continuity of sin.

  Desirous to avoid the pains of Hell,
  You will repent and join the Church, Parnell?
  How needless!--Nick will keep you off the coals
  And add you to the woes of other souls.

Jomater Abemy


REPLICA, n.  A reproduction of a work of art, by the artist that made
the original.  It is so called to distinguish it from a "copy," which
is made by another artist.  When the two are mae with equal skill the
replica is the more valuable, for it is supposed to be more beautiful
than it looks.

REPORTER, n.  A writer who guesses his way to the truth and dispels it
with a tempest of words.

  "More dear than all my bosom knows, O thou
  Whose 'lips are sealed' and will not disavow!"
  So sang the blithe reporter-man as grew
  Beneath his hand the leg-long "interview."

Barson Maith


REPOSE, v.i.  To cease from troubling.

REPRESENTATIVE, n.  In national politics, a member of the Lower House
in this world, and without discernible hope of promotion in the next.

REPROBATION, n.  In theology, the state of a luckless mortal
prenatally damned.  The doctrine of reprobation was taught by Calvin,
whose joy in it was somewhat marred by the sad sincerity of his
conviction that although some are foredoomed to perdition, others are
predestined to salvation.

REPUBLIC, n.  A nation in which, the thing governing and the thing
governed being the same, there is only a permitted authority to
enforce an optional obedience.  In a republic, the foundation of
public order is the ever lessening habit of submission inherited from
ancestors who, being truly governed, submitted because they had to.
There are as many kinds of republics as there are graduations between
the despotism whence they came and the anarchy whither they lead.

REQUIEM, n.  A mass for the dead which the minor poets assure us the
winds sing o'er the graves of their favorites.  Sometimes, by way of
providing a varied entertainment, they sing a dirge.

RESIDENT, adj.  Unable to leave.

RESIGN, v.t.  To renounce an honor for an advantage.  To renounce an
advantage for a greater advantage.

  'Twas rumored Leonard Wood had signed
      A true renunciation
  Of title, rank and every kind
      Of military station--
      Each honorable station.

  By his example fired--inclined
      To noble emulation,
  The country humbly was resigned
      To Leonard's resignation--
      His Christian resignation.

Politian Greame


RESOLUTE, adj.  Obstinate in a course that we approve.

RESPECTABILITY, n.  The offspring of a _liaison_ between a bald head
and a bank account.

RESPIRATOR, n.  An apparatus fitted over the nose and mouth of an
inhabitant of London, whereby to filter the visible universe in its
passage to the lungs.

RESPITE, n.  A suspension of hostilities against a sentenced assassin,
to enable the Executive to determine whether the murder may not have
been done by the prosecuting attorney.  Any break in the continuity of
a disagreeable expectation.

  Altgeld upon his incandescent bed
  Lay, an attendant demon at his head.

  "O cruel cook, pray grant me some relief--
  Some respite from the roast, however brief."

  "Remember how on earth I pardoned all
  Your friends in Illinois when held in thrall."

  "Unhappy soul! for that alone you squirm
  O'er fire unquenched, a never-dying worm.

  "Yet, for I pity your uneasy state,
  Your doom I'll mollify and pains abate.

  "Naught, for a season, shall your comfort mar,
  Not even the memory of who you are."

  Throughout eternal space dread silence fell;
  Heaven trembled as Compassion entered Hell.

  "As long, sweet demon, let my respite be
  As, governing down here, I'd respite thee."

  "As long, poor soul, as any of the pack
  You thrust from jail consumed in getting back."

  A genial chill affected Altgeld's hide
  While they were turning him on t'other side.

Joel Spate Woop


RESPLENDENT, adj.  Like a simple American citizen beduking himself in
his lodge, or affirming his consequence in the Scheme of Things as an
elemental unit of a parade.

      The Knights of Dominion were so resplendent in their velvet-
  and-gold that their masters would hardly have known them.

"Chronicles of the Classes"


RESPOND, v.i.  To make answer, or disclose otherwise a consciousness
of having inspired an interest in what Herbert Spencer calls "external
coexistences," as Satan "squat like a toad" at the ear of Eve,
responded to the touch of the angel's spear.  To respond in damages is
to contribute to the maintenance of the plaintiff's attorney and,
incidentally, to the gratification of the plaintiff.

RESPONSIBILITY, n.  A detachable burden easily shifted to the
shoulders of God, Fate, Fortune, Luck or one's neighbor.  In the days
of astrology it was customary to unload it upon a star.

  Alas, things ain't what we should see
  If Eve had let that apple be;
  And many a feller which had ought
  To set with monarchses of thought,
  Or play some rosy little game
  With battle-chaps on fields of fame,
  Is downed by his unlucky star
  And hollers:  "Peanuts!--here you are!"

"The Sturdy Beggar"


RESTITUTIONS, n.  The founding or endowing of universities and public
libraries by gift or bequest.

RESTITUTOR, n.  Benefactor; philanthropist.

RETALIATION, n.  The natural rock upon which is reared the Temple of
Law.

RETRIBUTION, n.  A rain of fire-and-brimstone that falls alike upon
the just and such of the unjust as have not procured shelter by
evicting them.

In the lines following, addressed to an Emperor in exile by Father
Gassalasca Jape, the reverend poet appears to hint his sense of the
improduence of turning about to face Retribution when it is talking
exercise:

  What, what! Dom Pedro, you desire to go
      Back to Brazil to end your days in quiet?
  Why, what assurance have you 'twould be so?
      'Tis not so long since you were in a riot,
      And your dear subjects showed a will to fly at
  Your throat and shake you like a rat.  You know
  That empires are ungrateful; are you certain
  Republics are less handy to get hurt in?

REVEILLE, n.  A signal to sleeping soldiers to dream of battlefields
no more, but get up and have their blue noses counted.  In the
American army it is ingeniously called "rev-e-lee," and to that
pronunciation our countrymen have pledged their lives, their
misfortunes and their sacred dishonor.

REVELATION, n.  A famous book in which St. John the Divine concealed
all that he knew.  The revealing is done by the commentators, who know
nothing.

REVERENCE, n.  The spiritual attitude of a man to a god and a dog to a
man.

REVIEW, v.t.

  To set your wisdom (holding not a doubt of it,
      Although in truth there's neither bone nor skin to it)
  At work upon a book, and so read out of it
      The qualities that you have first read into it.

REVOLUTION, n.  In politics, an abrupt change in the form of
misgovernment.  Specifically, in American history, the substitution of
the rule of an Administration for that of a Ministry, whereby the
welfare and happiness of the people were advanced a full half-inch.
Revolutions are usually accompanied by a considerable effusion of
blood, but are accounted worth it--this appraisement being made by
beneficiaries whose blood had not the mischance to be shed.  The
French revolution is of incalculable value to the Socialist of to-day;
when he pulls the string actuating its bones its gestures are
inexpressibly terrifying to gory tyrants suspected of fomenting law
and order.

RHADOMANCER, n.  One who uses a divining-rod in prospecting for
precious metals in the pocket of a fool.

RIBALDRY, n.  Censorious language by another concerning oneself.

RIBROASTER, n.  Censorious language by oneself concerning another.
The word is of classical refinement, and is even said to have been
used in a fable by Georgius Coadjutor, one of the most fastidious
writers of the fifteenth century--commonly, indeed, regarded as the
founder of the Fastidiotic School.

RICE-WATER, n.  A mystic beverage secretly used by our most popular
novelists and poets to regulate the imagination and narcotize the
conscience.  It is said to be rich in both obtundite and lethargine,
and is brewed in a midnight fog by a fat which of the Dismal Swamp.

RICH, adj.  Holding in trust and subject to an accounting the property
of the indolent, the incompetent, the unthrifty, the envious and the
luckless.  That is the view that prevails in the underworld, where the
Brotherhood of Man finds its most logical development and candid
advocacy.  To denizens of the midworld the word means good and wise.

RICHES, n.

      A gift from Heaven signifying, "This is my beloved son, in
  whom I am well pleased."

John D. Rockefeller


      The reward of toil and virtue.

J.P. Morgan


      The sayings of many in the hands of one.

Eugene Debs

To these excellent definitions the inspired lexicographer feels
that he can add nothing of value.

RIDICULE, n.  Words designed to show that the person of whom they are
uttered is devoid of the dignity of character distinguishing him who
utters them.  It may be graphic, mimetic or merely rident.
Shaftesbury is quoted as having pronounced it the test of truth--a
ridiculous assertion, for many a solemn fallacy has undergone
centuries of ridicule with no abatement of its popular acceptance.
What, for example, has been more valorously derided than the doctrine
of Infant Respectability?

RIGHT, n.  Legitimate authority to be, to do or to have; as the right
to be a king, the right to do one's neighbor, the right to have
measles, and the like.  The first of these rights was once universally
believed to be derived directly from the will of God; and this is
still sometimes affirmed _in partibus infidelium_ outside the
enlightened realms of Democracy; as the well known lines of Sir
Abednego Bink, following:

      By what right, then, do royal rulers rule?
          Whose is the sanction of their state and pow'r?
      He surely were as stubborn as a mule
          Who, God unwilling, could maintain an hour
  His uninvited session on the throne, or air
  His pride securely in the Presidential chair.

      Whatever is is so by Right Divine;
          Whate'er occurs, God wills it so.  Good land!
      It were a wondrous thing if His design
          A fool could baffle or a rogue withstand!
  If so, then God, I say (intending no offence)
  Is guilty of contributory negligence.

RIGHTEOUSNESS, n.  A sturdy virtue that was once found among the
Pantidoodles inhabiting the lower part of the peninsula of Oque.  Some
feeble attempts were made by returned missionaries to introduce it
into several European countries, but it appears to have been
imperfectly expounded.  An example of this faulty exposition is found
in the only extant sermon of the pious Bishop Rowley, a characteristic
passage from which is here given:

      "Now righteousness consisteth not merely in a holy state of
  mind, nor yet in performance of religious rites and obedience to
  the letter of the law.  It is not enough that one be pious and
  just:  one must see to it that others also are in the same state;
  and to this end compulsion is a proper means.  Forasmuch as my
  injustice may work ill to another, so by his injustice may evil be
  wrought upon still another, the which it is as manifestly my duty
  to estop as to forestall mine own tort.  Wherefore if I would be
  righteous I am bound to restrain my neighbor, by force if needful,
  in all those injurious enterprises from which, through a better
  disposition and by the help of Heaven, I do myself restrain."

RIME, n.  Agreeing sounds in the terminals of verse, mostly bad.  The
verses themselves, as distinguished from prose, mostly dull.  Usually
(and wickedly) spelled "rhyme."

RIMER, n.  A poet regarded with indifference or disesteem.

  The rimer quenches his unheeded fires,
  The sound surceases and the sense expires.
  Then the domestic dog, to east and west,
  Expounds the passions burning in his breast.
  The rising moon o'er that enchanted land
  Pauses to hear and yearns to understand.

Mowbray Myles


RIOT, n.  A popular entertainment given to the military by innocent
bystanders.

R.I.P.  A careless abbreviation of _requiescat in pace_, attesting to
indolent goodwill to the dead.  According to the learned Dr. Drigge,
however, the letters originally meant nothing more than _reductus in
pulvis_.

RITE, n.  A religious or semi-religious ceremony fixed by law, precept
or custom, with the essential oil of sincerity carefully squeezed out
of it.

RITUALISM, n.  A Dutch Garden of God where He may walk in rectilinear
freedom, keeping off the grass.

ROAD, n.  A strip of land along which one may pass from where it is
too tiresome to be to where it is futile to go.

  All roads, howsoe'er they diverge, lead to Rome,
  Whence, thank the good Lord, at least one leads back home.

Borey the Bald


ROBBER, n.  A candid man of affairs.
  It is related of Voltaire that one night he and some traveling
companion lodged at a wayside inn.  The surroundings were suggestive,
and after supper they agreed to tell robber stories in turn.  "Once
there was a Farmer-General of the Revenues."  Saying nothing more, he
was encouraged to continue.  "That," he said, "is the story."

ROMANCE, n.  Fiction that owes no allegiance to the God of Things as
They Are.  In the novel the writer's thought is tethered to
probability, as a domestic horse to the hitching-post, but in romance
it ranges at will over the entire region of the imagination--free,
lawless, immune to bit and rein.  Your novelist is a poor creature, as
Carlyle might say--a mere reporter.  He may invent his characters
and plot, but he must not imagine anything taking place that might not
occur, albeit his entire narrative is candidly a lie.  Why he imposes
this hard condition on himself, and "drags at each remove a
lengthening chain" of his own forging he can explain in ten thick
volumes without illuminating by so much as a candle's ray the black
profound of his own ignorance of the matter.  There are great novels,
for great writers have "laid waste their powers" to write them, but it
remains true that far and away the most fascinating fiction that we
have is "The Thousand and One Nights."

ROPE, n.  An obsolescent appliance for reminding assassins that they
too are mortal.  It is put about the neck and remains in place one's
whole life long.  It has been largely superseded by a more complex
electrical device worn upon another part of the person; and this is
rapidly giving place to an apparatus known as the preachment.

ROSTRUM, n.  In Latin, the beak of a bird or the prow of a ship.  In
America, a place from which a candidate for office energetically
expounds the wisdom, virtue and power of the rabble.

ROUNDHEAD, n.  A member of the Parliamentarian party in the English
civil war--so called from his habit of wearing his hair short,
whereas his enemy, the Cavalier, wore his long.  There were other
points of difference between them, but the fashion in hair was the
fundamental cause of quarrel.  The Cavaliers were royalists because
the king, an indolent fellow, found it more convenient to let his hair
grow than to wash his neck.  This the Roundheads, who were mostly
barbers and soap-boilers, deemed an injury to trade, and the royal
neck was therefore the object of their particular indignation.
Descendants of the belligerents now wear their hair all alike, but the
fires of animosity enkindled in that ancient strife smoulder to this
day beneath the snows of British civility.

RUBBISH, n.  Worthless matter, such as the religions, philosophies,
literatures, arts and sciences of the tribes infesting the regions
lying due south from Boreaplas.

RUIN, v.  To destroy.  Specifically, to destroy a maid's belief in the
virtue of maids.

RUM, n.  Generically, fiery liquors that produce madness in total
abstainers.

RUMOR, n.  A favorite weapon of the assassins of character.

  Sharp, irresistible by mail or shield,
      By guard unparried as by flight unstayed,
  O serviceable Rumor, let me wield
      Against my enemy no other blade.
  His be the terror of a foe unseen,
      His the inutile hand upon the hilt,
  And mine the deadly tongue, long, slender, keen,
      Hinting a rumor of some ancient guilt.
  So shall I slay the wretch without a blow,
  Spare me to celebrate his overthrow,
  And nurse my valor for another foe.

Joel Buxter


RUSSIAN, n.  A person with a Caucasian body and a Mongolian soul.  A
Tartar Emetic.




S



SABBATH, n.  A weekly festival having its origin in the fact that God
made the world in six days and was arrested on the seventh.  Among the
Jews observance of the day was enforced by a Commandment of which this
is the Christian version:  "Remember the seventh day to make thy
neighbor keep it wholly."  To the Creator it seemed fit and expedient
that the Sabbath should be the last day of the week, but the Early
Fathers of the Church held other views.  So great is the sanctity of
the day that even where the Lord holds a doubtful and precarious
jurisdiction over those who go down to (and down into) the sea it is
reverently recognized, as is manifest in the following deep-water
version of the Fourth Commandment:

  Six days shalt thou labor and do all thou art able,
  And on the seventh holystone the deck and scrape the cable.

Decks are no longer holystoned, but the cable still supplies the
captain with opportunity to attest a pious respect for the divine
ordinance.

SACERDOTALIST, n.  One who holds the belief that a clergyman is a
priest.  Denial of this momentous doctrine is the hardest challenge
that is now flung into the teeth of the Episcopalian church by the
Neo-Dictionarians.

SACRAMENT, n.  A solemn religious ceremony to which several degrees of
authority and significance are attached.  Rome has seven sacraments,
but the Protestant churches, being less prosperous, feel that they can
afford only two, and these of inferior sanctity.  Some of the smaller
sects have no sacraments at all--for which mean economy they will
indubitable be damned.

SACRED, adj.  Dedicated to some religious purpose; having a divine
character; inspiring solemn thoughts or emotions; as, the Dalai Lama
of Thibet; the Moogum of M'bwango; the temple of Apes in Ceylon; the
Cow in India; the Crocodile, the Cat and the Onion of ancient Egypt;
the Mufti of Moosh; the hair of the dog that bit Noah, etc.

  All things are either sacred or profane.
  The former to ecclesiasts bring gain;
  The latter to the devil appertain.

Dumbo Omohundro


SANDLOTTER, n.  A vertebrate mammal holding the political views of
Denis Kearney, a notorious demagogue of San Francisco, whose audiences
gathered in the open spaces (sandlots) of the town.  True to the
traditions of his species, this leader of the proletariat was finally
bought off by his law-and-order enemies, living prosperously silent
and dying impenitently rich.  But before his treason he imposed upon
California a constitution that was a confection of sin in a diction of
solecisms.  The similarity between the words "sandlotter" and
"sansculotte" is problematically significant, but indubitably
suggestive.

SAFETY-CLUTCH, n.  A mechanical device acting automatically to prevent
the fall of an elevator, or cage, in case of an accident to the
hoisting apparatus.

  Once I seen a human ruin
      In an elevator-well,
  And his members was bestrewin'
      All the place where he had fell.

  And I says, apostrophisin'
      That uncommon woful wreck:
  "Your position's so surprisin'
      That I tremble for your neck!"

  Then that ruin, smilin' sadly
      And impressive, up and spoke:
  "Well, I wouldn't tremble badly,
      For it's been a fortnight broke."

  Then, for further comprehension
      Of his attitude, he begs
  I will focus my attention
      On his various arms and legs--

  How they all are contumacious;
      Where they each, respective, lie;
  How one trotter proves ungracious,
      T'other one an _alibi_.

  These particulars is mentioned
      For to show his dismal state,
  Which I wasn't first intentioned
      To specifical relate.

  None is worser to be dreaded
      That I ever have heard tell
  Than the gent's who there was spreaded
      In that elevator-well.

  Now this tale is allegoric--
      It is figurative all,
  For the well is metaphoric
      And the feller didn't fall.

  I opine it isn't moral
      For a writer-man to cheat,
  And despise to wear a laurel
      As was gotten by deceit.

  For 'tis Politics intended
      By the elevator, mind,
  It will boost a person splendid
      If his talent is the kind.

  Col. Bryan had the talent
      (For the busted man is him)
  And it shot him up right gallant
      Till his head begun to swim.

  Then the rope it broke above him
      And he painful come to earth
  Where there's nobody to love him
      For his detrimented worth.

  Though he's livin' none would know him,
      Or at leastwise not as such.
  Moral of this woful poem:
      Frequent oil your safety-clutch.

Porfer Poog


SAINT, n.  A dead sinner revised and edited.

The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old
calumniator, Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis
de Sales, said, on hearing him called saint:  "I am delighted to hear
that Monsieur de Sales is a saint.  He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards.  In other respects he was a
perfect gentleman, though a fool."

SALACITY, n.  A certain literary quality frequently observed in
popular novels, especially in those written by women and young girls,
who give it another name and think that in introducing it they are
occupying a neglected field of letters and reaping an overlooked
harvest.  If they have the misfortune to live long enough they are
tormented with a desire to burn their sheaves.

SALAMANDER, n.  Originally a reptile inhabiting fire; later, an
anthropomorphous immortal, but still a pyrophile.  Salamanders are now
believed to be extinct, the last one of which we have an account
having been seen in Carcassonne by the Abbe Belloc, who exorcised it
with a bucket of holy water.

SARCOPHAGUS, n.  Among the Greeks a coffin which being made of a
certain kind of carnivorous stone, had the peculiar property of
devouring the body placed in it.  The sarcophagus known to modern
obsequiographers is commonly a product of the carpenter's art.

SATAN, n.  One of the Creator's lamentable mistakes, repented in
sashcloth and axes.  Being instated as an archangel, Satan made
himself multifariously objectionable and was finally expelled from
Heaven.  Halfway in his descent he paused, bent his head in thought a
moment and at last went back.  "There is one favor that I should like
to ask," said he.

"Name it."

"Man, I understand, is about to be created.  He will need laws."

"What, wretch! you his appointed adversary, charged from the dawn
of eternity with hatred of his soul--you ask for the right to make
his laws?"

"Pardon; what I have to ask is that he be permitted to make them
himself."

It was so ordered.

SATIETY, n.  The feeling that one has for the plate after he has eaten
its contents, madam.

SATIRE, n.  An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the
vices and follies of the author's enemies were expounded with
imperfect tenderness.  In this country satire never had more than a
sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we
are dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all
humor, being tolerant and sympathetic.  Moreover, although Americans
are "endowed by their Creator" with abundant vice and folly, it is not
generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the
satirist is popularly regarded as a soul-spirited knave, and his ever
victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a national assent.

  Hail Satire! be thy praises ever sung
  In the dead language of a mummy's tongue,
  For thou thyself art dead, and damned as well--
  Thy spirit (usefully employed) in Hell.
  Had it been such as consecrates the Bible
  Thou hadst not perished by the law of libel.

Barney Stims


SATYR, n.  One of the few characters of the Grecian mythology accorded
recognition in the Hebrew.  (Leviticus, xvii, 7.)  The satyr was at
first a member of the dissolute community acknowledging a loose
allegiance with Dionysius, but underwent many transformations and
improvements.  Not infrequently he is confounded with the faun, a
later and decenter creation of the Romans, who was less like a man and
more like a goat.

SAUCE, n.  The one infallible sign of civilization and enlightenment.
A people with no sauces has one thousand vices; a people with one
sauce has only nine hundred and ninety-nine.  For every sauce invented
and accepted a vice is renounced and forgiven.

SAW, n.  A trite popular saying, or proverb.  (Figurative and
colloquial.)  So called because it makes its way into a wooden head.
Following are examples of old saws fitted with new teeth.

      A penny saved is a penny to squander.

      A man is known by the company that he organizes.

      A bad workman quarrels with the man who calls him that.

      A bird in the hand is worth what it will bring.

      Better late than before anybody has invited you.

      Example is better than following it.

      Half a loaf is better than a whole one if there is much else.

      Think twice before you speak to a friend in need.

      What is worth doing is worth the trouble of asking somebody to do it.

      Least said is soonest disavowed.

      He laughs best who laughs least.

      Speak of the Devil and he will hear about it.

      Of two evils choose to be the least.

      Strike while your employer has a big contract.

      Where there's a will there's a won't.

SCARABAEUS, n.  The sacred beetle of the ancient Egyptians, allied to
our familiar "tumble-bug."  It was supposed to symbolize immortality,
the fact that God knew why giving it its peculiar sanctity.  Its habit
of incubating its eggs in a ball of ordure may also have commended it
to the favor of the priesthood, and may some day assure it an equal
reverence among ourselves.  True, the American beetle is an inferior
beetle, but the American priest is an inferior priest.

SCARABEE, n.  The same as scarabaeus.

              He fell by his own hand
                  Beneath the great oak tree.
              He'd traveled in a foreign land.
              He tried to make her understand
              The dance that's called the Saraband,
                  But he called it Scarabee.
  He had called it so through an afternoon,
      And she, the light of his harem if so might be,
      Had smiled and said naught.  O the body was fair to see,
  All frosted there in the shine o' the moon--
                      Dead for a Scarabee
  And a recollection that came too late.
                          O Fate!
                  They buried him where he lay,
                  He sleeps awaiting the Day,
                          In state,
  And two Possible Puns, moon-eyed and wan,
  Gloom over the grave and then move on.
                      Dead for a Scarabee!
                                                     Fernando Tapple

SCARIFICATION, n.  A form of penance practised by the mediaeval pious.
The rite was performed, sometimes with a knife, sometimes with a hot
iron, but always, says Arsenius Asceticus, acceptably if the penitent
spared himself no pain nor harmless disfigurement.  Scarification,
with other crude penances, has now been superseded by benefaction.
The founding of a library or endowment of a university is said to
yield to the penitent a sharper and more lasting pain than is
conferred by the knife or iron, and is therefore a surer means of
grace.  There are, however, two grave objections to it as a
penitential method:  the good that it does and the taint of justice.

SCEPTER, n.  A king's staff of office, the sign and symbol of his
authority.  It was originally a mace with which the sovereign
admonished his jester and vetoed ministerial measures by breaking the
bones of their proponents.

SCIMETAR, n.  A curved sword of exceeding keenness, in the conduct of
which certain Orientals attain a surprising proficiency, as the
incident here related will serve to show.  The account is translated
from the Japanese by Shusi Itama, a famous writer of the thirteenth
century.

      When the great Gichi-Kuktai was Mikado he condemned to
  decapitation Jijiji Ri, a high officer of the Court.  Soon after
  the hour appointed for performance of the rite what was his
  Majesty's surprise to see calmly approaching the throne the man
  who should have been at that time ten minutes dead!
      "Seventeen hundred impossible dragons!" shouted the enraged
  monarch.  "Did I not sentence you to stand in the market-place and
  have your head struck off by the public executioner at three
  o'clock?  And is it not now 3:10?"
      "Son of a thousand illustrious deities," answered the
  condemned minister, "all that you say is so true that the truth is
  a lie in comparison.  But your heavenly Majesty's sunny and
  vitalizing wishes have been pestilently disregarded.  With joy I
  ran and placed my unworthy body in the market-place.  The
  executioner appeared with his bare scimetar, ostentatiously
  whirled it in air, and then, tapping me lightly upon the neck,
  strode away, pelted by the populace, with whom I was ever a
  favorite.  I am come to pray for justice upon his own dishonorable
  and treasonous head."
      "To what regiment of executioners does the black-boweled
  caitiff belong?" asked the Mikado.
      "To the gallant Ninety-eight Hundred and Thirty-seventh--I
  know the man.  His name is Sakko-Samshi."
      "Let him be brought before me," said the Mikado to an
  attendant, and a half-hour later the culprit stood in the
  Presence.
      "Thou bastard son of a three-legged hunchback without thumbs!"
  roared the sovereign--"why didst thou but lightly tap the neck
  that it should have been thy pleasure to sever?"
      "Lord of Cranes of Cherry Blooms," replied the executioner,
  unmoved, "command him to blow his nose with his fingers."
      Being commanded, Jijiji Ri laid hold of his nose and trumpeted
  like an elephant, all expecting to see the severed head flung
  violently from him.  Nothing occurred:  the performance prospered
  peacefully to the close, without incident.
      All eyes were now turned on the executioner, who had grown as
  white as the snows on the summit of Fujiama.  His legs trembled
  and his breath came in gasps of terror.
      "Several kinds of spike-tailed brass lions!" he cried; "I am a
  ruined and disgraced swordsman!  I struck the villain feebly
  because in flourishing the scimetar I had accidentally passed it
  through my own neck!  Father of the Moon, I resign my office."
      So saying, he gasped his top-knot, lifted off his head, and
  advancing to the throne laid it humbly at the Mikado's feet.

SCRAP-BOOK, n.  A book that is commonly edited by a fool.  Many
persons of some small distinction compile scrap-books containing
whatever they happen to read about themselves or employ others to
collect.  One of these egotists was addressed in the lines following,
by Agamemnon Melancthon Peters:

  Dear Frank, that scrap-book where you boast
      You keep a record true
  Of every kind of peppered roast
          That's made of you;

  Wherein you paste the printed gibes
      That revel round your name,
  Thinking the laughter of the scribes
          Attests your fame;

  Where all the pictures you arrange
      That comic pencils trace--
  Your funny figure and your strange
          Semitic face--

  Pray lend it me.  Wit I have not,
      Nor art, but there I'll list
  The daily drubbings you'd have got
          Had God a fist.

SCRIBBLER, n.  A professional writer whose views are antagonistic to
one's own.

SCRIPTURES, n.  The sacred books of our holy religion, as
distinguished from the false and profane writings on which all other
faiths are based.

SEAL, n.  A mark impressed upon certain kinds of documents to attest
their authenticity and authority.  Sometimes it is stamped upon wax,
and attached to the paper, sometimes into the paper itself.  Sealing,
in this sense, is a survival of an ancient custom of inscribing
important papers with cabalistic words or signs to give them a magical
efficacy independent of the authority that they represent.  In the
British museum are preserved many ancient papers, mostly of a
sacerdotal character, validated by necromantic pentagrams and other
devices, frequently initial letters of words to conjure with; and in
many instances these are attached in the same way that seals are
appended now.  As nearly every reasonless and apparently meaningless
custom, rite or observance of modern times had origin in some remote
utility, it is pleasing to note an example of ancient nonsense
evolving in the process of ages into something really useful.  Our
word "sincere" is derived from _sine cero_, without wax, but the
learned are not in agreement as to whether this refers to the absence
of the cabalistic signs, or to that of the wax with which letters were
formerly closed from public scrutiny.  Either view of the matter will
serve one in immediate need of an hypothesis.  The initials L.S.,
commonly appended to signatures of legal documents, mean _locum
sigillis_, the place of the seal, although the seal is no longer used
--an admirable example of conservatism distinguishing Man from the
beasts that perish.  The words _locum sigillis_ are humbly suggested
as a suitable motto for the Pribyloff Islands whenever they shall take
their place as a sovereign State of the American Union.

SEINE, n.  A kind of net for effecting an involuntary change of
environment.  For fish it is made strong and coarse, but women are
more easily taken with a singularly delicate fabric weighted with
small, cut stones.

  The devil casting a seine of lace,
      (With precious stones 'twas weighted)
  Drew it into the landing place
      And its contents calculated.

  All souls of women were in that sack--
      A draft miraculous, precious!
  But ere he could throw it across his back
      They'd all escaped through the meshes.

Baruch de Loppis


SELF-ESTEEM, n.  An erroneous appraisement.

SELF-EVIDENT, adj.  Evident to one's self and to nobody else.

SELFISH, adj.  Devoid of consideration for the selfishness of others.

SENATE, n.  A body of elderly gentlemen charged with high duties and
misdemeanors.

SERIAL, n.  A literary work, usually a story that is not true,
creeping through several issues of a newspaper or magazine.
Frequently appended to each installment is a "synposis of preceding
chapters" for those who have not read them, but a direr need is a
synposis of succeeding chapters for those who do not intend to read
_them_.  A synposis of the entire work would be still better.

The late James F. Bowman was writing a serial tale for a weekly
paper in collaboration with a genius whose name has not come down to
us.  They wrote, not jointly but alternately, Bowman supplying the
installment for one week, his friend for the next, and so on, world
without end, they hoped.  Unfortunately they quarreled, and one Monday
morning when Bowman read the paper to prepare himself for his task, he
found his work cut out for him in a way to surprise and pain him.  His
collaborator had embarked every character of the narrative on a ship
and sunk them all in the deepest part of the Atlantic.

SEVERALTY, n.  Separateness, as, lands in severalty, i.e., lands held
individually, not in joint ownership.  Certain tribes of Indians are
believed now to be sufficiently civilized to have in severalty the
lands that they have hitherto held as tribal organizations, and could
not sell to the Whites for waxen beads and potato whiskey.

  Lo! the poor Indian whose unsuited mind
  Saw death before, hell and the grave behind;
  Whom thrifty settler ne'er besought to stay--
  His small belongings their appointed prey;
  Whom Dispossession, with alluring wile,
  Persuaded elsewhere every little while!
  His fire unquenched and his undying worm
  By "land in severalty" (charming term!)
  Are cooled and killed, respectively, at last,
  And he to his new holding anchored fast!

SHERIFF, n.  In America the chief executive office of a country, whose
most characteristic duties, in some of the Western and Southern
States, are the catching and hanging of rogues.

  John Elmer Pettibone Cajee
  (I write of him with little glee)
  Was just as bad as he could be.

  'Twas frequently remarked:  "I swon!
  The sun has never looked upon
  So bad a man as Neighbor John."

  A sinner through and through, he had
  This added fault:  it made him mad
  To know another man was bad.

  In such a case he thought it right
  To rise at any hour of night
  And quench that wicked person's light.

  Despite the town's entreaties, he
  Would hale him to the nearest tree
  And leave him swinging wide and free.

  Or sometimes, if the humor came,
  A luckless wight's reluctant frame
  Was given to the cheerful flame.

  While it was turning nice and brown,
  All unconcerned John met the frown
  Of that austere and righteous town.

  "How sad," his neighbors said, "that he
  So scornful of the law should be--
  An anar c, h, i, s, t."

  (That is the way that they preferred
  To utter the abhorrent word,
  So strong the aversion that it stirred.)

  "Resolved," they said, continuing,
  "That Badman John must cease this thing
  Of having his unlawful fling.

  "Now, by these sacred relics"--here
  Each man had out a souvenir
  Got at a lynching yesteryear--

  "By these we swear he shall forsake
  His ways, nor cause our hearts to ache
  By sins of rope and torch and stake.

  "We'll tie his red right hand until
  He'll have small freedom to fulfil
  The mandates of his lawless will."

  So, in convention then and there,
  They named him Sheriff.  The affair
  Was opened, it is said, with prayer.

J. Milton Sloluck


SIREN, n.  One of several musical prodigies famous for a vain attempt
to dissuade Odysseus from a life on the ocean wave.  Figuratively, any
lady of splendid promise, dissembled purpose and disappointing
performance.

SLANG, n.  The grunt of the human hog (_Pignoramus intolerabilis_)
with an audible memory.  The speech of one who utters with his tongue
what he thinks with his ear, and feels the pride of a creator in
accomplishing the feat of a parrot.  A means (under Providence) of
setting up as a wit without a capital of sense.

SMITHAREEN, n.  A fragment, a decomponent part, a remain.  The word is
used variously, but in the following verse on a noted female reformer
who opposed bicycle-riding by women because it "led them to the devil"
it is seen at its best:

  The wheels go round without a sound--
      The maidens hold high revel;
  In sinful mood, insanely gay,
  True spinsters spin adown the way
      From duty to the devil!
  They laugh, they sing, and--ting-a-ling!
      Their bells go all the morning;
  Their lanterns bright bestar the night
      Pedestrians a-warning.
  With lifted hands Miss Charlotte stands,
      Good-Lording and O-mying,
  Her rheumatism forgotten quite,
      Her fat with anger frying.
  She blocks the path that leads to wrath,
      Jack Satan's power defying.
  The wheels go round without a sound
      The lights burn red and blue and green.
  What's this that's found upon the ground?
      Poor Charlotte Smith's a smithareen!

John William Yope


SOPHISTRY, n.  The controversial method of an opponent, distinguished
from one's own by superior insincerity and fooling.  This method is
that of the later Sophists, a Grecian sect of philosophers who began
by teaching wisdom, prudence, science, art and, in brief, whatever men
ought to know, but lost themselves in a maze of quibbles and a fog of
words.

  His bad opponent's "facts" he sweeps away,
  And drags his sophistry to light of day;
  Then swears they're pushed to madness who resort
  To falsehood of so desperate a sort.
  Not so; like sods upon a dead man's breast,
  He lies most lightly who the least is pressed.

Polydore Smith


SORCERY, n.  The ancient prototype and forerunner of political
influence.  It was, however, deemed less respectable and sometimes was
punished by torture and death.  Augustine Nicholas relates that a poor
peasant who had been accused of sorcery was put to the torture to
compel a confession.  After enduring a few gentle agonies the
suffering simpleton admitted his guilt, but naively asked his
tormentors if it were not possible to be a sorcerer without knowing
it.

SOUL, n.  A spiritual entity concerning which there hath been brave
disputation.  Plato held that those souls which in a previous state of
existence (antedating Athens) had obtained the clearest glimpses of
eternal truth entered into the bodies of persons who became
philosophers.  Plato himself was a philosopher.  The souls that had
least contemplated divine truth animated the bodies of usurpers and
despots.  Dionysius I, who had threatened to decapitate the
broad-browed philosopher, was a usurper and a despot.  Plato, doubtless,
was not the first to construct a system of philosophy that could be
quoted against his enemies; certainly he was not the last.

"Concerning the nature of the soul," saith the renowned author of
_Diversiones Sanctorum_, "there hath been hardly more argument than
that of its place in the body.  Mine own belief is that the soul hath
her seat in the abdomen--in which faith we may discern and interpret
a truth hitherto unintelligible, namely that the glutton is of all men
most devout.  He is said in the Scripture to 'make a god of his belly'
--why, then, should he not be pious, having ever his Deity with him
to freshen his faith?  Who so well as he can know the might and
majesty that he shrines?  Truly and soberly, the soul and the stomach
are one Divine Entity; and such was the belief of Promasius, who
nevertheless erred in denying it immortality.  He had observed that
its visible and material substance failed and decayed with the rest of
the body after death, but of its immaterial essence he knew nothing.
This is what we call the Appetite, and it survives the wreck and reek
of mortality, to be rewarded or punished in another world, according
to what it hath demanded in the flesh.  The Appetite whose coarse
clamoring was for the unwholesome viands of the general market and the
public refectory shall be cast into eternal famine, whilst that which
firmly through civilly insisted on ortolans, caviare, terrapin,
anchovies, _pates de foie gras_ and all such Christian comestibles
shall flesh its spiritual tooth in the souls of them forever and ever,
and wreak its divine thirst upon the immortal parts of the rarest and
richest wines ever quaffed here below.  Such is my religious faith,
though I grieve to confess that neither His Holiness the Pope nor His
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom I equally and profoundly
revere) will assent to its dissemination."

SPOOKER, n.  A writer whose imagination concerns itself with
supernatural phenomena, especially in the doings of spooks.  One of
the most illustrious spookers of our time is Mr. William D. Howells,
who introduces a well-credentialed reader to as respectable and
mannerly a company of spooks as one could wish to meet.  To the terror
that invests the chairman of a district school board, the Howells
ghost adds something of the mystery enveloping a farmer from another
township.

STORY, n.  A narrative, commonly untrue.  The truth of the stories
here following has, however, not been successfully impeached.

One evening Mr. Rudolph Block, of New York, found himself seated
at dinner alongside Mr. Percival Pollard, the distinguished critic.

"Mr. Pollard," said he, "my book, _The Biography of a Dead Cow_,
is published anonymously, but you can hardly be ignorant of its
authorship.  Yet in reviewing it you speak of it as the work of the
Idiot of the Century.  Do you think that fair criticism?"

"I am very sorry, sir," replied the critic, amiably, "but it did
not occur to me that you really might not wish the public to know who
wrote it."

Mr. W.C. Morrow, who used to live in San Jose, California, was
addicted to writing ghost stories which made the reader feel as if a
stream of lizards, fresh from the ice, were streaking it up his back
and hiding in his hair.  San Jose was at that time believed to be
haunted by the visible spirit of a noted bandit named Vasquez, who had
been hanged there.  The town was not very well lighted, and it is
putting it mildly to say that San Jose was reluctant to be out o'
nights.  One particularly dark night two gentlemen were abroad in the
loneliest spot within the city limits, talking loudly to keep up their
courage, when they came upon Mr. J.J. Owen, a well-known journalist.

"Why, Owen," said one, "what brings you here on such a night as
this?  You told me that this is one of Vasquez' favorite haunts!  And
you are a believer.  Aren't you afraid to be out?"

"My dear fellow," the journalist replied with a drear autumnal
cadence in his speech, like the moan of a leaf-laden wind, "I am
afraid to be in.  I have one of Will Morrow's stories in my pocket and
I don't dare to go where there is light enough to read it."

Rear-Admiral Schley and Representative Charles F. Joy were
standing near the Peace Monument, in Washington, discussing the
question, Is success a failure?  Mr. Joy suddenly broke off in the
middle of an eloquent sentence, exclaiming:  "Hello!  I've heard that
band before.  Santlemann's, I think."

"I don't hear any band," said Schley.

"Come to think, I don't either," said Joy; "but I see General
Miles coming down the avenue, and that pageant always affects me in
the same way as a brass band.  One has to scrutinize one's impressions
pretty closely, or one will mistake their origin."

While the Admiral was digesting this hasty meal of philosophy
General Miles passed in review, a spectacle of impressive dignity.
When the tail of the seeming procession had passed and the two
observers had recovered from the transient blindness caused by its
effulgence--

"He seems to be enjoying himself," said the Admiral.

"There is nothing," assented Joy, thoughtfully, "that he enjoys
one-half so well."


The illustrious statesman, Champ Clark, once lived about a mile
from the village of Jebigue, in Missouri.  One day he rode into town
on a favorite mule, and, hitching the beast on the sunny side of a
street, in front of a saloon, he went inside in his character of
teetotaler, to apprise the barkeeper that wine is a mocker.  It was a
dreadfully hot day.  Pretty soon a neighbor came in and seeing Clark,
said:

"Champ, it is not right to leave that mule out there in the sun.
He'll roast, sure!--he was smoking as I passed him."

"O, he's all right," said Clark, lightly; "he's an inveterate
smoker."

The neighbor took a lemonade, but shook his head and repeated that
it was not right.

He was a conspirator.  There had been a fire the night before:  a
stable just around the corner had burned and a number of horses had
put on their immortality, among them a young colt, which was roasted
to a rich nut-brown.  Some of the boys had turned Mr. Clark's mule
loose and substituted the mortal part of the colt.  Presently another
man entered the saloon.

"For mercy's sake!" he said, taking it with sugar, "do remove that
mule, barkeeper:  it smells."

"Yes," interposed Clark, "that animal has the best nose in
Missouri.  But if he doesn't mind, you shouldn't."

In the course of human events Mr. Clark went out, and there,
apparently, lay the incinerated and shrunken remains of his charger.
The boys did not have any fun out of Mr. Clarke, who looked at the
body and, with the non-committal expression to which he owes so much
of his political preferment, went away.  But walking home late that
night he saw his mule standing silent and solemn by the wayside in the
misty moonlight.  Mentioning the name of Helen Blazes with uncommon
emphasis, Mr. Clark took the back track as hard as ever he could hook
it, and passed the night in town.

General H.H. Wotherspoon, president of the Army War College, has a
pet rib-nosed baboon, an animal of uncommon intelligence but
imperfectly beautiful.  Returning to his apartment one evening, the
General was surprised and pained to find Adam (for so the creature is
named, the general being a Darwinian) sitting up for him and wearing
his master's best uniform coat, epaulettes and all.

"You confounded remote ancestor!" thundered the great strategist,
"what do you mean by being out of bed after naps?--and with my coat
on!"

Adam rose and with a reproachful look got down on all fours in the
manner of his kind and, scuffling across the room to a table, returned
with a visiting-card:  General Barry had called and, judging by an
empty champagne bottle and several cigar-stumps, had been hospitably
entertained while waiting.  The general apologized to his faithful
progenitor and retired.  The next day he met General Barry, who said:

"Spoon, old man, when leaving you last evening I forgot to ask you
about those excellent cigars.  Where did you get them?"

General Wotherspoon did not deign to reply, but walked away.

"Pardon me, please," said Barry, moving after him; "I was joking
of course.  Why, I knew it was not you before I had been in the room
fifteen minutes."

SUCCESS, n.  The one unpardonable sin against one's fellows.  In
literature, and particularly in poetry, the elements of success are
exceedingly simple, and are admirably set forth in the following lines
by the reverend Father Gassalasca Jape, entitled, for some mysterious
reason, "John A. Joyce."

  The bard who would prosper must carry a book,
      Do his thinking in prose and wear
  A crimson cravat, a far-away look
      And a head of hexameter hair.
  Be thin in your thought and your body'll be fat;
  If you wear your hair long you needn't your hat.

SUFFRAGE, n.  Expression of opinion by means of a ballot.  The right
of suffrage (which is held to be both a privilege and a duty) means,
as commonly interpreted, the right to vote for the man of another
man's choice, and is highly prized.  Refusal to do so has the bad name
of "incivism."  The incivilian, however, cannot be properly arraigned
for his crime, for there is no legitimate accuser.  If the accuser is
himself guilty he has no standing in the court of opinion; if not, he
profits by the crime, for A's abstention from voting gives greater
weight to the vote of B.  By female suffrage is meant the right of a
woman to vote as some man tells her to.  It is based on female
responsibility, which is somewhat limited.  The woman most eager to
jump out of her petticoat to assert her rights is first to jump back
into it when threatened with a switching for misusing them.

SYCOPHANT, n.  One who approaches Greatness on his belly so that he
may not be commanded to turn and be kicked.  He is sometimes an
editor.

  As the lean leech, its victim found, is pleased
  To fix itself upon a part diseased
  Till, its black hide distended with bad blood,
  It drops to die of surfeit in the mud,
  So the base sycophant with joy descries
  His neighbor's weak spot and his mouth applies,
  Gorges and prospers like the leech, although,
  Unlike that reptile, he will not let go.
  Gelasma, if it paid you to devote
  Your talent to the service of a goat,
  Showing by forceful logic that its beard
  Is more than Aaron's fit to be revered;
  If to the task of honoring its smell
  Profit had prompted you, and love as well,
  The world would benefit at last by you
  And wealthy malefactors weep anew--
  Your favor for a moment's space denied
  And to the nobler object turned aside.
  Is't not enough that thrifty millionaires
  Who loot in freight and spoliate in fares,
  Or, cursed with consciences that bid them fly
  To safer villainies of darker dye,
  Forswearing robbery and fain, instead,
  To steal (they call it "cornering") our bread
  May see you groveling their boots to lick
  And begging for the favor of a kick?
  Still must you follow to the bitter end
  Your sycophantic disposition's trend,
  And in your eagerness to please the rich
  Hunt hungry sinners to their final ditch?
  In Morgan's praise you smite the sounding wire,
  And sing hosannas to great Havemeyher!
  What's Satan done that him you should eschew?
  He too is reeking rich--deducting _you_.

SYLLOGISM, n.  A logical formula consisting of a major and a minor
assumption and an inconsequent.  (See LOGIC.)

SYLPH, n.  An immaterial but visible being that inhabited the air when
the air was an element and before it was fatally polluted with factory
smoke, sewer gas and similar products of civilization.  Sylphs were
allied to gnomes, nymphs and salamanders, which dwelt, respectively,
in earth, water and fire, all now insalubrious.  Sylphs, like fowls of
the air, were male and female, to no purpose, apparently, for if they
had progeny they must have nested in accessible places, none of the
chicks having ever been seen.

SYMBOL, n.  Something that is supposed to typify or stand for
something else.  Many symbols are mere "survivals"--things which
having no longer any utility continue to exist because we have
inherited the tendency to make them; as funereal urns carved on
memorial monuments.  They were once real urns holding the ashes of the
dead.  We cannot stop making them, but we can give them a name that
conceals our helplessness.

SYMBOLIC, adj.  Pertaining to symbols and the use and interpretation
of symbols.

  They say 'tis conscience feels compunction;
  I hold that that's the stomach's function,
  For of the sinner I have noted
  That when he's sinned he's somewhat bloated,
  Or ill some other ghastly fashion
  Within that bowel of compassion.
  True, I believe the only sinner
  Is he that eats a shabby dinner.
  You know how Adam with good reason,
  For eating apples out of season,
  Was "cursed."  But that is all symbolic:
  The truth is, Adam had the colic.

G.J.





T



T, the twentieth letter of the English alphabet, was by the Greeks
absurdly called _tau_.  In the alphabet whence ours comes it had the
form of the rude corkscrew of the period, and when it stood alone
(which was more than the Phoenicians could always do) signified
_Tallegal_, translated by the learned Dr. Brownrigg, "tanglefoot."

TABLE D'HOTE, n.  A caterer's thrifty concession to the universal
passion for irresponsibility.

  Old Paunchinello, freshly wed,
      Took Madam P. to table,
  And there deliriously fed
      As fast as he was able.

  "I dote upon good grub," he cried,
      Intent upon its throatage.
  "Ah, yes," said the neglected bride,
      "You're in your _table d'hotage_."

Associated Poets


TAIL, n.  The part of an animal's spine that has transcended its
natural limitations to set up an independent existence in a world of
its own.  Excepting in its foetal state, Man is without a tail, a
privation of which he attests an hereditary and uneasy consciousness
by the coat-skirt of the male and the train of the female, and by a
marked tendency to ornament that part of his attire where the tail
should be, and indubitably once was.  This tendency is most observable
in the female of the species, in whom the ancestral sense is strong
and persistent.  The tailed men described by Lord Monboddo are now
generally regarded as a product of an imagination unusually
susceptible to influences generated in the golden age of our pithecan
past.

TAKE, v.t.  To acquire, frequently by force but preferably by stealth.

TALK, v.t.  To commit an indiscretion without temptation, from an
impulse without purpose.

TARIFF, n.  A scale of taxes on imports, designed to protect the
domestic producer against the greed of his consumer.

  The Enemy of Human Souls
  Sat grieving at the cost of coals;
  For Hell had been annexed of late,
  And was a sovereign Southern State.

  "It were no more than right," said he,
  "That I should get my fuel free.
  The duty, neither just nor wise,
  Compels me to economize--
  Whereby my broilers, every one,
  Are execrably underdone.
  What would they have?--although I yearn
  To do them nicely to a turn,
  I can't afford an honest heat.
  This tariff makes even devils cheat!
  I'm ruined, and my humble trade
  All rascals may at will invade:
  Beneath my nose the public press
  Outdoes me in sulphureousness;
  The bar ingeniously applies
  To my undoing my own lies;
  My medicines the doctors use
  (Albeit vainly) to refuse
  To me my fair and rightful prey
  And keep their own in shape to pay;
  The preachers by example teach
  What, scorning to perform, I teach;
  And statesmen, aping me, all make
  More promises than they can break.
  Against such competition I
  Lift up a disregarded cry.
  Since all ignore my just complaint,
  By Hokey-Pokey!  I'll turn saint!"
  Now, the Republicans, who all
  Are saints, began at once to bawl
  Against _his_ competition; so
  There was a devil of a go!
  They locked horns with him, tete-a-tete
  In acrimonious debate,
  Till Democrats, forlorn and lone,
  Had hopes of coming by their own.
  That evil to avert, in haste
  The two belligerents embraced;
  But since 'twere wicked to relax
  A tittle of the Sacred Tax,
  'Twas finally agreed to grant
  The bold Insurgent-protestant
  A bounty on each soul that fell
  Into his ineffectual Hell.

Edam Smith


TECHNICALITY, n.  In an English court a man named Home was tried for
slander in having accused his neighbor of murder.  His exact words
were:  "Sir Thomas Holt hath taken a cleaver and stricken his cook
upon the head, so that one side of the head fell upon one shoulder and
the other side upon the other shoulder."  The defendant was acquitted
by instruction of the court, the learned judges holding that the words
did not charge murder, for they did not affirm the death of the cook,
that being only an inference.

TEDIUM, n.  Ennui, the state or condition of one that is bored.  Many
fanciful derivations of the word have been affirmed, but so high an
authority as Father Jape says that it comes from a very obvious
source--the first words of the ancient Latin hymn _Te Deum
Laudamus_.  In this apparently natural derivation there is something
that saddens.

TEETOTALER, n.  One who abstains from strong drink, sometimes totally,
sometimes tolerably totally.

TELEPHONE, n.  An invention of the devil which abrogates some of the
advantages of making a disagreeable person keep his distance.

TELESCOPE, n.  A device having a relation to the eye similar to that
of the telephone to the ear, enabling distant objects to plague us
with a multitude of needless details.  Luckily it is unprovided with a
bell summoning us to the sacrifice.

TENACITY, n.  A certain quality of the human hand in its relation to
the coin of the realm.  It attains its highest development in the hand
of authority and is considered a serviceable equipment for a career in
politics.  The following illustrative lines were written of a
Californian gentleman in high political preferment, who has passed to
his accounting:

  Of such tenacity his grip
  That nothing from his hand can slip.
  Well-buttered eels you may o'erwhelm
  In tubs of liquid slippery-elm
  In vain--from his detaining pinch
  They cannot struggle half an inch!
  'Tis lucky that he so is planned
  That breath he draws not with his hand,
  For if he did, so great his greed
  He'd draw his last with eager speed.
  Nay, that were well, you say.  Not so
  He'd draw but never let it go!

THEOSOPHY, n.  An ancient faith having all the certitude of religion
and all the mystery of science.  The modern Theosophist holds, with
the Buddhists, that we live an incalculable number of times on this
earth, in as many several bodies, because one life is not long enough
for our complete spiritual development; that is, a single lifetime
does not suffice for us to become as wise and good as we choose to
wish to become.  To be absolutely wise and good--that is perfection;
and the Theosophist is so keen-sighted as to have observed that
everything desirous of improvement eventually attains perfection.
Less competent observers are disposed to except cats, which seem
neither wiser nor better than they were last year.  The greatest and
fattest of recent Theosophists was the late Madame Blavatsky, who had
no cat.

TIGHTS, n.  An habiliment of the stage designed to reinforce the
general acclamation of the press agent with a particular publicity.
Public attention was once somewhat diverted from this garment to Miss
Lillian Russell's refusal to wear it, and many were the conjectures as
to her motive, the guess of Miss Pauline Hall showing a high order of
ingenuity and sustained reflection.  It was Miss Hall's belief that
nature had not endowed Miss Russell with beautiful legs.  This theory
was impossible of acceptance by the male understanding, but the
conception of a faulty female leg was of so prodigious originality as
to rank among the most brilliant feats of philosophical speculation!
It is strange that in all the controversy regarding Miss Russell's
aversion to tights no one seems to have thought to ascribe it to what
was known among the ancients as "modesty."  The nature of that
sentiment is now imperfectly understood, and possibly incapable of
exposition with the vocabulary that remains to us.  The study of lost
arts has, however, been recently revived and some of the arts
themselves recovered.  This is an epoch of _renaissances_, and there
is ground for hope that the primitive "blush" may be dragged from its
hiding-place amongst the tombs of antiquity and hissed on to the
stage.

TOMB, n.  The House of Indifference.  Tombs are now by common consent
invested with a certain sanctity, but when they have been long
tenanted it is considered no sin to break them open and rifle them,
the famous Egyptologist, Dr. Huggyns, explaining that a tomb may be
innocently "glened" as soon as its occupant is done "smellynge," the
soul being then all exhaled.  This reasonable view is now generally
accepted by archaeologists, whereby the noble science of Curiosity has
been greatly dignified.

TOPE, v.  To tipple, booze, swill, soak, guzzle, lush, bib, or swig.
In the individual, toping is regarded with disesteem, but toping
nations are in the forefront of civilization and power.  When pitted
against the hard-drinking Christians the abstemious Mahometans go down
like grass before the scythe.  In India one hundred thousand
beef-eating and brandy-and-soda guzzling Britons hold in subjection two
hundred and fifty million vegetarian abstainers of the same Aryan race.
With what an easy grace the whisky-loving American pushed the temperate
Spaniard out of his possessions!  From the time when the Berserkers
ravaged all the coasts of western Europe and lay drunk in every
conquered port it has been the same way:  everywhere the nations that
drink too much are observed to fight rather well and not too
righteously.  Wherefore the estimable old ladies who abolished the
canteen from the American army may justly boast of having materially
augmented the nation's military power.

TORTOISE, n.  A creature thoughtfully created to supply occasion for
the following lines by the illustrious Ambat Delaso:


TO MY PET TORTOISE


  My friend, you are not graceful--not at all;
  Your gait's between a stagger and a sprawl.

  Nor are you beautiful:  your head's a snake's
  To look at, and I do not doubt it aches.

  As to your feet, they'd make an angel weep.
  'Tis true you take them in whene'er you sleep.

  No, you're not pretty, but you have, I own,
  A certain firmness--mostly you're [sic] backbone.

  Firmness and strength (you have a giant's thews)
  Are virtues that the great know how to use--

  I wish that they did not; yet, on the whole,
  You lack--excuse my mentioning it--Soul.

  So, to be candid, unreserved and true,
  I'd rather you were I than I were you.

  Perhaps, however, in a time to be,
  When Man's extinct, a better world may see

  Your progeny in power and control,
  Due to the genesis and growth of Soul.

  So I salute you as a reptile grand
  Predestined to regenerate the land.

  Father of Possibilities, O deign
  To accept the homage of a dying reign!

  In the far region of the unforeknown
  I dream a tortoise upon every throne.

  I see an Emperor his head withdraw
  Into his carapace for fear of Law;

  A King who carries something else than fat,
  Howe'er acceptably he carries that;

  A President not strenuously bent
  On punishment of audible dissent--

  Who never shot (it were a vain attack)
  An armed or unarmed tortoise in the back;

  Subject and citizens that feel no need
  To make the March of Mind a wild stampede;

  All progress slow, contemplative, sedate,
  And "Take your time" the word, in Church and State.

  O Tortoise, 'tis a happy, happy dream,
  My glorious testudinous regime!

  I wish in Eden you'd brought this about
  By slouching in and chasing Adam out.

TREE, n.  A tall vegetable intended by nature to serve as a penal
apparatus, though through a miscarriage of justice most trees bear
only a negligible fruit, or none at all.  When naturally fruited, the
tree is a beneficient agency of civilization and an important factor
in public morals.  In the stern West and the sensitive South its fruit
(white and black respectively) though not eaten, is agreeable to the
public taste and, though not exported, profitable to the general
welfare.  That the legitimate relation of the tree to justice was no
discovery of Judge Lynch (who, indeed, conceded it no primacy over the
lamp-post and the bridge-girder) is made plain by the following
passage from Morryster, who antedated him by two centuries:

      While in yt londe I was carried to see ye Ghogo tree, whereof
  I had hearde moch talk; but sayynge yt I saw naught remarkabyll in
  it, ye hed manne of ye villayge where it grewe made answer as
  followeth:
      "Ye tree is not nowe in fruite, but in his seasonne you shall
  see dependynge fr. his braunches all soch as have affroynted ye
  King his Majesty."
      And I was furder tolde yt ye worde "Ghogo" sygnifyeth in yr
  tong ye same as "rapscal" in our owne.

_Trauvells in ye Easte_


TRIAL, n.  A formal inquiry designed to prove and put upon record the
blameless characters of judges, advocates and jurors.  In order to
effect this purpose it is necessary to supply a contrast in the person
of one who is called the defendant, the prisoner, or the accused.  If
the contrast is made sufficiently clear this person is made to undergo
such an affliction as will give the virtuous gentlemen a comfortable
sense of their immunity, added to that of their worth.  In our day the
accused is usually a human being, or a socialist, but in mediaeval
times, animals, fishes, reptiles and insects were brought to trial.  A
beast that had taken human life, or practiced sorcery, was duly
arrested, tried and, if condemned, put to death by the public
executioner.  Insects ravaging grain fields, orchards or vineyards
were cited to appeal by counsel before a civil tribunal, and after
testimony, argument and condemnation, if they continued _in
contumaciam_ the matter was taken to a high ecclesiastical court,
where they were solemnly excommunicated and anathematized.  In a
street of Toledo, some pigs that had wickedly run between the
viceroy's legs, upsetting him, were arrested on a warrant, tried and
punished.  In Naples and ass was condemned to be burned at the stake,
but the sentence appears not to have been executed.  D'Addosio relates
from the court records many trials of pigs, bulls, horses, cocks,
dogs, goats, etc., greatly, it is believed, to the betterment of their
conduct and morals.  In 1451 a suit was brought against the leeches
infesting some ponds about Berne, and the Bishop of Lausanne,
instructed by the faculty of Heidelberg University, directed that some
of "the aquatic worms" be brought before the local magistracy.  This
was done and the leeches, both present and absent, were ordered to
leave the places that they had infested within three days on pain of
incurring "the malediction of God."  In the voluminous records of this
_cause celebre_ nothing is found to show whether the offenders braved
the punishment, or departed forthwith out of that inhospitable
jurisdiction.

TRICHINOSIS, n.  The pig's reply to proponents of porcophagy.

Moses Mendlessohn having fallen ill sent for a Christian
physician, who at once diagnosed the philosopher's disorder as
trichinosis, but tactfully gave it another name.  "You need and
immediate change of diet," he said; "you must eat six ounces of pork
every other day."

"Pork?" shrieked the patient--"pork?  Nothing shall induce me to
touch it!"

"Do you mean that?" the doctor gravely asked.

"I swear it!"

"Good!--then I will undertake to cure you."

TRINITY, n.  In the multiplex theism of certain Christian churches,
three entirely distinct deities consistent with only one.  Subordinate
deities of the polytheistic faith, such as devils and angels, are not
dowered with the power of combination, and must urge individually
their claims to adoration and propitiation.  The Trinity is one of the
most sublime mysteries of our holy religion.  In rejecting it because
it is incomprehensible, Unitarians betray their inadequate sense of
theological fundamentals.  In religion we believe only what we do not
understand, except in the instance of an intelligible doctrine that
contradicts an incomprehensible one.  In that case we believe the
former as a part of the latter.

TROGLODYTE, n.  Specifically, a cave-dweller of the paleolithic
period, after the Tree and before the Flat.  A famous community of
troglodytes dwelt with David in the Cave of Adullam.  The colony
consisted of "every one that was in distress, and every one that was
in debt, and every one that was discontented"--in brief, all the
Socialists of Judah.

TRUCE, n.  Friendship.

TRUTH, n.  An ingenious compound of desirability and appearance.
Discovery of truth is the sole purpose of philosophy, which is the
most ancient occupation of the human mind and has a fair prospect of
existing with increasing activity to the end of time.

TRUTHFUL, adj.  Dumb and illiterate.

TRUST, n.  In American politics, a large corporation composed in
greater part of thrifty working men, widows of small means, orphans in
the care of guardians and the courts, with many similar malefactors
and public enemies.

TURKEY, n.  A large bird whose flesh when eaten on certain religious
anniversaries has the peculiar property of attesting piety and
gratitude.  Incidentally, it is pretty good eating.

TWICE, adv.  Once too often.

TYPE, n.  Pestilent bits of metal suspected of destroying
civilization and enlightenment, despite their obvious agency in this
incomparable dictionary.

TZETZE (or TSETSE) FLY, n.  An African insect (_Glossina morsitans_)
whose bite is commonly regarded as nature's most efficacious remedy
for insomnia, though some patients prefer that of the American
novelist (_Mendax interminabilis_).




U



UBIQUITY, n.  The gift or power of being in all places at one time,
but not in all places at all times, which is omnipresence, an
attribute of God and the luminiferous ether only.  This important
distinction between ubiquity and omnipresence was not clear to the
mediaeval Church and there was much bloodshed about it.  Certain
Lutherans, who affirmed the presence everywhere of Christ's body were
known as Ubiquitarians.  For this error they were doubtless damned,
for Christ's body is present only in the eucharist, though that
sacrament may be performed in more than one place simultaneously.  In
recent times ubiquity has not always been understood--not even by
Sir Boyle Roche, for example, who held that a man cannot be in two
places at once unless he is a bird.

UGLINESS, n.  A gift of the gods to certain women, entailing virtue
without humility.

ULTIMATUM, n.  In diplomacy, a last demand before resorting to
concessions.

Having received an ultimatum from Austria, the Turkish Ministry
met to consider it.

"O servant of the Prophet," said the Sheik of the Imperial Chibouk
to the Mamoosh of the Invincible Army, "how many unconquerable
soldiers have we in arms?"

"Upholder of the Faith," that dignitary replied after examining
his memoranda, "they are in numbers as the leaves of the forest!"

"And how many impenetrable battleships strike terror to the hearts
of all Christian swine?" he asked the Imaum of the Ever Victorious
Navy.

"Uncle of the Full Moon," was the reply, "deign to know that they
are as the waves of the ocean, the sands of the desert and the stars
of Heaven!"

For eight hours the broad brow of the Sheik of the Imperial
Chibouk was corrugated with evidences of deep thought:  he was
calculating the chances of war.  Then, "Sons of angels," he said, "the
die is cast!  I shall suggest to the Ulema of the Imperial Ear that he
advise inaction.  In the name of Allah, the council is adjourned."

UN-AMERICAN, adj.  Wicked, intolerable, heathenish.

UNCTION, n.  An oiling, or greasing.  The rite of extreme unction
consists in touching with oil consecrated by a bishop several parts of
the body of one engaged in dying.  Marbury relates that after the rite
had been administered to a certain wicked English nobleman it was
discovered that the oil had not been properly consecrated and no other
could be obtained.  When informed of this the sick man said in anger:
"Then I'll be damned if I die!"

"My son," said the priest, "this is what we fear."

UNDERSTANDING, n.  A cerebral secretion that enables one having it to
know a house from a horse by the roof on the house.  Its nature and
laws have been exhaustively expounded by Locke, who rode a house, and
Kant, who lived in a horse.

  His understanding was so keen
  That all things which he'd felt, heard, seen,
  He could interpret without fail
  If he was in or out of jail.
  He wrote at Inspiration's call
  Deep disquisitions on them all,
  Then, pent at last in an asylum,
  Performed the service to compile 'em.
  So great a writer, all men swore,
  They never had not read before.

Jorrock Wormley


UNITARIAN, n.  One who denies the divinity of a Trinitarian.

UNIVERSALIST, n.  One who forgoes the advantage of a Hell for persons
of another faith.

URBANITY, n.  The kind of civility that urban observers ascribe to
dwellers in all cities but New York.  Its commonest expression is
heard in the words, "I beg your pardon," and it is not consistent with
disregard of the rights of others.

  The owner of a powder mill
  Was musing on a distant hill--
      Something his mind foreboded--
  When from the cloudless sky there fell
  A deviled human kidney!  Well,
      The man's mill had exploded.
  His hat he lifted from his head;
  "I beg your pardon, sir," he said;
      "I didn't know 'twas loaded."

Swatkin


USAGE, n.  The First Person of the literary Trinity, the Second and
Third being Custom and Conventionality.  Imbued with a decent
reverence for this Holy Triad an industrious writer may hope to
produce books that will live as long as the fashion.

UXORIOUSNESS, n.  A perverted affection that has strayed to one's own
wife.




V



VALOR, n.  A soldierly compound of vanity, duty and the gambler's
hope.

"Why have you halted?" roared the commander of a division and
Chickamauga, who had ordered a charge; "move forward, sir, at once."

"General," said the commander of the delinquent brigade, "I am
persuaded that any further display of valor by my troops will bring
them into collision with the enemy."

VANITY, n.  The tribute of a fool to the worth of the nearest ass.

  They say that hens do cackle loudest when
      There's nothing vital in the eggs they've laid;
      And there are hens, professing to have made
  A study of mankind, who say that men
  Whose business 'tis to drive the tongue or pen
      Make the most clamorous fanfaronade
      O'er their most worthless work; and I'm afraid
  They're not entirely different from the hen.
  Lo! the drum-major in his coat of gold,
      His blazing breeches and high-towering cap--
  Imperiously pompous, grandly bold,
      Grim, resolute, an awe-inspiring chap!
  Who'd think this gorgeous creature's only virtue
  Is that in battle he will never hurt you?

Hannibal Hunsiker


VIRTUES, n.pl.  Certain abstentions.

VITUPERATION, n.  Saite, as understood by dunces and all such as
suffer from an impediment in their wit.

VOTE, n.  The instrument and symbol of a freeman's power to make a
fool of himself and a wreck of his country.




W



W (double U) has, of all the letters in our alphabet, the only
cumbrous name, the names of the others being monosyllabic.  This
advantage of the Roman alphabet over the Grecian is the more valued
after audibly spelling out some simple Greek word, like
_epixoriambikos_.  Still, it is now thought by the learned that other
agencies than the difference of the two alphabets may have been
concerned in the decline of "the glory that was Greece" and the rise
of "the grandeur that was Rome."  There can be no doubt, however, that
by simplifying the name of W (calling it "wow," for example) our
civilization could be, if not promoted, at least better endured.

WALL STREET, n.  A symbol for sin for every devil to rebuke.  That
Wall Street is a den of thieves is a belief that serves every
unsuccessful thief in place of a hope in Heaven.  Even the great and
good Andrew Carnegie has made his profession of faith in the matter.

  Carnegie the dauntless has uttered his call
  To battle:  "The brokers are parasites all!"
  Carnegie, Carnegie, you'll never prevail;
  Keep the wind of your slogan to belly your sail,
  Go back to your isle of perpetual brume,
  Silence your pibroch, doff tartan and plume:
  Ben Lomond is calling his son from the fray--
  Fly, fly from the region of Wall Street away!
  While still you're possessed of a single baubee
  (I wish it were pledged to endowment of me)
  'Twere wise to retreat from the wars of finance
  Lest its value decline ere your credit advance.
  For a man 'twixt a king of finance and the sea,
  Carnegie, Carnegie, your tongue is too free!

Anonymus Bink


WAR, n.  A by-product of the arts of peace.  The most menacing
political condition is a period of international amity.  The student
of history who has not been taught to expect the unexpected may justly
boast himself inaccessible to the light.  "In time of peace prepare
for war" has a deeper meaning than is commonly discerned; it means,
not merely that all things earthly have an end--that change is the
one immutable and eternal law--but that the soil of peace is thickly
sown with the seeds of war and singularly suited to their germination
and growth.  It was when Kubla Khan had decreed his "stately pleasure
dome"--when, that is to say, there were peace and fat feasting in
Xanadu--that he

                      heard from afar
  Ancestral voices prophesying war.

One of the greatest of poets, Coleridge was one of the wisest of
men, and it was not for nothing that he read us this parable.  Let us
have a little less of "hands across the sea," and a little more of
that elemental distrust that is the security of nations.  War loves to
come like a thief in the night; professions of eternal amity provide
the night.

WASHINGTONIAN, n.  A Potomac tribesman who exchanged the privilege of
governing himself for the advantage of good government.  In justice to
him it should be said that he did not want to.

  They took away his vote and gave instead
  The right, when he had earned, to _eat_ his bread.
  In vain--he clamors for his "boss," pour soul,
  To come again and part him from his roll.

Offenbach Stutz


WEAKNESSES, n.pl.  Certain primal powers of Tyrant Woman wherewith she
holds dominion over the male of her species, binding him to the
service of her will and paralyzing his rebellious energies.

WEATHER, n.  The climate of the hour.  A permanent topic of
conversation among persons whom it does not interest, but who have
inherited the tendency to chatter about it from naked arboreal
ancestors whom it keenly concerned.  The setting up official weather
bureaus and their maintenance in mendacity prove that even governments
are accessible to suasion by the rude forefathers of the jungle.

  Once I dipt into the future far as human eye could see,
  And I saw the Chief Forecaster, dead as any one can be--
  Dead and damned and shut in Hades as a liar from his birth,
  With a record of unreason seldom paralleled on earth.
  While I looked he reared him solemnly, that incandescent youth,
  From the coals that he'd preferred to the advantages of truth.
  He cast his eyes about him and above him; then he wrote
  On a slab of thin asbestos what I venture here to quote--
  For I read it in the rose-light of the everlasting glow:
  "Cloudy; variable winds, with local showers; cooler; snow."

Halcyon Jones


WEDDING, n.  A ceremony at which two persons undertake to become one,
one undertakes to become nothing, and nothing undertakes to become
supportable.

WEREWOLF, n.  A wolf that was once, or is sometimes, a man.  All
werewolves are of evil disposition, having assumed a bestial form to
gratify a beastial appetite, but some, transformed by sorcery, are as
humane and is consistent with an acquired taste for human flesh.

Some Bavarian peasants having caught a wolf one evening, tied it
to a post by the tail and went to bed.  The next morning nothing was
there!  Greatly perplexed, they consulted the local priest, who told
them that their captive was undoubtedly a werewolf and had resumed its
human for during the night.  "The next time that you take a wolf," the
good man said, "see that you chain it by the leg, and in the morning
you will find a Lutheran."

WHANGDEPOOTENAWAH, n.  In the Ojibwa tongue, disaster; an unexpected
affliction that strikes hard.

  Should you ask me whence this laughter,
  Whence this audible big-smiling,
  With its labial extension,
  With its maxillar distortion
  And its diaphragmic rhythmus
  Like the billowing of an ocean,
  Like the shaking of a carpet,
  I should answer, I should tell you:
  From the great deeps of the spirit,
  From the unplummeted abysmus
  Of the soul this laughter welleth
  As the fountain, the gug-guggle,
  Like the river from the canon [sic],
  To entoken and give warning
  That my present mood is sunny.
  Should you ask me further question--
  Why the great deeps of the spirit,
  Why the unplummeted abysmus
  Of the soule extrudes this laughter,
  This all audible big-smiling,
  I should answer, I should tell you
  With a white heart, tumpitumpy,
  With a true tongue, honest Injun:
  William Bryan, he has Caught It,
  Caught the Whangdepootenawah!

  Is't the sandhill crane, the shankank,
  Standing in the marsh, the kneedeep,
  Standing silent in the kneedeep
  With his wing-tips crossed behind him
  And his neck close-reefed before him,
  With his bill, his william, buried
  In the down upon his bosom,
  With his head retracted inly,
  While his shoulders overlook it?
  Does the sandhill crane, the shankank,
  Shiver grayly in the north wind,
  Wishing he had died when little,
  As the sparrow, the chipchip, does?
  No 'tis not the Shankank standing,
  Standing in the gray and dismal
  Marsh, the gray and dismal kneedeep.
  No, 'tis peerless William Bryan
  Realizing that he's Caught It,
  Caught the Whangdepootenawah!

WHEAT, n.  A cereal from which a tolerably good whisky can with some
difficulty be made, and which is used also for bread.  The French are
said to eat more bread _per capita_ of population than any other
people, which is natural, for only they know how to make the stuff
palatable.

WHITE, adj. and n.  Black.

WIDOW, n.  A pathetic figure that the Christian world has agreed to
take humorously, although Christ's tenderness towards widows was one
of the most marked features of his character.

WINE, n.  Fermented grape-juice known to the Women's Christian Union
as "liquor," sometimes as "rum."  Wine, madam, is God's next best gift
to man.

WIT, n.  The salt with which the American humorist spoils his
intellectual cookery by leaving it out.

WITCH, n.  (1)  Any ugly and repulsive old woman, in a wicked league
with the devil.  (2)  A beautiful and attractive young woman, in
wickedness a league beyond the devil.

WITTICISM, n.  A sharp and clever remark, usually quoted, and seldom
noted; what the Philistine is pleased to call a "joke."

WOMAN, n.

      An animal usually living in the vicinity of Man, and having a
  rudimentary susceptibility to domestication.  It is credited by
  many of the elder zoologists with a certain vestigial docility
  acquired in a former state of seclusion, but naturalists of the
  postsusananthony period, having no knowledge of the seclusion,
  deny the virtue and declare that such as creation's dawn beheld,
  it roareth now.  The species is the most widely distributed of all
  beasts of prey, infesting all habitable parts of the globe, from
  Greeland's spicy mountains to India's moral strand.  The popular
  name (wolfman) is incorrect, for the creature is of the cat kind.
  The woman is lithe and graceful in its movement, especially the
  American variety (_felis pugnans_), is omnivorous and can be
  taught not to talk.

Balthasar Pober


WORMS'-MEAT, n.  The finished product of which we are the raw
material.  The contents of the Taj Mahal, the Tombeau Napoleon and the
Granitarium.  Worms'-meat is usually outlasted by the structure that
houses it, but "this too must pass away."  Probably the silliest work
in which a human being can engage is construction of a tomb for
himself.  The solemn purpose cannot dignify, but only accentuates by
contrast the foreknown futility.

  Ambitious fool! so mad to be a show!
  How profitless the labor you bestow
      Upon a dwelling whose magnificence
  The tenant neither can admire nor know.

  Build deep, build high, build massive as you can,
  The wanton grass-roots will defeat the plan
      By shouldering asunder all the stones
  In what to you would be a moment's span.

  Time to the dead so all unreckoned flies
  That when your marble is all dust, arise,
      If wakened, stretch your limbs and yawn--
  You'll think you scarcely can have closed your eyes.

  What though of all man's works your tomb alone
  Should stand till Time himself be overthrown?
      Would it advantage you to dwell therein
  Forever as a stain upon a stone?

Joel Huck


WORSHIP, n.  Homo Creator's testimony to the sound construction and
fine finish of Deus Creatus.  A popular form of abjection, having an
element of pride.

WRATH, n.  Anger of a superior quality and degree, appropriate to
exalted characters and momentous occasions; as, "the wrath of God,"
"the day of wrath," etc.  Amongst the ancients the wrath of kings was
deemed sacred, for it could usually command the agency of some god for
its fit manifestation, as could also that of a priest.  The Greeks
before Troy were so harried by Apollo that they jumped out of the
frying-pan of the wrath of Cryses into the fire of the wrath of
Achilles, though Agamemnon, the sole offender, was neither fried nor
roasted.  A similar noted immunity was that of David when he incurred
the wrath of Yahveh by numbering his people, seventy thousand of whom
paid the penalty with their lives.  God is now Love, and a director of
the census performs his work without apprehension of disaster.




X



X in our alphabet being a needless letter has an added invincibility
to the attacks of the spelling reformers, and like them, will
doubtless last as long as the language.  X is the sacred symbol of ten
dollars, and in such words as Xmas, Xn, etc., stands for Christ, not,
as is popular supposed, because it represents a cross, but because the
corresponding letter in the Greek alphabet is the initial of his name
--_Xristos_.  If it represented a cross it would stand for St.
Andrew, who "testified" upon one of that shape.  In the algebra of
psychology x stands for Woman's mind.  Words beginning with X are
Grecian and will not be defined in this standard English dictionary.




Y



YANKEE, n.  In Europe, an American.  In the Northern States of our
Union, a New Englander.  In the Southern States the word is unknown.
(See DAMNYANK.)

YEAR, n.  A period of three hundred and sixty-five disappointments.

YESTERDAY, n.  The infancy of youth, the youth of manhood, the entire
past of age.

  But yesterday I should have thought me blest
      To stand high-pinnacled upon the peak
      Of middle life and look adown the bleak
  And unfamiliar foreslope to the West,
  Where solemn shadows all the land invest
      And stilly voices, half-remembered, speak
      Unfinished prophecy, and witch-fires freak
  The haunted twilight of the Dark of Rest.
  Yea, yesterday my soul was all aflame
      To stay the shadow on the dial's face
  At manhood's noonmark!  Now, in God His name
      I chide aloud the little interspace
  Disparting me from Certitude, and fain
  Would know the dream and vision ne'er again.

Baruch Arnegriff


It is said that in his last illness the poet Arnegriff was
attended at different times by seven doctors.

YOKE, n.  An implement, madam, to whose Latin name, _jugum_, we owe
one of the most illuminating words in our language--a word that
defines the matrimonial situation with precision, point and poignancy.
A thousand apologies for withholding it.

YOUTH, n.  The Period of Possibility, when Archimedes finds a fulcrum,
Cassandra has a following and seven cities compete for the honor of
endowing a living Homer.

      Youth is the true Saturnian Reign, the Golden Age on earth
  again, when figs are grown on thistles, and pigs betailed with
  whistles and, wearing silken bristles, live ever in clover, and
  cows fly over, delivering milk at every door, and Justice never
  is heard to snore, and every assassin is made a ghost and,
  howling, is cast into Baltimost!

Polydore Smith




Z



ZANY, n.  A popular character in old Italian plays, who imitated with
ludicrous incompetence the _buffone_, or clown, and was therefore the
ape of an ape; for the clown himself imitated the serious characters
of the play.  The zany was progenitor to the specialist in humor, as
we to-day have the unhappiness to know him.  In the zany we see an
example of creation; in the humorist, of transmission.  Another
excellent specimen of the modern zany is the curate, who apes the
rector, who apes the bishop, who apes the archbishop, who apes the
devil.

ZANZIBARI, n.  An inhabitant of the Sultanate of Zanzibar, off the
eastern coast of Africa.  The Zanzibaris, a warlike people, are best
known in this country through a threatening diplomatic incident that
occurred a few years ago.  The American consul at the capital occupied
a dwelling that faced the sea, with a sandy beach between.  Greatly to
the scandal of this official's family, and against repeated
remonstrances of the official himself, the people of the city
persisted in using the beach for bathing.  One day a woman came down
to the edge of the water and was stooping to remove her attire (a pair
of sandals) when the consul, incensed beyond restraint, fired a charge
of bird-shot into the most conspicuous part of her person.
Unfortunately for the existing _entente cordiale_ between two great
nations, she was the Sultana.

ZEAL, n.  A certain nervous disorder afflicting the young and
inexperienced.  A passion that goeth before a sprawl.

  When Zeal sought Gratitude for his reward
  He went away exclaiming:  "O my Lord!"
  "What do you want?" the Lord asked, bending down.
  "An ointment for my cracked and bleeding crown."

Jum Coople


ZENITH, n.  The point in the heavens directly overhead to a man
standing or a growing cabbage.  A man in bed or a cabbage in the pot
is not considered as having a zenith, though from this view of the
matter there was once a considerably dissent among the learned, some
holding that the posture of the body was immaterial.  These were
called Horizontalists, their opponents, Verticalists.  The
Horizontalist heresy was finally extinguished by Xanobus, the
philosopher-king of Abara, a zealous Verticalist.  Entering an
assembly of philosophers who were debating the matter, he cast a
severed human head at the feet of his opponents and asked them to
determine its zenith, explaining that its body was hanging by the
heels outside.  Observing that it was the head of their leader, the
Horizontalists hastened to profess themselves converted to whatever
opinion the Crown might be pleased to hold, and Horizontalism took its
place among _fides defuncti_.

ZEUS, n.  The chief of Grecian gods, adored by the Romans as Jupiter
and by the modern Americans as God, Gold, Mob and Dog.  Some explorers
who have touched upon the shores of America, and one who professes to
have penetrated a considerable distance to the interior, have thought
that these four names stand for as many distinct deities, but in his
monumental work on Surviving Faiths, Frumpp insists that the natives
are monotheists, each having no other god than himself, whom he
worships under many sacred names.

ZIGZAG, v.t.  To move forward uncertainly, from side to side, as one
carrying the white man's burden.  (From _zed_, _z_, and _jag_, an
Icelandic word of unknown meaning.)

  He zedjagged so uncomen wyde
  Thet non coude pas on eyder syde;
  So, to com saufly thruh, I been
  Constreynet for to doodge betwene.

Munwele


ZOOLOGY, n.  The science and history of the animal kingdom, including
its king, the House Fly (_Musca maledicta_).  The father of Zoology
was Aristotle, as is universally conceded, but the name of its mother
has not come down to us.  Two of the science's most illustrious
expounders were Buffon and Oliver Goldsmith, from both of whom we
learn (_L'Histoire generale des animaux_ and _A History of Animated
Nature_) that the domestic cow sheds its horn every two years.






SOME FICTION.

"One More Unfortunate."





It was midnight-a black, wet, midnight-in a great city by the sea.
The church clocks were booming the hour, in tones half-smothered by
the marching rain, when an officer of the watch saw a female figure
glide past him like a ghost in the gloom, and make directly toward a
wharf. The officer felt that some dreadful tragedy was about to be
enacted, and started in pursuit. Through the sleeping city sped
those two dark figures like shadows athwart a tomb. Out along the
deserted wharf to its farther end fled the mysterious fugitive, the
guardian of the night vainly endeavouring to overtake, and calling
to her to stay. Soon she stood upon the extreme end of the pier, in
the scourging rain which lashed her fragile figure and blinded her
eyes with other tears than those of grief. The night wind tossed her
tresses wildly in air, and beneath her bare feet the writhing
billows struggled blackly upward for their prey. At this fearful
moment the panting officer stumbled and fell! He was badly bruised;
he felt angry and misanthropic. Instead of rising to his feet, he
sat doggedly up and began chafing his abraded shin. The desperate
woman raised her white arms heavenward for the final plunge, and the
voice of the gale seemed like the dread roaring of the waters in her
ears, as down, down, she went--in imagination--to a black death among
the spectral piles. She backed a few paces to secure an impetus,
cast a last look upon the stony officer, with a wild shriek sprang
to the awful verge and came near losing her balance. Recovering
herself with an effort, she turned her face again to the officer,
who was clawing about for his missing club. Having secured it, he
started to leave.

In a cosy, vine-embowered cottage near the sounding sea, lives and
suffers a blighted female. Nothing being known of her past history,
she is treated by her neighbours with marked respect. She never
speaks of the past, but it has been remarked that whenever the
stalwart form of a certain policeman passes her door, her clean,
delicate face assumes an expression which can only be described as
frozen profanity. The Strong Young Man of Colusa.

Professor Cramer conducted a side-show in the wake of a horse-opera,
and the same sojourned at Colusa. Enters unto the side show a
powerful young man of the Colusa sort, and would see his money's
worth. Blandly and with conscious pride the Professor directs the
young man's attention to his fine collection of living snakes.
Lithely the blacksnake uncoils in his sight. Voluminously the
bloated boa convolves before him. All horrent the cobra exalts his
hooded head, and the spanning jaws fly open. Quivers and chitters
the tail of the cheerful rattlesnake; silently slips out the forked
tongue, and is as silently absorbed. The fangless adder warps up the
leg of the Professor, lays clammy coils about his neck, and pokes a
flattened head curiously into his open mouth. The young man of
Colusa is interested; his feelings transcend expression. Not a
syllable breathes he, but with a deep-drawn sigh he turns his broad
back upon the astonishing display, and goes thoughtfully forth into
his native wild. Half an hour later might have been seen that brawny
Colusan, emerging from an adjacent forest with a strong faggot.

Then this Colusa young man unto the appalled Professor thus: "Ther
ain't no good place yer in Kerloosy fur fittin' out serpence to be
subtler than all the beasts o' the field. Ther's enmity atween our
seed and ther seed, an' it shell brooze ther head." And with a
singleness of purpose and a rapt attention to detail that would have
done credit to a lean porker garnering the strewn kernels behind a
deaf old man who plants his field with corn, he started in upon that
reptilian host, and exterminated it with a careful thoroughness of
extermination.






The Glad New Year.





A poor brokendown drunkard returned to his dilapidated domicile
early on New Year's morn. The great bells of the churches were
jarring the creamy moonlight which lay above the soggy undercrust of
mud and snow. As he heard their joyous peals, announcing the birth
of a new year, his heart smote his old waistcoat like a remorseful
sledge-hammer.

"Why," soliloquized he, "should not those bells also proclaim the
advent of a new resolution? I have not made one for several weeks,
and it's about time. I'll swear off."

He did it, and at that moment a new light seemed to be shed upon his
pathway; his wife came out of the house with a tin lantern. He
rushed frantically to meet her. She saw the new and holy purpose in
his eye. She recognised it readily-she had seen it before. They
embraced and wept. Then stretching the wreck of what had once been a
manly form to its full length, he raised his eyes to heaven and one
hand as near there as he could get it, and there in the pale
moonlight, with only his wondering wife, and the angels, and a cow
or two, for witnesses, he swore he would from that moment abstain
from all intoxicating liquors until death should them part. Then
looking down and tenderly smiling into the eyes of his wife, he
said: "Is it not well, dear one?" With a face beaming all over with
a new happiness, she replied:

"Indeed it is, John-let's take a drink." And they took one, she with
sugar and he plain.

The spot is still pointed out to the traveller. The Late Dowling,
Senior.

My friend, Jacob Dowling, Esq., had been spending the day very
agreeably in his counting-room with some companions, and at night
retired to the domestic circle to ravel out some intricate accounts.
Seated at his parlour table he ordered his wife and children out of
the room and addressed himself to business. While clambering wearily
up a column of figures he felt upon his cheek the touch of something
that seemed to cling clammily to the skin like the caress of a naked
oyster. Thoughtfully setting down the result of his addition so far
as he had proceeded with it, he turned about and looked up.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said he, "but you have not the advantage
of my acquaintance."

"Why, Jake," replied the apparition-whom I have thought it useless
to describe--"don't you know me?"

"I confess that your countenance is familiar," returned my friend,
"but I cannot at this moment recall your name. I never forget a
face, but names I cannot remember."

"Jake!" rumbled the spectre with sepulchral dignity, a look of
displeasure crawling across his pallid features, "you're foolin'."

"I give you my word I am quite serious. Oblige me with your name,
and favour me with a statement of your business with me at this
hour."

The disembodied party sank uninvited into a chair, spread out his
knees and stared blankly at a Dutch clock with an air of weariness
and profound discouragement. Perceiving that his guest was making
himself tolerably comfortable my friend turned again to his figures,
and silence reigned supreme. The fire in the grate burned
noiselessly with a mysterious blue light, as if it could do more if
it wished; the Dutch clock looked wise, and swung its pendulum with
studied exactness, like one who is determined to do his precise duty
and shun responsibility; the cat assumed an attitude of intelligent
neutrality. Finally the spectre trained his pale eyes upon his host,
pulled in a long breath and remarked:

"Jake, I'm yur dead father. I come back to have a talk with ye 'bout
the way things is agoin' on. I want to know 'f you think it's right
notter recognise yur dead parent?"

"It is a little rough on you, dear," replied the son without looking
up, "but the fact is that [7 and 3 are 10, and 2 are 12, and 6 are
18] it is so long since you have been about [and 3 off are 15] that
I had kind of forgotten, and [2 into 4 goes twice, and 7 into 6 you
can't] you know how it is yourself. May I be permitted to again
inquire the precise nature of your present business?"

"Well, yes-if you wont talk anything but shop I s'pose I must come
to the p'int. Isay! you don't keep any thing to drink 'bout yer, do
ye-Jake?"

"14 from 23 are 9-I'll get you something when we get done. Please
explain how we can serve one another."

"Jake, I done everything for you, and you ain't done nothin' for me
since I died. I want a monument bigger'n Dave Broderick's, with an
eppytaph in gilt letters, by Joaquin Miller. I can't git into any
kind o' society till I have 'em. You've no idee how exclusive they
are where I am."

This dutiful son laid down his pencil and effected a stiffly
vertical attitude. He was all attention:

"Anything else to-day?" he asked-rather sneeringly, I grieve to
state.

"No-o-o, I don't think of anything special," drawled the ghost
reflectively; "I'd like to have an iron fence around it to keep the
cows off, but I s'pose that's included."

"Of course! And a gravel walk, and a lot of abalone shells, and
fresh posies daily; a marble angel or two for company, and anything
else that will add to your comfort. Have you any other extremely
reasonable request to make of me?"

"Yes-since you mention it. I want you to contest my will. Horace
Hawes is having his'n contested."

"My fine friend, you did not make any will."

"That ain't o' no consequence. You forge me a good 'un and contest
that."

"With pleasure, sir; but that will be extra. Now indulge me in one
question. You spoke of the society where you reside. Where do you
reside?"

The Dutch clock pounded clamorously upon its brazen gong a countless
multitude of hours; the glowing coals fell like an avalanche through
the grate, spilling all over the cat, who exalted her voice in a
squawk like the deathwail of a stuck pig, and dashed affrighted
through the window. A smell of scorching fur pervaded the place, and
under cover of it the aged spectre walked into the mirror, vanishing
like a dream. "Love's Labour Lost."

Joab was a beef, who was tired of being courted for his clean,
smooth skin. So he backed through a narrow gateway six or eight
times, which made his hair stand the wrong way. He then went and
rubbed his fat sides against a charred log. This made him look
untidy. You never looked worse in your life than Joab did.

"Now," said he, "I shall be loved for myself alone. I will change my
name, and hie me to pastures new, and all the affection that is then
lavished upon me will be pure and disinterested."

So he strayed off into the woods and came out at old Abner Davis'
ranch. The two things Abner valued most were a windmill and a
scratching-post for hogs. They were equally beautiful, and the fame
of their comeliness had gone widely abroad. To them Joab naturally
paid his attention. The windmill, who was called Lucille Ashtonbury
Clifford, received him with expressions of the liveliest disgust.
His protestations of affection were met by creakings of contempt,
and as he turned sadly away he was rewarded by a sound spank from
one of her fans. Like a gentlemanly beef he did not deign to avenge
the insult by overturning Lucille Ashtonbury; and it is well for him
that he did not, for old Abner stood by with a pitchfork and a
trinity of dogs.

Disgusted with the selfish heartlessness of society, Joab shambled
off and was passing the scratching-post without noticing her. (Her
name was Arabella Cliftonbury Howard.) Suddenly she kicked away a
multitude of pigs who were at her feet, and called to the rolling
beef of uncanny exterior:

"Comeer!"

Joab paused, looked at her with his ox-eyes, and gravely marching
up, commenced a vigorous scratching against her.

"Arabella," said he, "do you think you could love a shaggy-hided
beef with black hair? Could you love him for himself alone?"

Arabella had observed that the black rubbed off, and the hair lay
sleek when stroked the right way.

"Yes, I think so; could you?"

This was a poser: Joab had expected her to talk business. He did not
reply. It was only her arch way; she thought, naturally, that the
best way to win any body's love was to be a fool. She saw her
mistake. She had associated with hogs all her life, and this fellow
was a beef! Mistakes must be rectified very speedily in these
matters.

"Sir, I have for you a peculiar feeling; I may say a tenderness.
Hereafter you, and you only, shall scratch against Arabella
Cliftonbury Howard!"

Joab was delighted; he stayed and scratched all day. He was loved
for himself alone, and he did not care for anything but that. Then
he went home, made an elaborate toilet, and returned to astonish
her. Alas! old Abner had been about, and seeing how Joab had worn
her smooth and useless, had cut her down for firewood. Joab gave one
glance, then walked solemnly away into a "clearing," and getting
comfortably astride a blazing heap of logs, made a barbacue of
himself!

After all, Lucille Ashtonbury Clifford, the light-headed windmill,
seems to have got the best of all this. I have observed that the
light-headed commonly get the best of everything in this world;
which the wooden-headed and the beef-headed regard as an outrage. I
am not prepared to say if it is or not. A Comforter.

William Bunker had paid a fine of two hundred dollars for beating
his wife. After getting his receipt he went moodily home and seated
himself at the domestic hearth. Observing his abstracted and
melancholy demeanour, the good wife approached and tenderly inquired
the cause. "It's a delicate subject, dear," said he, with love-
light in his eyes; "let's talk about something good to eat."

Then, with true wifely instinct she sought to cheer him up with
pleasing prattle of a new bonnet he had promised her. "Ah! darling,"
he sighed, absently picking up the fire-poker and turning it in his
hands, "let us change the subject."

Then his soul's idol chirped an inspiring ballad, kissed him on the
top of his head, and sweetly mentioned that the dressmaker had sent
in her bill. "Let us talk only of love," returned he, thoughtfully
rolling up his dexter sleeve.

And so she spoke of the vine-enfolded cottage in which she fondly
hoped they might soon sip together the conjugal sweets. William
became rigidly erect, a look not of earth was in his face, his
breast heaved, and the fire-poker quivered with emotion. William
felt deeply. "Mine own," said the good woman, now busily irrigating
a mass of snowy dough for the evening meal, "do you know that there
is not a bite of meat in the house?"

It is a cold, unlovely truth-a sad, heart-sickening fact-but it
must be told by the conscientious novelist. William repaid all this
affectionate solicitude-all this womanly devotion, all this trust,
confidence, and abnegation in a manner that needs not be
particularly specified.

A short, sharp curve in the middle of that iron fire-poker is
eloquent of a wrong redressed. Little Isaac.

Mr. Gobwottle came home from a meeting of the Temperance Legion
extremely drunk. He went to the bed, piled himself loosely atop of
it and forgot his identity. About the middle of the night, his wife,
who was sitting up darning stockings, heard a voice from the
profoundest depths of the bolster: "Say, Jane?"

Jane gave a vicious stab with the needle, impaling one of her
fingers, and continued her work. There was a long silence, faintly
punctuated by the bark of a distant dog. Again that
voice--"Say-Jane!"

The lady laid aside her work and wearily, replied: "Isaac, do go to
sleep; they are off."

Another and longer pause, during which the ticking of the clock
became painful in the intensity of the silence it seemed to be
measuring. "Jane, what's off!" "Why, your boots, to be sure,"
replied the petulant woman, losing patience; "I pulled them off when
you first lay down."

Again the prostrate gentleman was still. Then when the candle of the
waking housewife had burned low down to the socket, and the wasted
flame on the hearth was expiring bluely in convulsive leaps, the
head of the family resumed: "Jane, who said anything about boots?"

There was no reply. Apparently none was expected, for the man
immediately rose, lengthened himself out like a telescope, and
continued: "Jane, I must have smothered that brat, and I'm 'fernal
sorry!"

"What brat?" asked the wife, becoming interested.

"Why, ours-our little Isaac. I saw you put 'im in bed last week, and
I've been layin' right onto 'im!"

"What under the sun do you mean?" asked the good wife; "we haven't
any brat, and never had, and his name should not be Isaac if we had.
I believe you are crazy."

The man balanced his bulk rather unsteadily, looked hard into the
eyes of his companion, and triumphantly emitted the following
conundrum: "Jane, look-a-here! If we haven't any brat, what'n
thunder's the use o' bein' married!"

Pending the solution of the momentous problem, its author went out
and searched the night for a whisky-skin.






The Heels of Her.





Passing down Commercial-street one fine day, I observed a lady
standing alone in the middle of the sidewalk, with no obvious
business there, but with apparently no intention of going on. She
was outwardly very calm, and seemed at first glance to be lost in
some serene philosophical meditation. A closer examination, however,
revealed a peculiar restlessness of attitude, and a barely
noticeable uneasiness of expression. The conviction came upon me
that the lady was in distress, and as delicately as possible I
inquired of her if such were not the case, intimating at the same
time that I should esteem it a great favour to be permitted to do
something. The lady smiled blandly and replied that she was merely
waiting for a gentleman. It was tolerably evident that I was not
required, and with a stammered apology I hastened away, passed clear
around the block, came up behind her, and took up a position on a
dry-goods box; it lacked an hour to dinner time, and I had leisure.
The lady maintained her attitude, but with momently increasing
impatience, which found expression in singular wave-like undulations
of her lithe figure, and an occasional unmistakeable contortion.
Several gentlemen approached, but were successively and politely
dismissed. Suddenly she experienced a quick convulsion, strode
sharply forward one step, stopped short, had another convulsion, and
walked rapidly away. Approaching the spot I found a small iron
grating in the sidewalk, and between the bars two little boot heels,
riven from their kindred soles, and unsightly with snaggy nails.

Heaven only knows why that entrapped female had declined the
proffered assistance of her species-why she had elected to ruin her
boots in preference to having them removed from her feet. Upon that
day when the grave shall give up its dead, and the secrets of all
hearts shall be revealed, I shall know all about it; but I want to
know now. A Tale of Two Feet.

My friend Zacharias was accustomed to sleep with a heated stone at
his feet; for the feet of Mr. Zacharias were as the feet of the
dead. One night he retired as usual, and it chanced that he awoke
some hours afterwards with a well-defined smell of burning leather,
making it pleasant for his nostrils.

"Mrs. Zacharias," said he, nudging his snoring spouse, "I wish you
would get up and look about. I think one of the children must have
fallen into the fire."

The lady, who from habit had her own feet stowed comfortably away
against the warm stomach of her lord and master, declined to make
the investigation demanded, and resumed the nocturnal melody. Mr.
Zacharias was angered; for the first time since she had sworn to
love, honour, and obey, this female was in open rebellion. He
decided upon prompt and vigorous action. He quietly moved over to
the back side of the bed and braced his shoulders against the wall.
Drawing up his sinewy knees to a level with his breast, he placed
the soles of his feet broadly against the back of the insurgent,
with the design of propelling her against the opposite wall. There
was a strangled snort, then a shriek of female agony, and the
neighbours came in.

Mutual explanations followed, and Mr. Zacharias walked the streets
of Grass Valley next day as if he were treading upon eggs worth a
dollar a dozen. The Scolliver Pig.

One of Thomas Jefferson's maxims is as follows: "When angry, count
ten before you speak; if very angry, count a hundred." I once knew a
man to square his conduct by this rule, with a most gratifying
result. Jacob Scolliver, a man prone to bad temper, one day started
across the fields to visit his father, whom he generously permitted
to till a small corner of the old homestead. He found the old
gentleman behind the barn, bending over a barrel that was canted
over at an angle of seventy degrees, and from which issued a cloud
of steam. Scolliver père was evidently scalding one end of a dead
pig-an operation essential to the loosening of the hair, that the
corpse may be plucked and shaven.

"Good morning, father," said Mr. Scolliver, approaching, and
displaying a long, cheerful smile. "Got a nice roaster there?" The
elder gentleman's head turned slowly and steadily, as upon a swivel,
until his eyes pointed backward; then he drew his arms out of the
barrel, and finally, revolving his body till it matched his head, he
deliberately mounted upon the supporting block and sat down upon the
sharp edge of the barrel in the hot steam. Then he replied, "Good
mornin' Jacob. Fine mornin'."

"A little warm in spots, I should imagine," returned the son. "Do
you find that a comfortable seat?" "Why-yes-it's good enough for an
old man," he answered, in a slightly husky voice, and with an uneasy
gesture of the legs; "don't make much difference in this life where
we set, if we're good-does it? This world ain't heaven, anyhow, I
s'spose."

"There I do not entirely agree with you," rejoined the young man,
composing his body upon a stump for a philosophical argument. "I
don't neither," added the old one, absently, screwing about on the
edge of the barrel and constructing a painful grimace. There was no
argument, but a silence instead. Suddenly the aged party sprang off
that barrel with exceeding great haste, as of one who has made up
his mind to do a thing and is impatient of delay. The seat of his
trousers was steaming grandly, the barrel upset, and there was a
great wash of hot water, leaving a deposit of spotted pig. In life
that pig had belonged to Mr. Scolliver the younger! Mr. Scolliver
the younger was angry, but remembering Jefferson's maxim, he rattled
off the number ten, finishing up with "You--thief!" Then
perceiving himself very angry, he began all over again and ran up to
one hundred, as a monkey scampers up a ladder. As the last syllable
shot from his lips he planted a dreadful blow between the old man's
eyes, with a shriek that sounded like--"You son of a sea-cook!"

Mr. Scolliver the elder went down like a stricken beef, and his son
often afterward explained that if he had not counted a hundred, and
so given himself time to get thoroughly mad, he did not believe he
could ever have licked the old man. Mr. Hunker's Mourner.

Strolling through Lone Mountain cemetery one day my attention was
arrested by the inconsolable grief of a granite angel bewailing the
loss of "Jacob Hunker, aged 67." The attitude of utter dejection,
the look of matchless misery upon that angel's face sank into my
heart like water into a sponge. I was about to offer some words of
condolence when another man, similarly affected, got in before me,
and laying a rather unsteady hand upon the celestial shoulder tipped
back a very senile hat, and pointing to the name on the stone
remarked with the most exact care and scrupulous accent: "Friend of
yours, perhaps; been dead long?"

There was no reply; he continued: "Very worthy man, that Jake; knew
him up in Tuolumne. Good feller-Jake." No response: the gentleman
settled his hat still farther back, and continued with a trifle less
exactness of speech: "I say, young wom'n, Jake was my pard in the
mines. Goo' fell'r I 'bserved!"

The last sentence was shot straight into the celestial ear at short
range. It produced no effect. The gentleman's patience and
rhetorical vigilance were now completely exhausted. He walked round,
and planting himself defiantly in front of the vicarious mourner, he
stuck his hands doggedly into his pockets and delivered the
following rebuke, like the desultory explosions of a bunch of
damaged fire-crackers: "It wont do, old girl; ef Jake knowed how
you's treatin' his old pard he'd jest git up and snatch you bald
headed-he would! You ain't no friend o' his'n and you ain't yur fur
no good-you bet! Now you jest 'sling your swag an' bolt back to
heaven, or I'm hanged ef I don't have suthin' worse'n horse-stealin'
to answer fur, this time."

And he took a step forward. At this point I interfered. A Bit of
Chivalry.

At Woodward's Garden, in the city of San Francisco, is a rather
badly chiselled statue of Pandora pulling open her casket of ills.
Pandora's raiment, I grieve to state, has slipped down about her
waist in a manner exceedingly reprehensible. One evening about
twilight, I was passing that way, and saw a long gaunt miner,
evidently just down from the mountains, and whom I had seen before,
standing rather unsteadily in front of Pandora, admiring her shapely
figure, but seemingly afraid to approach her. Seeing me advance, he
turned to me with a queer, puzzled expression in his funny eyes, and
said with an earnestness that came near defeating its purpose, "Good
ev'n'n t'ye, stranger." "Good evening, sir," I replied, after having
analyzed his salutation and extracted the sense of it. Lowering his
voice to what was intended for a whisper, the miner, with a jerk of
his thumb Pandoraward, continued: "Stranger, d'ye hap'n t'know 'er?"
"Certainly; that is Bridget Pandora, a Greek maiden, in the pay of
the Board of Supervisors."

He straightened himself up with a jerk that threatened the integrity
of his neck and made his teeth snap, lurched heavily to the other
side, oscillated critically for a few moments, and muttered:
"Brdgtpnd--." It was too much for him; he went down into his
pocket, fumbled feebly round, and finally drawing out a paper of
purely hypothetical tobacco, conveyed it to his mouth and bit off
about two-thirds of it, which he masticated with much apparent
benefit to his understanding, offering what was left to me. He then
resumed the conversation with the easy familiarity of one who has
established a claim to respectful attention:

"Pardner, couldn't ye interdooce a fel'r's wants tknow'er?"
"Impossible; I have not the honour of her acquaintance." A look of
distrust crept into his face, and finally settled into a savage
scowl about his eyes. "Sed ye knew 'er!" he faltered, menacingly.
"So I do, but I am not upon speaking terms with her, and-in fact she
declines to recognise me." The soul of the honest miner flamed out;
he laid his hand threateningly upon his pistol, jerked himself
stiff, glared a moment at me with the look of a tiger, and hurled
this question at my head as if it had been an iron interrogation
point: "W'at a' yer ben adoin' to that gurl?"

I fled, and the last I saw of the chivalrous gold-hunter, he had his
arm about Pandora's stony waist and was endeavouring to soothe her
supposed agitation by stroking her granite head. The Head of the
Family.

Our story begins with the death of our hero. The manner of it was
decapitation, the instrument a mowing machine. A young son of the
deceased, dumb with horror, seized the paternal head and ran with it
to the house.

"There!" ejaculated the young man, bowling the gory pate across the
threshold at his mother's feet, "look at that, will you?"

The old lady adjusted her spectacles, lifted the dripping head into
her lap, wiped the face of it with her apron, and gazed into its
fishy eyes with tender curiosity. "John," said she, thoughtfully,
"is this yours?"

"No, ma, it ain't none o' mine."

"John," continued she, with a cold, unimpassioned earnestness,
"where did you get this thing?"

"Why, ma," returned the hopeful, "that's Pap's."

"John"--and there was just a touch of severity in her voice--"when
your mother asks you a question you should answer that particular
question. Where did you get this?"

"Out in the medder, then, if you're so derned pertikeller," retorted
the youngster, somewhat piqued; "the mowin' machine lopped it off."

The old lady rose and restored the head into the hands of the young
man. Then, straightening with some difficulty her aged back, and
assuming a matronly dignity of bearing and feature, she emitted the
rebuke following:

"My son, the gentleman whom you hold in your hand-any more pointed
allusion to whom would be painful to both of us-has punished you a
hundred times for meddling with things lying about the farm. Take
that head back and put it down where you found it, or you will make
your mother very angry." Deathbed Repentance.

An old man of seventy-five years lay dying. For a lifetime he had
turned a deaf ear to religion, and steeped his soul in every current
crime. He had robbed the orphan and plundered the widow; he had
wrested from the hard hands of honest toil the rewards of labour;
had lost at the gaming-table the wealth with which he should have
endowed churches and Sunday schools; had wasted in riotous living
the substance of his patrimony, and left his wife and children
without bread. The intoxicating bowl had been his god-his belly had
absorbed his entire attention. In carnal pleasures passed his days
and nights, and to the maddening desires of his heart he had
ministered without shame and without remorse. He was a bad, bad egg!
And now this hardened iniquitor was to meet his Maker! Feebly and
hesitatingly his breath fluttered upon his pallid lips. Weakly
trembled the pulse in his flattened veins! Wife, children,
mother-in-law, friends, who should have hovered lovingly about his
couch, cheering his last moments and giving him medicine, he had
killed with grief, or driven widely away; and he was now dying alone
by the inadequate light of a tallow candle, deserted by heaven and
by earth. No, not by heaven. Suddenly the door was pushed softly
open, and there entered the good minister, whose pious counsel the
suffering wretch had in health so often derided. Solemnly the man of
God advanced, Bible in hand. Long and silently he stood uncovered in
the presence of death. Then with cold and impressive dignity he
remarked, "Miserable old sinner!"

Old Jonas Lashworthy looked up. He sat up. The voice of that holy
man put strength into his aged limbs, and he stood up. He was
reserved for a better fate than to die like a neglected dog: Mr.
Lashworthy was hanged for braining a minister of the Gospel with a
boot-jack. This touching tale has a moral.

MORAL OF THIS TOUCHING TALE.--In snatching a brand from the eternal
burning, make sure of its condition, and be careful how you lay hold
of it. The New Church that was not Built.

I have a friend who was never a church member, but was, and is, a
millionaire-a generous benevolent millionaire-who once went about
doing good by stealth, but with a natural preference for doing it at
his office. One day he took it into his thoughtful noddle that he
would like to assist in the erection of a new church edifice, to
replace the inadequate and shabby structure in which a certain small
congregation in his town then worshipped. So he drew up a
subscription paper, modestly headed the list with "Christian, 2000
dollars," and started one of the Deacons about with it. In a few
days the Deacon came back to him, like the dove to the ark, saying
he had succeeded in procuring a few names, but the press of his
private business was such that he had felt compelled to intrust the
paper to Deacon Smith.

Next day the document was presented to my friend, as nearly blank as
when it left his hands. Brother Smith explained that he (Smith) had
started this thing, and a brother calling himself "Christian," whose
name he was not at liberty to disclose, had put down 2000 dollars.
Would our friend aid them with an equal amount? Our friend took the
paper and wrote "Philanthropist, 1000 dollars," and Brother Smith
went away.

In about a week Brother Jones put in an appearance with the
subscription paper. By extraordinary exertions Brother
Jones-thinking a handsome new church would be an ornament to the
town and increase the value of real estate-had got two brethren, who
desired to remain incog., to subscribe: "Christian" 2000 dollars,
and "Philanthropist" 1000 dollars. Would my friend kindly help along
a struggling congregation? My friend would. He wrote "Citizen, 500
dollars," pledging Brother Jones, as he had pledged the others, not
to reveal his name until it was time to pay.

Some weeks afterward, a clergyman stepped into my friend's
counting-room, and after smilingly introducing himself, produced
that identical subscription list.

"Mr. K.," said he, "I hope you will pardon the liberty, but I have
set on foot a little scheme to erect a new church for our
congregation, and three of the brethren have subscribed handsomely.
Would you mind doing something to help along the good work?"

My friend glanced over his spectacles at the proffered paper. He
rose in his wrath! He towered! Seizing a loaded pen he dashed at
that fair sheet and scrabbled thereon in raging characters,
"Impenitent Sinner--Not one cent, by G--!"

After a brief explanatory conference, the minister thoughtfully went
his way. That struggling congregation still worships devoutly in its
original, unpretending temple. A Tale of the Great Quake.

One glorious morning, after the great earthquake of October 21,
1868, had with some difficulty shaken me into my trousers and boots,
I left the house. I may as well state that I left it immediately,
and by an aperture constructed for another purpose. Arrived in the
street, I at once betook myself to saving people. This I did by
remarking closely the occurrence of other shocks, giving the alarm
and setting an example fit to be followed. The example was followed,
but owing to the vigour with which it was set was seldom overtaken.
In passing down Clay-street I observed an old rickety brick
boarding-house, which seemed to be just on the point of honouring
the demands of the earthquake upon its resources. The last shock had
subsided, but the building was slowly and composedly settling into
the ground. As the third story came down to my level, I observed in
one of the front rooms a young and lovely female in white, standing
at a door trying to get out. She couldn't, for the door was locked-I
saw her through the key-hole. With a single blow of my heel I opened
that door, and opened my arms at the same time.

"Thank God," cried I, "I have arrived in time. Come to these arms."

The lady in white stopped, drew out an eye-glass, placed it
carefully upon her nose, and taking an inventory of me from head to
foot, replied:

"No thank you; I prefer to come to grief in the regular way."

While the pleasing tones of her voice were still ringing in my ears
I noticed a puff of smoke rising from near my left toe. It came from
the chimney of that house. Johnny.

Johnny is a little four-year-old, of bright, pleasant manners, and
remarkable for intelligence. The other evening his mother took him
upon her lap, and after stroking his curly head awhile, asked him if
he knew who made him. I grieve to state that instead of answering
"Dod," as might have been expected, Johnny commenced cramming his
face full of ginger-bread, and finally took a fit of coughing that
threatened the dissolution of his frame. Having unloaded his throat
and whacked him on the back, his mother propounded the following
supplementary conundrum:

"Johnny, are you not aware that at your age every little boy is
expected to say something brilliant in reply to my former question?
How can you so dishonour your parents as to neglect this golden
opportunity? Think again."

The little urchin cast his eyes upon the floor and meditated a long
time. Suddenly he raised his face and began to move his lips. There
is no knowing what he might have said, but at that moment his mother
noted the pressing necessity of wringing and mopping his nose, which
she performed with such painful and conscientious singleness of
purpose that Johnny set up a war-whoop like that of a
night-blooming tomcat.

It may be objected that this little tale is neither instructive nor
amusing. I have never seen any stories of bright children that were.
The Child's Provider.

Mr. Goboffle had a small child, no wife, a large dog, and a house.
As he was unable to afford the expense of a nurse, he was accustomed
to leave the child in the care of the dog, who was much attached to
it, while absent at a distant restaurant for his meals, taking the
precaution to lock them up together to prevent kidnapping. One day,
while at his dinner, he crowded a large, hard-boiled potato down
his neck, and it conducted him into eternity. His clay was taken to
the Coroner's, and the great world went on, marrying and giving in
marriage, lying, cheating, and praying, as if he had never existed.

Meantime the dog had, after several days of neglect, forced an
egress through a window, and a neighbouring baker received a call
from him daily. Walking gravely in, he would deposit a piece of
silver, and receiving a roll and his change would march off
homeward. As this was a rather unusual proceeding in a cur of his
species, the baker one day followed him, and as the dog leaped
joyously into the window of the deserted house, the man of dough
approached and looked in. What was his surprise to see the dog
deposit his bread calmly upon the floor and fall to tenderly licking
the face of a beautiful child!

It is but fair to explain that there was nothing but the face
remaining. But this dog did so love the child! Boys who Began Wrong.

Two little California boys were arrested at Reno for horse thieving.
They had started from Surprise Valley with a cavalcade of thirty
animals, and disposed of them leisurely along their line of march,
until they were picked up at Reno, as above explained. I don't feel
quite easy about those youths-away out there in Nevada without their
Testaments! Where there are no Sunday School books boys are so apt
to swear and chew tobacco and rob sluice-boxes; and once a boy
begins to do that last he might as well sell out; he's bound to end
by doing something bad! I knew a boy once who began by robbing
sluice-boxes, and he went right on from bad to worse, until the last
I heard of him he was in the State Legislature, elected by
Democratic votes. You never saw anybody take on as his poor old
mother did when she heard about it.

"Hank," said she to the boy's father, who was forging a bank note in
the chimney corner, "this all comes o' not edgercatin' 'im when he
was a baby. Ef he'd larnt spellin' and ciferin' he never could a-ben
elected."

It pains me to state that old Hank didn't seem to get any thinner
under the family disgrace, and his appetite never left him for a
minute. The fact is, the old gentleman wanted to go to the United
States Senate. A Kansas Incident.

An invalid wife in Leavenworth heard her husband make proposals of
marriage to the nurse. The dying woman arose in bed, fixed her large
black eyes for a moment upon the face of her heartless spouse with a
reproachful intensity that must haunt him through life, and then
fell back a corpse. The remorse of that widower, as he led the
blushing nurse to the altar the next week, can be more easily
imagined than described. Such reparation as was in his power he
made. He buried the first wife decently and very deep down, laying a
handsome and exceedingly heavy stone upon the sepulchre. He
chiselled upon the stone the following simple and touching line:
"She can't get back." Mr. Grile's Girl.

In a lecture about girls, Cady Stanton contrasted the buoyant spirit
of young males with the dejected sickliness of immature women. This,
she says, is because the latter are keenly sensitive to the fact
that they have no aim in life. This is a sad, sad truth! No longer
ago than last year the writer's youngest girl-Gloriana, a skin-milk
blonde concern of fourteen-came pensively up to her father with big
tears in her little eyes, and a forgotten morsel of buttered bread
lying unchewed in her mouth.

"Papa," murmured the poor thing, "I'm gettin' awful pokey, and my
clothes don't seem to set well in the back. My days are full of
ungratified longin's, and my nights don't get any better. Papa, I
think society needs turnin' inside out and scrapin'. I haven't got
nothin' to aspire to-no aim; nor anything!"

The desolate creature spilled herself loosely into a cane-bottom
chair, and her sorrow broke "like a great dyke broken."

The writer lifted her tenderly upon his knee and bit her softly on
the neck.

"Gloriana," said he, "have you chewed up all that toffy in two
days?"

A smothered sob was her frank confession.

"Now, see here, Glo," continued the parent, rather sternly, "don't
let me hear any more about 'aspirations'-which are always
adulterated with terra alba-nor 'aims'-which will give you the
gripes like anything. You just take this two shilling-piece and
invest every penny of it in lollipops!"

You should have seen the fair, bright smile crawl from one of that
innocent's ears to the other-you should have marked that face
sprinkle, all over with dimples-you ought to have beheld the tears
of joy jump glittering into her eyes and spill all over her father's
clean shirt that he hadn't had on more than fifteen minutes! Cady
Stanton is impotent of evil in the Grile family so long as the price
of sweets remains unchanged. His Railway.

The writer remembers, as if it were but yesterday, when he edited
the Hang Tree Herald. For six months he devoted his best talent to
advocating the construction of a railway between that place and
Jayhawk, thirty miles distant. The route presented every inducement.
There would be no grading required, and not a single curve would be
necessary. As it lay through an uninhabited alkali flat, the right
of way could be easily obtained. As neither terminus had other than
pack-mule communication with civilization, the rolling stock and
other material must necessarily be constructed at Hang Tree, because
the people at the other end didn't know enough to do it, and hadn't
any blacksmith. The benefit to our place was indisputable; it
constituted the most seductive charm of the scheme. After six months
of conscientious lying, the company was incorporated, and the first
shovelful of alkali turned up and preserved in a museum, when
suddenly the devil put it into the head of one of the Directors to
inquire publicly what the road was designed to carry. It is needless
to say the question was never satisfactorily answered, and the most
daring enterprise of the age was knocked perfectly cold. That very
night a deputation of stockholders waited upon the editor of the
Herald and prescribed a change of climate. They afterward said the
change did them good. Mr. Gish Makes a Present.

In the season for making presents my friend Stockdoddle Gish, Esq.,
thought he would so far waive his superiority to the insignificant
portion of mankind outside his own waistcoat as to follow one of its
customs. Mr. Gish has a friend-a delicate female of the shrinking
sort-whom he favours with his esteem as a sort of equivalent for the
respect she accords him when he browbeats her. Our hero numbers
among the blessings which his merit has extorted from niggardly
Nature a gaunt meathound, between whose head and body there exists
about the same proportion as between those of a catfish, which he
also resembles in the matter of mouth. As to sides, this precious
pup is not dissimilar to a crockery crate loosely covered with a wet
sheet. In appetite he is liberal and cosmopolitan, loving a dried
sheepskin as well in proportion to its weight as a kettle of soap.
The village which Mr. Gish honours by his residence has for some
years been kept upon the dizzy verge of financial ruin by the
maintenance of this animal.

The reader will have already surmised that it was this beast which
our hero selected to testify his toleration of his lady friend.
There never was a greater mistake. Mr. Gish merely presented her a
sheaf of assorted angle-worms, neatly bound with a pink ribbon tied
into a simple knot. The dog is an heirloom and will descend to the
Gishes of the next generation, in the direct line of inheritance. A
Cow-County Pleasantry.

About the most ludicrous incident that I remember occurred one day
in an ordinarily solemn village in the cow-counties. A worthy
matron, who had been absent looking after a vagrom cow, returned
home, and pushing against the door found it obstructed by some heavy
substance, which, upon examination, proved to be her husband. He had
been slaughtered by some roving joker, who had wrought upon him with
a pick-handle. To one of his ears was pinned a scrap of greasy
paper, upon which were scrambled the following sentiments in pencil-
tracks:

"The inqulosed boddy is that uv old Burker. Step litely, stranger,
fer yer lize the mortil part uv wat you mus be sum da. Thers arrest
for the weery! If Burker heddenta wurkt agin me fer Corner I
wuddenta bed to sit on him. Ov setch is the kingum of hevvun! You
don't want to moov this boddy til ime summuns to hold a ninquest.
Orl flesh are gras!"

The ridiculous part of the story is that the lady did not wait to
summon the Coroner, but took charge of the remains herself; and in
dragging them toward the bed she exploded into her face a shotgun,
which had been cunningly contrived to discharge by a string
connected with the body. Thus was she punished for an infraction of
the law. The next day the particulars were told me by the facetious
Coroner himself, whose jury had just rendered a verdict of
accidental drowning in both cases. I don't know when I have enjoyed
a heartier laugh. The Optimist, and What He Died Of.

One summer evening, while strolling with considerable difficulty
over Russian Hill, San Francisco, Mr. Grile espied a man standing
upon the extreme summit, with a pensive brow and a suit of clothes
which seemed to have been handed down through a long line of
ancestors from a remote Jew peddler. Mr. Grile respectfully saluted;
a man who has any clothes at all is to him an object of veneration.
The stranger opened the conversation:

"My son," said he, in a tone suggestive of strangulation by the
Sheriff, "do you behold this wonderful city, its wharves crowded
with the shipping of all nations?"

Mr. Grile beheld with amazement.

"Twenty-one years ago-alas! it used to be but twenty," and he wiped
away a tear--"you might have bought the whole dern thing for a
Mexican ounce."

Mr. Grile hastened to proffer a paper of tobacco, which disappeared
like a wisp of oats drawn into a threshing machine.

"I was one among the first who--"

Mr. Grile hit him on the head with a paving-stone by way of changing
the topic.

"Young man," continued he, "do you feel this bommy breeze? There
isn't a climit in the world--"

This melancholy relic broke down in a fit of coughing. No sooner had
he recovered than he leaped into the air, making a frantic clutch at
something, but apparently without success.

"Dern it," hissed he, "there goes my teeth; blowed out again, by
hokey!"

A passing cloud of dust hid him for a moment from view, and when he
reappeared he was an altered man; a paroxysm of asthma had doubled
him up like a nut-cracker.

"Excuse me," he wheezed, "I'm subject to this; caught it crossin'
the Isthmus in '49. As I was a-sayin', there's no country in the
world that offers such inducements to the immygrunt as Californy.
With her fertile soil, her unrivalled climit, her magnificent bay,
and the rest of it, there is enough for all."

This venerable pioneer picked a fragmentary biscuit from the street
and devoured it. Mr. Grile thought this had gone on about long
enough. He twisted the head off that hopeful old party, surrendered
himself to the authorities, and was at once discharged. The Root of
Education.

A pedagogue in Indiana, who was "had up" for unmercifully waling the
back of a little girl, justified his action by explaining that "she
persisted in flinging paper pellets at him when his back was
turned." That is no excuse. Mr. Grile once taught school up in the
mountains, and about every half hour had to remove his coat and
scrape off the dried paper wads adhering to the nap. He never
permitted a trifle like this to unsettle his patience; he just kept
on wearing that gaberdine until it had no nap and the wads wouldn't
stick. But when they took to dipping them in mucilage he made a
complaint to the Board of Directors.

"Young man," said the Chairman, "ef you don't like our ways, you'd
better sling your blankets and git. Prentice Mulford tort skule yer
for more'n six months, and he never said a word agin the wads."

Mr. Grile briefly explained that Mr. Mulford might have been brought
up to paper wads, and didn't mind them.

"It ain't no use," said another Director, "the children hev got to
be amused."

Mr. Grile protested that there were other amusements quite as
diverting; but the third Director here rose and remarked:

"I perfeckly agree with the Cheer; this youngster better travel. I
consider as paper wads lies at the root uv popillar edyercation;
ther a necessary adjunck uv the skool systim. Mr. Cheerman, I move
and second that this yer skoolmarster be shot."

Mr. Grile did not remain to observe the result of the voting.
Retribution.

A citizen of Pittsburg, aged sixty, had, by tireless industry and
the exercise of rigid economy, accumulated a hoard of frugal
dollars, the sight and feel whereof were to his soul a pure delight.
Imagine his sorrow and the heaviness of his aged heart when he
learned that the good wife had bestowed thereof upon her brother
bountiful largess exceeding his merit. Sadly and prayerfully while
she slept lifted he the retributive mallet and beat in her brittle
pate. Then with the quiet dignity of one who has redressed a
grievous wrong, surrendered himself unto the law this worthy old
man. Let him who has never known the great grief of slaughtering a
wife judge him harshly. He that is without sin among you, let him
cast the first stone-and let it be a large heavy stone that shall
grind that wicked old man into a powder of exceeding impalpability.
The Faithful Wife.

"A man was sentenced to twenty years' confinement for a deed of
violence. In the excitement of the moment his wife sought and
obtained a divorce. Thirteen years afterward he was pardoned. The
wife brought the pardon to the gate; the couple left the spot arm in
arm; and in less than an hour they were again united in the bonds of
wedlock."

Such is the touching tale narrated by a newspaper correspondent. It
is in every respect true; I knew the parties well, and during that
long bitter period of thirteen years it was commonly asked
concerning the woman: "Hasn't that hag trapped anybody yet? She'll
have to take back old Jabe when he gets out." And she did. For
nearly thirteen weary years she struggled nobly against fate: she
went after every unmarried man in her part of the country; but "No,"
said they, "we cannot-indeed we cannot-marry you, after the way you
went back on Jabe. It is likely that under the same circumstances
you would play us the same scurvy trick. G'way, woman!" And so the
poor old heartbroken creature had to go to the Governor and get the
old man pardoned out. Bless her for her steadfast fidelity! Margaret
the Childless.

This, therefore, is the story of her:--Some four years ago her
husband brought home a baby, which he said he found lying in the
street, and which they concluded to adopt. About a year after this
he brought home another, and the good woman thought she could stand
that one too. A similar period passed away, when one evening he
opened the door and fell headlong into the room, swearing with
studied correctness at a dog which had tripped him up, but which
upon inspection turned out to be another baby. Margaret's sus-
picion was aroused, but to allay his she hastened to implore him to
adopt that darling also, to which, after some slight hesitation, he
consented. Another twelvemonth rolled into eternity, when one
evening the lady heard a noise in the back yard, and going out she
saw her husband labouring at the windlass of the well with unwonted
industry. As the bucket neared the top he reached down and extracted
another infant, exactly like the former ones, and holding it up,
explained to the astonished matron: "Look at this, now; did you ever
see such a sweet young one go a-campaignin' about the country
without a lantern and a-tumblin' into wells? There, take the poor
little thing in to the fire, and get off its wet clothes." It
suddenly flashed across his mind that he had neglected an obvious
precaution-the clothes were not wet-and he hastily added: "There's
no tellin' what would have become of it, a-climbin' down that rope,
if I hadn't seen it afore it got down to the water."

Silently the good wife took that infant into the house and disrobed
it; sorrowfully she laid it alongside its little brothers and
sister; long and bitterly she wept over the quartette; and then with
one tender look at her lord and master, smoking in solemn silence by
the fire, and resembling them with all his might, she gathered her
shawl about her bowed shoulders and went away into the night. The
Discomfited Demon.

I never clearly knew why I visited the old cemetery that night.
Perhaps it was to see how the work of removing the bodies was
getting on, for they were all being taken up and carted away to a
more comfortable place where land was less valuable. It was well
enough; nobody had buried himself there for years, and the skeletons
that were now exposed were old mouldy affairs for which it was
difficult to feel any respect. However, I put a few bones in my
pocket as souvenirs. The night was one of those black, gusty ones in
March, with great inky clouds driving rapidly across the sky,
spilling down sudden showers of rain which as suddenly would cease.
I could barely see my way between the empty graves, and in
blundering about among the coffins I tripped and fell headlong. A
peculiar laugh at my side caused me to turn my head, and I saw a
singular old gentleman whom I had often noticed hanging about the
Coroner's office, sitting cross-legged upon a prostrate tombstone.

"How are you, sir?" said I, rising awkwardly to my feet; "nice
night."

"Get off my tail," answered the elderly party, without moving a
muscle.

"My eccentric friend," rejoined I, mockingly, "may I be permitted to
inquire your street and number?"

"Certainly," he replied, "No. 1, Marle Place, Asphalt Avenue,
Hades."

"The devil!" sneered I.

"Exactly," said he; "oblige me by getting off my tail."

I was a little staggered, and by way of rallying my somewhat dazed
faculties, offered a cigar: "Smoke?"

"Thank you," said the singular old gentleman, putting it under his
coat; "after dinner. Drink?"

I was not exactly prepared for this, but did not know if it would be
safe to decline, and so putting the proffered flask to my lips
pretended to swig elaborately, keeping my mouth tightly closed the
while. "Good article," said I, returning it. He simply remarked,
"You're a fool," and emptied the bottle at a gulp.

"And now," resumed he, "you will confer a favour I shall highly
appreciate by removing your feet from my tail."

There was a slight shock of earthquake, and all the skeletons in
sight arose to their feet, stretched themselves and yawned audibly.
Without moving from his seat, the old gentleman rapped the nearest
one across the skull with his gold-headed cane, and they all curled
away to sleep again.

"Sire," I resumed, "indulge me in the impertinence of inquiring your
business here at this hour."

"My business is none of yours," retorted he, calmly; "what are you
up to yourself?"

"I have been picking up some bones," I replied, carelessly.

"Then you are--"

I am--"

"A Ghoul!"

"My good friend, you do me injustice. You have doubtless read very
frequently in the newspapers of the Fiend in Human Shape whose
actions and way of life are so generally denounced. Sire, you see
before you that maligned party!"

There was a quick jerk under the soles of my feet, which pitched me
prone upon the ground. Scrambling up, I saw the old gentleman
vanishing behind an adjacent sandhill as if the devil were after
him. The Mistake of a Life.

The hotel was in flames. Mr. Pokeweed was promptly on hand, and tore
madly into the burning pile, whence he soon emerged with a nude
female. Depositing her tenderly upon a pile of hot bricks, he mopped
his steaming front with his warm coat-tail.

"Now, Mrs. Pokeweed," said he, "where will I be most likely to find
the children? They will naturally wish to get out."

The lady assumed a stiffly vertical attitude, and with freezing
dignity replied in the words following:

"Sir, you have saved my life; I presume you are entitled to my
thanks. If you are likewise solicitous regarding the fate of the
person you have mentioned, you had better go back and prospect round
till you find her; she would probably be delighted to see you. But
while I have a character to maintain unsullied, you shall not stand
there and call me Mrs. Pokeweed!"

Just then the front wall toppled outward, and Pokeweed cleared the
street at a single bound. He never learned what became of the
strange lady, and to the day of his death he professed an
indifference that was simply brutal. L. S.

Early one evening in the autumn of '64, a pale girl stood singing
Methodist hymns at the summit of Bush Street hill. She was attired,
Spanish fashion, in a loose overcoat and slippers. Suddenly she
broke off her song, a dark-browed young soldier from the Presidio
cautiously approached, and seizing her fondly in his arms, snatched
away the overcoat, retreating with it to an auction-house on Pacific
Street, where it may still be seen by the benighted traveller, just
a-going for two-and-half-and never gone!

The poor maiden after this misfortune felt a bitter resentment
swelling in her heart, and scorning to remain among her kind in that
costume, took her way to the Cliff House, where she arrived, worn
and weary, about breakfast-time.

The landlord received her kindly, and offered her a pair of his best
trousers; but she was of noble blood, and having been reared in
luxury, respectfully declined to receive charity from a low-born
stranger. All efforts to induce her to eat were equally unavailing.
She would stand for hours on the rocks where the road descends to
the beach, and gaze at the playful seals in the surf below, who
seemed rather flattered by her attention, and would swim about,
singing their sweetest songs to her alone. Passers-by were equally
curious as to her, but a broken lyre gives forth no music, and her
heart responded not with any more long metre hymns.

After a few weeks of this solitary life she was suddenly missed. At
the same time a strange seal was noted among the rest. She was
remarkable for being always clad in an overcoat, which she had
doubtless fished up from the wreck of the French galleon
Brignardello, which went ashore there some years afterward.

One tempestuous night, an old hag who had long done business as a
hermitess on Helmet Rock came into the bar-room at the Cliff House,
and there, amidst the crushing thunders and lightnings spilling all
over the horizon, she related that she had seen a young seal in a
comfortable overcoat, sitting pensively upon the pinnacle of Seal
Rock, and had distinctly heard the familiar words of a Methodist
hymn. Upon inquiry the tale was discovered to be founded upon fact.
The identity of this seal could no longer be denied without
downright blasphemy, and in all the old chronicles of that period
not a doubt is even implied.

One day a handsome, dark, young lieutenant of infantry, Don Edmundo
by name, came out to the Cliff House to celebrate his recent
promotion. While standing upon the verge of the cliff, with his
friends all about him, Lady Celia, as visitors had christened her,
came swimming below him, and taking off her overcoat, laid it upon a
rock. She then turned up her eyes and sang a Methodist hymn.

No sooner did the brave Don Edmundo hear it than he tore off his
gorgeous clothes, and cast himself headlong in the billows. Lady
Celia caught him dexterously by the waist in her mouth, and,
swimming to the outer rock, sat up and softly bit him in halves. She
then laid the pieces tenderly in a conspicuous place, put on her
overcoat, and plunging into the waters was never seen more.

Many are the wild fabrications of the poets about her subsequent
career, but to this day nothing authentic has turned up. For some
months strenuous efforts were made to recover the wicked
Lieutenant's body. Every appliance which genius could invent and
skill could wield was put in requisition; until one night the
landlord, fearing these constant efforts might frighten away the
seals, had the remains quietly removed and secretly interred. The
Baffled Asian.

One day in '49 an honest miner up in Calaveras county, California,
bit himself with a small snake of the garter variety, and either as
a possible antidote, or with a determination to enjoy the brief
remnant of a wasted life, applied a brimming jug of whisky to his
lips, and kept it there until, like a repleted leech, it fell off.

The man fell off likewise.

The next day, while the body lay in state upon a pine slab, and the
bereaved partner of the deceased was unbending in a game of seven-up
with a friendly Chinaman, the game was interrupted by a familiar
voice which seemed to proceed from the jaws of the corpse: "I say-
Jim!"

Bereaved partner played the king of spades, claimed "high," and
then, looking over his shoulder at the melancholy remains, replied,
"Well, what is it, Dave? I'm busy."

"I say-Jim!" repeated the corpse in the same measured tone.

With a look of intense annoyance, and muttering something about
"people that could never stop dead more'n a minute," the bereaved
partner rose and stood over the body with his cards in his hand.

"Jim," continued the mighty dead, "how fur's this thing gone?"

"I've paid the Chinaman two-and-a-half to dig the grave," responded
the bereaved.

"Did he strike anything?"

The Chinaman looked up: "Me strikee pay dirt; me no bury dead
'Melican in 'em grave. Me keep 'em claim."

The corpse sat up erect: "Jim, git my revolver and chase that
pig-tail off. Jump his dam sepulchre, and tax his camp five dollars
each fer prospectin' on the public domain. These Mungolyun hordes
hez got to be got under. And-I say-Jim! 'f any more serpents come
foolin' round here drive 'em off. 'T'aint right to be bitin' a
feller when whisky's two dollars a gallon. Dern all foreigners,
anyhow!"

And the mortal part pulled on its boots. TALL TALK. A Call to
Dinner.

When the starving peasantry of France were bearing with inimitable
fortitude their great bereavement in the death of Louis le Grand,
how cheerfully must they have bowed their necks to the easy yoke of
Philip of Orleans, who set them an example in eating which he had
not the slightest objection to their following. A monarch skilled in
the mysteries of the cuisine must wield the sceptre all the more
gently from his schooling in handling the ladle. In royalty, the
delicate manipulation of an omelette soufflé is at once an evidence
of genius, and an assurance of a tender forbearance in state policy.
All good rulers have been good livers, and if all bad ones have been
the same this merely proves that even the worst of men have still
something divine in them.

There is more in a good dinner than is disclosed by the removal of
the covers. Where the eye of hunger perceives but a juicy roast, the
eye of faith detects a smoking God. A well-cooked joint is redolent
of religion, and a delicate pasty is crisp with charity. The man who
can light his after-dinner Havana without feeling full to the neck
with all the cardinal virtues is either steeped in iniquity or has
dined badly. In either case he is no true man. We stoutly contend
that that worthy personage Epicurus has been shamefully
misrepresented by abstemious, and hence envious and mendacious,
historians. Either his philosophy was the most gentle, genial, and
reverential of antique systems, or he was not an Epicurean, and to
call him so is a deceitful flattery. We hold that it is morally
impossible for a man to dine daily upon the fat of the land in
courses, and yet deny a future state of existence, beatific with
beef, and ecstatic with all edibles. Another falsity of history is
that of Heliogabalus-was it not?-dining off nightingales' tongues.
No true gourmet would ever send this warbler to the shambles so long
as scarcer birds might be obtained.

It is a fine natural instinct that teaches the hungry and cadaverous
to avoid the temples of religion, and a short-sighted and
misdirected zeal that would gather them into the sanctuary. Religion
is for the oleaginous, the fat-bellied, chylesaturated devotees of
the table. Unless the stomach be lined with good things, the parson
may say as many as he likes and his truths shall not be swallowed
nor his wisdom inly digested. Probably the highest, ripest, and most
acceptable form of worship is that performed with a knife and fork;
and whosoever on the resurrection morning can produce from amongst
the lumber of his cast-off flesh a thin-coated and elastic stomach,
showing evidences of daily stretchings done in the body, will find
it his readiest passport and best credential. We believe that God
will not hold him guiltless who eats with his knife, but if the
deadly steel be always well laden with toothsome morsels, divine
justice will be tempered with mercy to that man's soul. When the
author of the "Lost Tales" represented Sisyphus as capturing his
guest, the King of Terrors, and stuffing the old glutton with meat
and drink until he became "a jolly, rubicund, tun-bellied Death," he
gave us a tale which needs no hæc fabula docet to point out the
moral.

We verily believe that Shakspeare writ down Fat Jack at his last
gasp, as babbling, not o' green fields, but o' green turtle, and
that that starvling Colley Cibber altered the text from sheer envy
at a good man's death. To die well we must live well, is a familiar
platitude. Morality is, of course, best promoted by the good quality
of our fare, but quantitative excellence is by no means to be
despised. Cæteris paribus, the man who eats much is a better
Christian than the man who eats little, and he who eats little will
pursue a more uninterrupted course of benevolence than he who eats
nothing. On Death and Immortality.

Did it ever strike you, dear reader, that it must be a particularly
pleasant thing to be dead? To say nothing hackneyed about the
blessed freedom from the cares and vexations of life--which we cling
to with such tenacity while we can, and which, when we have no
longer the power to hold, we let go all at once, with probably a
feeling of exquisite relief-and to take no account of this latter
probable but totally undemonstrable felicity, it must be what boys
call awfully jolly to be dead.

Here you are, lying comfortably upon your back-what is left of it-in
the cool dark, and with the smell of the fresh earth all about you.
Your soul goes knocking about amongst an infinity of shadowy things,
Lord knows where, making all sorts of silent discoveries in the
gloom of what was yesterday an unknown and mysterious future, and
which, after centuries of exploration, must still be strangely
unfamiliar. The nomadic thing doubtless comes back occasionally to
the old grave-if the body is so fortunate as to possess one-and
looks down upon it with big round eyes and a lingering tenderness.

It is hard to conceive a soul entirely cut loose from the old bones,
and roving rudderless about eternity. It was probably this inability
to mentally divorce soul from substance that gave us that absurdly
satisfactory belief in the resurrection of the flesh. There is said
to be a race of people somewhere in Africa who believe in the
immortality of the body, but deny the resurrection of the soul. The
dead will rise refreshed after their long sleep, and in their
anxiety to test their rejuvenated powers, will skip bodily away and
forget their souls. Upon returning to look for them, they will find
nothing but little blue flames, which can never be extinguished, but
may be carried about and used for cooking purposes. This belief
probably originates in some dim perception of the law of
compensation. In this life the body is the drudge of the spirit; in
the next the situation is reversed.

The heaven of the Mussulman is not incompatible with this kind of
immortality. Its delights, being merely carnal ones, could be as
well or better enjoyed without a soul, and the latter might be
booked for the Christian heaven, with only just enough of the body
to attach a pair of wings to. Mr. Solyman Muley Abdul Ben Gazel
could thus enjoy a dual immortality and secure a double portion of
eternal felicity at no expense to anybody.

In fact, there can be no doubt whatever that this theory of a double
heaven is the true one, and needs but to be fairly stated to be
universally received, inasmuch as it supposes the maximum of
felicity for terrestrial good behaviour. It is therefore a sensible
theory, resting upon quite as solid a foundation of fact as any
other theory, and must commend itself at once to the proverbial good
sense of Christians everywhere. The trouble is that some
architectural scoundrel of a priest is likely to build a religion
upon it; and what the world needs is theory-good, solid, nourishing
theory. Music-Muscular and Mechanical.

One cheerful evidence of the decivilization of the Anglo-Saxon race
is the late tendency to return to first principles in art, as
manifested in substituting noise for music. Herein we detect
symptoms of a rapid relapse into original barbarism. The savage who
beats his gong or kettledrum until his face is of a delicate blue,
and his eyes assert themselves like those of an unterrified snail,
believes that musical skill is a mere question of brawn-a matter of
muscle. If not wholly ignorant of technical gymnastics, he has a
theory that a deftness at dumb-bells is a prime requisite in a
finished artist. The advance-in a circle-of civilization has only
partially unsettled this belief in the human mind, and we are
constantly though unconsciously reverting to it.

It is true the modern demand for a great deal of music has
outstripped the supply of muscle for its production; but the
ingenuity of man has partially made up for his lack of physical
strength, and the sublimer harmonies may still be rendered with
tolerable effectiveness, and with little actual fatigue to the
artist. As we retrograde towards the condition of Primeval Man-the
man with the gong and kettledrum-the blacksmith slowly reasserts his
place as the interpreter of the maestro.

But there is a limit beyond which muscle, whether that of the arm or
cheek, can no further go, without too great an expenditure of force
in proportion to the volume of noise attainable. And right here the
splendid triumphs of modern invention and discovery are made
manifest; electricity and gunpowder come to the relief of puny
muscle, simple appliance, and orchestras limited by sparse
population. Batteries of artillery thunder exultingly our victory
over Primeval Man, beaten at his own game-signally routed and put to
shame, pounding his impotent gong and punishing his ridiculous
kettledrum in frantic silence, amidst the clash and clang and roar
of modern art. The Good Young Man.

Why is he? Why defaces he the fair page of creation, and why is he
to be continued? This has never been explained; it is one of those
dispensations of Providence the design whereof is wrapped in
profoundest obscurity. The good young man is perhaps not without
excuse for his existence, but society is without excuse for
permitting it. At his time of life to be "good" is to insult
humanity. Goodness is proper to the aged; it is their sole glory;
why should this milky stripling bring it into disrepute? Why should
he be permitted to defile with the fat of his sleek locks a crown
intended to adorn the grizzled pow of his elders?

A young man may be manly, gentle, honourable, noble, tender and
true, and nobody will ever think of calling him a good young man.
Your good young man is commonly a sneak, and is very nearly allied
to that other social pest, the "nice young lady." As applied to the
immature male of our kind, the adjective "good" seems to have been
perverted from its original and ordinary signification, and to have
acquired a dyslogistic one. It is a term of reproach, and means, as
nearly as may be, "characterless." That any one should submit to
have it applied to him is proof of the essential cowardice of
Virtue.

We believe the direst ill afflicting civilization is the good young
man. The next direst is his natural and appointed mate, the nice
young lady. If the two might be tied neck and heels together and
flung into the sea, the land would be the fatter for it. The Average
Parson.

Our objection to him is not that he is senseless; this-as it
concerns us not-we can patiently endure. Nor that he is bigoted;
this we expect, and have become accustomed to. Nor that he is
small-souled, narrow, and hypocritical; all these qualities become
him well, sitting easily and gracefully upon him. We protest against
him because he is always "carrying on."

To carry on, in one way or another, seems to be the function of his
existence, and essential to his health. When he is not doing it in
the pulpit he is at it in the newspapers; when both fail him he
resorts to the social circle, the church meeting, the Sunday-school,
or even the street corner. We have known him to disport for half a
day upon the kerb-stone, carrying on with all his might to
whomsoever would endure it.

No sooner does a young sick-faced theologue get safely through his
ordination, as a baby finishes teething, than straightway he casts
about him for an opportunity to carry on. A pretext is soon found,
and he goes at it hammer and tongs; and forty years after you shall
find him at the same trick with as simple a faith, as exalted an
expectation, as vigorous an impotence, as the day he began.

His carryings-on are as diverse in kind, as comprehensive in scope,
as those of the most versatile negro minstrel. He cuts as many
capers in a lifetime as there are stars in heaven or grains of sand
in a barrel of sugar. Everything is fish that comes to his net. If a
discovery in science is announced, he will execute you an antic upon
it before it gets fairly cold. Is a new theory advanced-ten to one
while you are trying to get it through your head he will stand on
his own and make mouths at it. A great invention provokes him into a
whirlwind of flip-flaps absolutely bewildering to the secular eye;
while at any exceptional phenomenon of nature, such as an
earthquake, he will project himself frog-like into an infinity of
lofty gymnastic absurdities.

In short, the slightest agitation of the intellectual atmosphere
sets your average parson into a tempest of pumping like the jointed
ligneous youth attached to the eccentric of a boy's whirligig. His
philosophy of life may be boiled down into a single sentence: Carry
on and you will be happy. Did We Eat One Another?

There is no doubt of it. The unwelcome truth has long been
suppressed by interested parties who find their account in playing
sycophant to that self-satisfied tyrant Modern Man; but to the
impartial philosopher it is as plain as the nose upon an elephant's
face that our ancestors ate one another. The custom of the Fiji
Islanders, which is their only stock-in-trade, their only claim to
notoriety, is a relic of barbarism; but it is a, relic of our
barbarism.

Man is naturally a carnivorous animal. This none but greengrocers
will dispute. That he was formerly less vegetarian in his diet than
at present, is clear from the fact that market-gardening increases
in the ratio of civilization. So we may safely assume that at some
remote period Man subsisted upon an exclusively flesh diet. Our
uniform vanity has given us the human mind as the ne plus ultra of
intelligence, the human face and figure as the standard of beauty.
Of course we cannot deny to human fat and lean an equal superiority
over beef, mutton, and pork. It is plain that our meat-eating
ancestors would think in this way, and, being unrestrained by the
mawkish sentiment attendant upon high civilization, would act
habitually upon the obvious suggestion. A priori, therefore, it is
clear that we ate ourselves.

Philology is about the only thread which connects us with the
prehistoric past. By picking up and piecing out the scattered
remnants of language, we form a patchwork of wondrous design. Oblige
us by considering the derivation of the word "sarcophagus," and see
if it be not suggestive of potted meats. Observe the significance of
the phrase "sweet sixteen." What a world of meaning lurks in the
expression "she is sweet as a peach," and how suggestive of luncheon
are the words "tender youth." A kiss itself is but a modified bite,
and when a young girl insists upon making a "strawberry mark" upon
the back of your hand, she only gives way to an instinct she has not
yet learned to control. The fond mother, when she says her babe is
almost "good enough to eat," merely shows that she herself is only a
trifle too good to eat it.

These evidences might be multiplied ad infinitum; but if enough has
been said to induce one human being to revert to the diet of his
ancestors, the object of this essay is accomplished. Your Friend's
Friend.

If there is any individual who combines within himself the vices of
an entire species it is he. A mother-in-law has usually been thought
a rather satisfactory specimen of total depravity; it has been
customary to regard your sweetheart's brother as tolerably vicious
for a young man; there is excellent authority for looking upon your
business partner as not wholly without merit as a nuisance-but your
friend's friend is as far ahead of these in all that constitutes a
healthy disagreeableness as they themselves are in advance of the
average reptile or the conventional pestilence.

We do not propose to illustrate the great truth we have in hand by
instances; the experience of the reader will furnish ample evidence
in support of our proposition, and any narration of pertinent facts
could only quicken into life the dead ghosts of a thousand sheeted
annoyances to squeak and gibber through a memory studded thick with
the tombstones of happy hours murdered by your friend's friend.

Also, the animal is too well known to need a description. Imagine a
thing in all essential particulars the exact reverse of a desirable
acquaintance, and you have his mental photograph. How your friend
could ever admire so hopeless and unendurable a bore is a problem
you are ever seeking to solve. Perhaps you may be assisted in it by
a previous solution of the kindred problem-how he could ever feel
affection for yourself? Perhaps your friend's friend is equally
exercised over that question. Perhaps from his point of view you are
your friend's friend. Le Diable est aux Vaches.

If it be that ridicule is the test of truth, as Shaftesbury is
reported to have said and didn't, the doctrine of Woman Suffrage is
the truest of all faiths. The amount of really good ridicule that
has been expended upon this thing is appalling, and yet we are
compelled to confess that to all appearance "the cause" has been
thereby shorn of no material strength, nor bled of its vitality. And
shall it be admitted that this potent argument of little minds is as
powerless as the dullards of all ages have steadfastly maintained?
Forbid it, Heaven! the gimlet is as proper a gimlet as any in all
Christendom, but the timber is too hard to pierce! Grant ye that
"the movement" is waxing more wondrous with each springing sun, who
shall say what it might not have been but for the sharp hatcheting
of us wits among its boughs? If the doctor have not cured his
patient by to-morrow he may at least claim that without the physic
the man would have died to-day.

And pray who shall search the vitals of a whale with a bodkin-who
may reach his jackknife through the superposed bubber? Pachyderm,
thy name is Woman! All the king's horses and all the king's men
shall not bend the bow that can despatch a clothyard shaft through
thy pearly hide. The male and female women who nightly howl their
social and political grievances into the wide ear of the universe
are as insensible to the prickings of ridicule as they are
unconscious of logic. An intellectual Goliah of Gath might spear
them with an epigram like unto a weaver's beam, and the sting
thereof would be as but the nipping of a red ant. Apollo might speed
among them his silver arrows, which erst heaped the Phrygian shores
with hecatombs of Argive slain, and they would but complain of the
mosquito's beak. Your female reformer goes smashing through society
like a tipsy rhinoceros among the tulip beds, and all the torrent of
brickbats rained upon her skin is shed, as globules of mercury might
be supposed to run off the back of a dry drake.

One of the rarest amusements in life is to go about with an icicle
suspended by a string, letting it down the necks of the unwary. The
sudden shrug, the quick frightened shudder, the yelp of apprehension
are sources of a pure, because diabolical, delight. But these
women-you may practise your chilling joke upon one of them, and she
will calmly wonder where you got your ice, and will pen with
deliberate fingers an ungrammatical resolution denouncing
congelation as tyrannical and obsolete.

We despair of ever dispelling these creatures by pungent
pleasantries-of routing them by sharp censure. They are, apparently,
to go on practically unmolested to the end. Meantime we are cast
down with a mighty proneness along the dust; our shapely anatomy is
clothed in a jaunty suit of sackcloth liberally embellished with the
frippery of ashes; our days are vocal with wailing, our nights
melodious with snuffle!

Brethren, let us pray that the political sceptre may not pass from
us into the jewelled hands which were intended by nature for the
clouting of babes and sucklings. Angels and Angles.

When abandoned to her own devices, the average female has a tendency
to "put on her things," and to contrive the same, in a manner that
is not conducive to patience in the male beholder. Her besetting
iniquity in this particular is a fondness for angles, and she is
unwavering in her determination to achieve them at whatever cost.

Now we vehemently affirm that in woman's apparel an angle is an
offence to the male eye, and therefore a crime of no small
magnitude. In the masculine garb angles are tolerable-angles of
whatever acuteness. The masculine character and life are rigid and
angular, and the apparel should, or at least may, proclaim the man.
But with the soft, rounded nature of woman, her bending flexibility
of temper, angles are absolutely incompatible. In her outward
seeming all should be easy and flowing-every fold a nest of graces,
and every line a curve.

By close attention to this great truth, and a conscientious striving
after its advantages, woman may hope to become rather comely of
exterior, and to find considerable favour in the eyes of man. It is
not impossible that, without any abatement of her present
usefulness, she may come to be regarded as actually ornamental, and
even attractive. If with her angles she will also renounce some
hundreds of other equally harassing absurdities of attire, she may
consider her position assured, and her claim to masculine toleration
reasonably well grounded. A Wingless Insect.

It would be profitable in the end if man would take a hint from his
lack of wings, and settle down comfortably into the assurance that
midair is not his appointed element. The confession is a humiliating
one, but there is a temperate balm in the consciousness that his
inability to "shave with level wing" the blue empyrean cannot justly
be charged upon himself. He has done his endeavour, and done it
nobly; but he'll break his precious neck.

In Goldsmith's veracious "History of Animated Nature" is a sprightly
account of one Nicolas, who was called, if our memory be not at
fault, the man-fish, and who was endowed by his Creator-the late Mr.
Goldsmith aforesaid-with the power of conducting an active existence
under the sea. That equally veracious and instructive work "The
Arabian Nights' Entertainments," peoples the bottom of old ocean
with powerful nations of similarly gifted persons; while in our own
day "the Man-Frog" has taught us what may be done in this line when
one has once got the knack of it.

Some years since (we do not know if he has yet suffered martyrdom at
the hand of the fiendish White) there lived a noted Indian chieftain
whose name, being translated, signifies "The-
Man-Who-Walks-Under-the-Ground," probably a lineal descendant of the
gnomes. We have ourselves walked under the ground in wine cellars.

With these notable examples in mind, we are not prepared to assert
that, though man has as a rule neither the gills of a fish nor the
nose of a mole, he may not enjoy a drive at the bottom of the sea,
or a morning ramble under the subsoil. But with the exception of
Peter Wilkins' Flying Islanders-whose existence we vehemently
dispute-and some similar creatures whom it suits our purpose to
ignore, there is no record of any person to whom the name of
The-Man-Who-Flies-Over-the-Hills may be justly applied. We make no
account of the shallow device of Mongolfier, nor the dubious
contrivance of Marriott. A gentleman of proper aspirations would
scorn to employ either, as the Man-Frog would reject a diving-bell,
or the subterranean chieftain would sneer at the Mont Cenis tunnel.
These "weak inventions" only emphasize our impotence to strive with
the subtle element about and above. They prove nothing so
conclusively as that we can't fly-a fact still more strikingly
proven by the constant thud of people tumbling out of them. To a
Titan of comprehensive ear, who could catch the noises of a world
upon his single tympanum as Hector caught Argive javelins upon his
shield, the patter of dropping aëronauts would sound like the gentle
pelting of hailstones upon a dusty highway-so thick and fast they
fall.

It is probable that man is no more eager to float free into space
than the earth-if it be sentient-is to shake him off; but it would
appear that he and it must, like the Siamese twins, consent to
endure the disadvantages of a mutually disagreeable intimacy. We
submit that it is hardly worth his while to continue "larding the
lean earth" with his carcase in the vain endeavour to emulate
angels, whom in no respect he at all resembles. Pork on the Hoof.

The motto aut Cæsar aut nullus is principally nonsense, we take it.
If one may not be a man, one may, in most cases, be a hog with equal
satisfaction to his mind and heart.

There is Thompson Washington Smith, for example (his name is not
Thompson, nor Washington, nor yet Smith; we call him so to conceal
his real name, which is perhaps Smythe). Now Thompson, there is
reason to believe, tried earnestly for some years to be a man. Alas!
he began while he was a boy, and got exhausted before he arrived at
maturity. He could make no further effort, and manhood is not
acquired without a mighty struggle, nor maintained without untiring
industry. So having fatigued himself before reaching the
starting-point, Thompson Washington did not re-enter the race for
manhood, but contented his simple soul with achieving a modest
swinehood. He became a hog of considerable talent and promise.

Let it not be supposed that Thompson has anything in common with
the typical, ideal hog-him who encrusts his hide with clay, and
inhumes his muzzle in garbage. Far from it; he is a cleanly-almost a
godly-hog, preternaturally fair of exterior, and eke fastidious of
appetite. He is glossy of coat, stainless of shirt, immaculate of
trousers. He is shiny of beaver and refulgent of boot. With all, a
Hog. Watch him ten minutes under any circumstances and his face
shall seem to lengthen and sharpen away, split at the point, and
develop an unmistakeable snout. A ridge of bristles will struggle
for sunlight under the gloss of his coat. This is your imagination,
and that is about as far as it will take you. So long as Thompson
Washington, actual, maintains a vertical attitude, Thompson
Washington, unreal, will not assume an horizontal one. Your fancy
cannot "go the whole hog."

It only remains to state explicitly to whom we are alluding. Well,
there is a stye in the soul of every one of us, in which abides a
porker more or less objectionable. We don't all let him range at
large, like Smith, but he will occasionally exalt his visage above
the rails of even the most cleverly constructed pen. The best of us
are they who spend most time repressing the beast by rapping him
upon the nose. The Young Person.

We are prepared, not perhaps to prove, but to maintain, that
civilization would be materially aided and abetted by the offer of a
liberal reward for the scalps of Young Persons with the ears
attached. Your regular Young Person is a living nuisance, whose
every act is a provocation to exterminate her. We say "her," not
because, physically considered, the Y. P. is necesarily of the she
sex; more commonly is it an irreclaimable male; but morally and
intellectually it is an unmixed female. Her virtues are merely
milk-and-morality-her intelligence is pure spiritual whey. Her
conversation (to which not even her own virtues and intelligence are
in any way related) is three parts rain-water that has stood too
long and one part cider that has not stood long enough-a sickening,
sweetish compound, one dose of which induces in the mental stomach a
colicky qualm, followed, if no correctives be taken, by violent
retching, coma, and death.

The Young Person vegetates best in the atmosphere of parlours and
ball-rooms; if she infested the fields and roadsides like the
squirrels, lizards, and mud-hens, she would be as ruthlessly
exterminated as they. Every passing sportsman would fill her with
duck-shot, and every strolling gentleman would step out of his way
to smite off her head with his cane, as one decapitates a thistle.
But in the drawing-room one lays off his destructiveness with his
hat and gloves, and the Young Person enjoys the same immunity that a
sleepy mastiff grants to the worthless kitten campaigning against
his nose.

But there is no good reason why the Spider should be destroyed and
the Young Person tolerated. A Certain Popular Fallacy.

The world makes few graver mistakes than in supposing a man must
necessarily possess all the cardinal virtues because he has a big
dog and some dirty children.

We know a butcher whose children are not merely dirty-they are
fearfully and wonderfully besmirched by the hand of an artist. He
has, in addition, a big dog with a tendency to dropsy, who flies at
you across the street with such celerity that he outruns his bark by
a full second, and you are warned of your danger only after his
teeth are buried in your leg. And yet the owner of these children
and father of this dog is no whit better, to all appearance, than a
baker who has clean brats and a mild poodle. He is not even a good
butcher; he hacks a rib and lacerates a sirloin. He talks through
his nose, which turns up to such an extent that the voice passes
right over your head, and you have to get on a table to tell whether
he is slandering his dead wife or swearing at yourself.

If that man possessed a thousand young ones, exaltedly nasty, and
dogs enough to make a sub-Atlantic cable of German sausage, you
would find it difficult to make us believe in him. In fact, we look
upon the big dog test of morality as a venerable mistake-natural but
erroneous; and we regard dirty children as indispensable in no other
sense than that they are inevitable. Pastoral Journalism.

There shall be joy in the household of the country editor what time
the rural mind shall no longer crave the unhealthy stimuli afforded
by fascinating accounts of corpulent beets, bloated pumpkins,
dropsical melons, aspiring maize, and precocious cabbages. Then the
bucolic journalist shall have surcease of toil, and may go out upon
the meads to frisk with kindred lambs, frolic familiarly with
loose-jointed colts, and exchange grave gambollings with solemn
cows. Then shall the voice of the press, no longer attuned to the
praises of the vegetable kingdom, find a more humble, but not less
useful, employment in calling the animal kingdom to the evening meal
beneath the sanctum window.

To the over-worked editor life will have a fresh zest and a new
significance. The hills shall hump more greenly upward to a bluer
sky, the fields blush with a more tender sunshine. He will go forth
at dawn with countless flipflaps of gymnastic joy; and when the
white sun shall redden with the blood of dying day, and the hogs
shall set up a fine evening hymn of supplication to the Giver of
Swill, he will stand upon the editorial head, blissfully conscious
that his intellect is a-ripening for the morrow's work.

The rural newspaper! We sit with it in hand, running our fingers
over the big staring letters, as over the black and white keys of a
piano, drumming out of them a mild melody of perfect repose. With
what delight do we disport us in the illimitable void of its
nothingness, as who should swim in air! Here is nothing to
startle-nothing to wound. The very atmosphere is saturated with "the
spirit of the rural press;" and even our dog stands by, with pendant
tail, slowly dropping the lids over his great eyes; and then,
jerking them suddenly up again, tries to look as if he were not
sleepy in the least. A pleasant smell of ploughed ground comes
strong upon us. The tinkle of ghostly cow-bells falls drowsily upon
the ear. Airy figures of phenomenal esculents float dreamily before
our half-shut eyes, and vanish ere perfect vision can catch them.
About and above are the drone of bees, and the muffled thunder of
milk streams shooting into the foaming pail. The gabble of distant
geese is faintly marked off by the bark of a distant dog. The city
with its noises sinks away from our feet as from one in a balloon,
and our senses are steeped in country languor. We slumber.

God bless the man who first invented the country newspaper!-though
Sancho Panza blessed him once before. Mendicity's Mistake.

Your famishing beggar is a fish of as sorry aspect as may readily be
scared up. Generally speaking, he is repulsive as to hat, abhorrent
as to vesture, squalid of boot, and in tout ensemble unseemly and
atrocious. His appeal for alms falls not more vexingly upon the ear
than his offensive personality smites hard upon the eye. The
touching effectiveness of his tale is ever neutralized by the
uncomeliness of his raiment and the inartistic besmirchedness of his
countenance. His pleading is like the pathos of some moving ballad
from the lips of a negro minstrel; shut your eyes and it shall make
you fumble in your pocket for your handkerchief; open them, and you
would fain draw out a pistol instead.

It is to be wished that Poverty would garb his body in a clean skin,
that Adversity would cultivate a taste for spotless linen, and that
Beggary would address himself unto your pocket from beneath a downy
hat. However, we cannot hope to immediately impress these worthy
mendicants with the advantage of devoting a portion of their gains
to the purchase of purple and fine linen, instead of expending their
all upon the pleasures of the table and riotous living; but our duty
unto them remains.

The very least that one can do for the offensive needy is to direct
them to the nearest clothier. That, therefore, is the proper course.
Insects.

Every one has observed, a solitary ant breasting a current of his
fellows as he retraces his steps to pack off something he has
forgotten. At each meeting with a neighbour there is a mutual pause,
and the two confront each other for a moment, reaching out their
delicate antennæ, and making a critical examination of one another's
person. This the little creature repeats with tireless persistence
to the end of his journey.

As with the ant, so with the other insect-the sprightly "female of
our species." It is really delightful to watch the fine frenzy of
her lovely eye as she notes the approach of a woman more gorgeously
arrayed than herself, or the triumphant contempt that settles about
her lips at the advance of a poorly clad sister. How contemplatively
she lingers upon each detail of attire-with what keen penetration
she takes in the general effect at a sweep!

And this suggests the fearful thought-what would the darlings do if
they wore no clothes? One-half their pleasure in walking on the
street would vanish like a dream, and an equal proportion of the
philosopher's happiness in watching them would perish in the barren
prospect of an inartistic nudity. Picnicking considered as a
Mistake.

Why do people attend public picnics? We do not wish to be iterative,
but why do they? Heaven help them! it is because they know no
better, and no one has had the leisure to enlighten them.

Now your picnic-goer is a muff-an egregious, gregarious muff, and a
glutton. Moreover, a nobody who, if he be male wears, in nine cases
in ten, a red necktie and a linen duster to his heel; if she be
female hath soiled hose to her calf, and in her face a premonition
of colic to come.

We hold it morally impossible to attend a picnic and come home pure
in heart and undefiled of cuticle. For the dust will get in your
nose, clog your ears, make clay in your mouth and mortar in your
eyes, and so stop up all the natural passages to the soul; whereby
the wickedness which that subtle organ doth constantly excrete is
balked of its issue, tainting the entire system with a grievous
taint.

At picnics, moreover, is engendered an unpleasant perspiration,
which the patient must perforce endure until he shall bathe him in a
bath. It is not sweet to reek, and your picnicker must reek. Should
he chance to break a leg, or she a limb, the inevitable exposure of
the pedal condition is alarming and eke humiliating. Thanksgiving
Day.

There be those of us whose memories, though vexed with an
oyster-rake would not yield matter for gratitude, and whose piety
though strained through a sieve would leave no trace of an object
upon which to lavish thanks. It is easy enough, with a waistcoat
selected for the occasion, to eat one's proportion of turkey and
hide away one's allowance of wine; and if this be returning thanks,
why then gratitude is considerably easier, and vastly more
agreeable, than falling off a log, and may be acquired in one easy
lesson without a master. But if more than this be required-if to be
grateful means anything beyond being gluttonous, your true
philosopher--he of the severe brow upon which logic has stamped its
eternal impress, and from whose heart sentiment has been banished
along with other small vices-your true philosopher, say we, will
think twice before he "crooks the pregnant hinges of the knee" in
humble observance of the day.

For here is the nut of reason he is obliged to crack before he can
obtain the kernel of emotion proper to the day. Unless the blessings
we enjoy are favours from the Omnipotent, to be grateful is to be
absurd. If they are, then, also the ills with which we are afflicted
have the same origin. Grant this, and you make an offset of the
latter against the former, or are driven either to the ridiculous
position that we must be equally grateful for both evils and
blessings, or the no less ridiculous one that all evils are
blessings in disguise.

But the truth is, my fine friend, your annual gratitude is a sorry
sham, a cloak, my good fellow, to cover your unhandsome gluttony;
and when by chance you do take to your knees, it is only that you
prefer to digest your bird in that position. We understand your case
accurately, and the hard sense we are poking at you is not a
preachment for your edification, but a bit of harmless fun for our
own diversion. For, look you! there is really a subtle but potent
relation between the gratitude of the spirit and the stuffing of the
flesh.

We have ever taught the identity of Soul and Stomach; these are but
different names for one object considered under differing aspects.
Thankfulness we believe to be a kind of ether evolved by the action
of the gastric fluid upon rich meats. Like all gases it ascends, and
so passes out of the esophagus in prayer and psalmody. This
beautiful theory we have tested by convincing experiments in the
manner following:--

Experiment 1st.--A quantity of grass was placed in a large bladder,
and a gill of the gastric fluid of a sheep introduced. In ten
minutes the neck of the bladder emitted a contented bleat.

Experiment 2nd.--A pound of beef was substituted for the grass, and
the fluid of a dog for that of the sheep. The result was a cheerful
bark, accompanied by an agitation of the bottom of the bladder, as
if it were attempting to wag an imaginary tail.

Experiment 3rd.--The bladder was charged with a handful of chopped
turkey, and an ounce of human gastric juice obtained from the
Coroner. At first, nothing but a deep sigh of satisfaction escaped
from the neck of the bladder, followed by an unmistakeable grunt,
similar to that of a hog. Upon increasing the proportion of turkey,
and confining the gas, the bladder was very much distended,
appearing to suffer great uneasiness. The restriction being removed,
the neck distinctly articulated the words "Praise God, from whom all
blessings flow!"

Against such demonstration as this any mere theological theorizing
is of no avail. Flogging.

It may justly be demanded of the essayist that he shall give some
small thought to the question of corporal punishment by means of the
"cat," and "ground-ash." We have given the subject the most
elaborate attention; we have written page after page upon it. Day
and night we have toiled and perspired over that distressing
problem. Through Summer's sun and Winter's snow, with all
unfaltering purpose, we have strung miles of ink upon acres of
paper, weaving wisdom into eloquence with the tireless industry of a
silkworm fashioning his cocoon. We have refused food, scorned sleep,
and endured thirst to see our work grow beneath our cunning hand.
The more we wrote the wiser we became; the opinions of one day were
rejected the next; the blind surmising of yesterday ripened into the
full knowledge of to-day, and this matured into the superhuman
omniscience of this evening. We have finally got so infernally
clever that we have abandoned the original design of our great work,
and determined to make it a compendium of everything that is
accurately known up to date, and the bearing of this upon flogging
in general.

To other, and inferior, writers it is most fortunate that our design
has taken so wide a scope. These can go on with their perennial
wrangle over the petty question of penal and educational
flagellation, while we grapple with the higher problem, and unfold
the broader philosophy of an universal walloping. Reflections upon
the Beneficent Influence of the Press.

Reflection 1.--The beneficent influence of the Press is most talked
about by the Press.

Reflection 2.--If the Press were less evenly divided upon all social,
political, and moral questions the influence of its beneficence
would be greater than it is.

Reflection 3.--The beneficence of its influence would be more marked.

Reflection 4.--If the Press were more wise and righteous than it is,
it might escape the reproach of being more foolish and wicked than
it should be.

Reflection 5.--The foregoing Reflection is not an identical
proposition.

Reflection 6.--(a) The beneficent influence of the Press cannot be
purchased for money. (b) It can if you have enough money. Charity.

Charity is certain to bring its reward-if judiciously bestowed. The
Anglo-Saxons are the most charitable race in the world-and the most
judicious. The right hand should never know of the charity that the
left hand giveth. There is, however, no objection to putting it in
the papers. Charity is usually represented with a babe in her
arms-going to place it benevolently upon a rich man's doorstep. The
Study of Human Nature.

To the close student of human nature no place offers such manifold
attractions, such possibilities of deep insight, such a mine of
suggestion, such a prodigality of illustration, as a pig-pen at
feeding time. It has been said, with allusion to this philosophical
pursuit, that "there is no place like home;" but it will be seen
that this is but another form of the same assertion.--End of the
Essay upon the Study of Human Nature. Additional Talk-Done in the
Country. I.

.... Life in the country may be compared to the aimless drifting of
a house-dog professing to busy himself about a lawn. He goes nosing
about, tacking and turning here and there with the most intense
apparent earnestness; and finally seizes a blade of grass by the
middle, chews it savagely, drops it; gags comically, and curls away
to sleep as if worn out with some mighty exercise. Whatever pursuit
you may engage in in the country is sure to end in nausea, which you
are quite as sure to try to get recognised as fatigue. II.

.... A windmill keeps its fans going about; they do not stop long in
one position. A man should be like the fans of a windmill; he should
go about a good deal, and not stop long-in the country. III.

.... A great deal has been written and said and sung in praise of
green trees. And yet there are comparatively few green trees that
are good to eat. Asparagus is probably the best of them, though
celery is by no means to be despised. Both may be obtained in any
good market in the city. IV.

.... A cow in walking does not, as is popularly supposed, pick up
all her feet at once, but only one of them at a time. Which one
depends upon circumstances. The cow is but an indifferent
pedestrian. Hæc fabula docet that one should not keep three-fourths
of his capital lying idle. V.

.... The Quail is a very timorous bird, who never achieves anything
notable, yet he has a crest. The Jay, who is of a warlike and
powerful family, has no crest. There is a moral in this which
Aristocracy will do well to ponder. But the quail is very good to
eat and the jay is not. The quail is entitled to a crest. (In the
Eastern States, this meditation will provoke dispute, for there the
jay has a crest and the quail has not. The Eastern States are
exceptional and inferior.) VI.

.... The destruction of rubbish with fire makes a very great smoke.
In this particular a battle resembles the destruction of rubbish.
There would be a close resemblance even if a battle evolved no
smoke. Rubbish, by the way, is not good eating, but an essayist
should not be a gourmet-in the country. VII.

.... Sweet milk should be taken only in the middle of the night. If
taken during the day it forms a curd in the stomach, and breeds a
dire distress. In the middle of the night the stomach is supposed to
be innocent of whisky, and it is the whisky that curdles the milk.
Should you be sleeping nicely, I would not advise you to come out of
that condition to drink sweet milk. VIII.

.... In the country the atmosphere is of unequal density, and in
passing through the denser portions your silk hat will be ruffled,
and the country people will jeer at it. They will jeer at it anyhow.
When going into the country, you should leave your silk hat at a
bank, taking a certificate of deposit. IX.

.... The sheep chews too fast to enjoy his victual.






CURRENT JOURNALINGS.





... Following is the manner of death incurred by Dr. Deadwood, the
celebrated African explorer, which took place at Ujijijijiji, under
the auspices of the Royal Geographical Society of England, assisted,
at some distance, by Mr. Shandy of the New York Herald;--

An intelligent gorilla has recently been imported to this country,
who had the good fortune to serve the Doctor as a body servant in
the interior of Africa, and he thus describes the manner of his
master's death. The Doctor was accustomed to pass his nights in the
stomach of an acquaintance-a crocodile about fifty feet long.
Stepping out one evening to take an observation of one of the lunar
eclipses peculiar to the country, he spoke to his host, saying that
as he should not return, until after bedtime, he would not trouble
him to sit up to let him in; he would just leave the door open till
he came home. By way of doing so, he set up a stout fence-rail
between his landlord's distended jaws, and went away.

Returning about midnight, he took off his boots outside, so as not
to awaken his friend, entered softly, knocked away the prop, and
prepared to turn in. But the noise of pounding on the rail had
aroused the householder, and so great was the feeling of relief
induced by the relaxation of the maxillary muscles, that he
unconsciously shut his mouth to smile, without giving his tenant
time to get into the bedroom. The Doctor was just stooping to untie
his drawers, when he was caught between the floor and ceiling, like
a lemon in a squeezer.

Next day the melancholy remains were given up to our informant, who
displays a singular reticence regarding his disposition of them;
merely picking his teeth with his claws in an absent, thoughtful
kind of way, as if the subject were too mournful to be discussed in
all its harrowing details.

None of the Doctor's maps or instruments were recovered; his
bereaved landlord holds them as security for certain rents claimed
to be due and unpaid. It is probable that Great Britain will make a
stern demand for them, and if they are not at once surrendered
will-submit her claim to a Conference.

.... The prim young maidens who affiliate with the Young Men's
Christian Association of San Francisco-who furnish the posies for
their festivals, and assist in the singing of psalms-have a
gymnasium in the temple. Thither they troop nightly to display their
skill in turning inside out and shutting themselves up like
jack-knives of the gentler kind.

Here may be seen the godly Rachel and the serious Ruth, suspended by
their respective toes between the heaven to which they aspire and
the wicked world they do abhor. Here the meek-eyed Hannah, pendent
from the horizontal bar, doubleth herself upon herself and stares
fixedly backward from between her shapely limbs, a thing of beauty
and a joy for several minutes. Mehitable Ann, beloved of young
Soapenlocks, vaults lightly over a barrier and with unspoken prayer
lays hold on the unstable trapeze mounting aloft in air. Jerusha,
comeliest of her sex, ties herself in a double bow-knot, and
meditates upon the doctrine of election.

O, blessed temple of grace divine! O, innocence and youth and simple
faith! O, water and molasses and unsalted butter! O, niceness
absolute and godly whey! Would that we were like unto these ewe
lambs, that we might frisk and gambol among them without evil. Would
that we were female, and Christian, and immature, with a flavour as
of green grass and a hope in heaven. Then would we, too, sing hymns
through our blessed nose, and contort and musculate with much
satisfaction of soul, even in the gymnasium of The Straight-backed.

.... Some raging iconoclast, after having overthrown religion by
history, upset history by science, and then toppled over science,
has now laid his impious hands upon babies' nursing bottles.

"The tubes of these infernal machines," says this tearing beast,
"are composed of india-rubber dissolved in bisulphide of carbon,
and thickened with lead, resin, and sometimes oxysulphuret of
antimony, from which, when it comes in contact with the milk,
sulphuretted hydrogen is evolved, and lactate of lead formed in the
stomach."

This logic is irresistible. Granting only that the tubes are made in
that simple and intelligible manner (and anybody can see for himself
that they are), the sulphuretted hydrogen and the lactate of lead
follow (down the osophagus) as a logical sequence. But the
scientific horror seems to be profoundly unaware that these
substances are not only harmless to the child, but actually
nutritious and essential to its growth. Not only so, but nature has
implanted in its breast an instinctive craving for these very
comforts. Often have we seen some wee thing turn disgusted from the
breast and lift up its thin voice: "Not for Joseph; give me the
bottle with the oxysulphuret of antimony tube. I take sulphuretted
hydrogen and lactate of lead in mine every time!" And we have said:
"Nature is working in that darling. What God hath joined together
let no man put asunder!"

And we have thought of the wicked iconoclast.

.... There are a lot of evil-minded horses about the city, who seem
to take a fiendish delight in letting fly their heels at whomsoever
they catch in a godly reverie unconscious of their proximity. This
is perfectly natural and human, but it is annoying to be always
getting horse-kicked when one is not in a mood for it.

The worst of it is, these horses always manage it so as to get
tethered across the sidewalk in the most populous thoroughfares,
where they at once drop into the semblance of a sound slumber. By
this means they lure the unsuspecting to their doom, and just as
some unconscious pedestrian is passing astern of them they wake up,
and without a preliminary yawn, or even a warning shake of the tail
like the more chivalrous rattlesnake, they at once discharge their
feet at him with a rapidity and effect that are quite surprising if
the range be not too long. Usually this occurs in Merchant-street,
below Montgomery, and the damage is merely nominal; some worthless
Italian fisherman, market gardener, or decayed gentleman oozing out
of a second-class restaurant being the only sufferer.

Rut not infrequently these playful brutes get themselves tethered in
some fashionable promenade, and the consequence is demoralizing to
white people. We speak within the limits of possibility when we say
that we have seen no less than seven women and children in the air
at once, impelled heavenward by as many consecutive kicks of a
single skilled operator. No longer ago than we can remember we saw
an aged party in spectacles and a clawhammer coat gyrating through
the air like an irregular bolt shot out of a catapult. Before we
could ascertain from him the site of the quadruped from whom he had
received his impulsion, he had passed like a vague dream, and the
equine scoundrel went unwhipped of justice.

These flying squadrons are serious inconveniences to public travel;
it is conducive to profanity to have a whizzing young woman, a
rattling old man, or a singing baby flung against one's face every
few moments by the hoofs of some animal whom one has never injured,
and who is a perfect stranger.

It ought to be stopped.

.... In the telegraphic account of a distressing railway accident in
New York, we find the following:--"The body of Mr. Germain was
identified by his business partner, John Austin, who seemed terribly
affected by his loss."

O, reader, how little we think upon the fearful possibilities hidden
away in the womb of the future. Any day may snatch from our life its
light. One moment we were happy in the possession of some dear
object, about which to twine the tendrils of the heart; the next, we
cower and shiver in the chill gloom of a bereavement that withers
the soul and makes existence an intolerable burden! To-day all
nature smiles with a sunny warmth, and life spreads before us a
wilderness of sweets; to-morrow-we lose our business partner!

.... Mr. J. L. Dummle, one of our most respected citizens, left his
home to go, as he said, to his office. There was nothing unusual in
his demeanour, and he appeared to be in his customary health and
spirits. It is not known that there was anything in his financial or
domestic affairs to make life distasteful to him. About half an hour
after parting with his family, he was seen conversing with a friend
at the corner of Kearny and Sutter-streets, from which point he
seems to have gone directly to the Vallejo-street wharf. He was here
seen by the captain of the steamer New World, standing upon the
extreme end of the wharf, but the circumstance did not arouse any
suspicion in the mind of the Captain, to whom he was well known. At
that moment some trivial business diverted the Captain's attention,
and he saw Mr. Dummle no more; but it has been ascertained that the
latter proceeded directly home, where he may now be seen by any one
desiring to obtain further particulars of the melancholy event here
narrated.

Mr. Dummle speaks of it with perfect frankness and composure.

.... In deference to a time-worn custom, on the first day of the
year the writer swore to, affixed a revenue stamp upon, and recorded
the following document:--

"I will not, during this year, utter a profane word-unless in
sport-without having been previously vexed by something.

"I will murder no one that does not offend me, except for his money.

"I will commit highway robbery upon none but small school children,
and then only under the stimulus of present or prospective hunger.

"I will not bear false witness against my neighbour where nothing is
to be made by it.

"I will be as moral and religious as the law shall compel me to be.

"I will run away with no man's wife without her full and free
consent, and never, no never, so help me heaven! will I take his
children along.

"I wont write any wicked slanders against anybody, unless by
refraining I should sacrifice a good joke.

"I wont beat any cripples who do not come fooling about me when I am
busy; and I will give all my neighbours' boots to the poor."

....A town in Vermont has a society of young men, formed for the
express purpose of rescuing young ladies from drowning. We warn
these gentlemen that we will not accept even honorary membership in
their concern; we do not sympathize with the movement. Upon several
occasions we have stood by and seen young ladies' noses disappear
beneath the waters blue, with a stolid indifference that would have
been creditable in a husband. It was a trifle rough on the darlings,
but if we know our own mind we do not purpose, just for the doubtful
pleasure of saving a female's life, to surrender our prerogative of
marrying when and whom we like.

If we take a fancy to a woman we shall wed her, but we're not to be
coerced into matrimony by any ridiculous school-girl who may chance
to fall into a horse-pond. We know their tricks and their manners
-waking to consciousness in a fellow's arms and throwing their own
wet ones about his neck, saying, "The life you have preserved, noble
youth, is yours; whither thou goest I will go; thy horses and
carriages shall be my horses and carriages!"

We are too old a sturgeon to be caught with a spoon-hook. Ladies in
the vicinity of our person need not hesitate to fling themselves
madly into the first goose-puddle that obstructs their way; their
liberty of action will be scrupulously respected.

.... There is a bladdery old nasality ranging about the country upon
free passes, vexing the public ear with "hallowed songs," and making
of himself a spectacle to the eye. This bleating lamb calls himself
the "Sacred Singer," and has managed to get that pleasing title into
the newspapers until it is become as offensive as himself.

Now, therefore, we do trustfully petition that this wearisome
psalm-sharp, this miauling meter-monger, this howling dervish of
hymns devotional, may strain his trachea, unsettle the braces of his
lungs, crack his ridiculous gizzard and perish of pneumonia
starvation. And may the good Satan seize upon the catgut strings of
his tuneful soul, and smite therefrom a wicked, wicked waltz!

.... We hold a most unflattering opinion of the man who will thieve
a dog, but between him and the man who will keep one, the moral
difference is not so great as to be irreconcilable.

Our own dog is a standing example of canine inutility. The scurvy
cur is not only totally depraved in his morals, but his hair stands
the wrong way, and his tail is of that nameless type intermediate
between the pendulously pitiful and the spirally exasperating-a tail
which gives rise to conflicting emotions in the mind of the
beholder, and causes the involuntarily uplifted hand to hesitate if
it shall knuckle away the springing tear, or fall in thunderous
vengeance upon the head of the dog's master.

That dog spends about half his elegant leisure in devouring the cold
victuals of compassion, and the other half in running after the
bricks of which he is the provocation and we are the target. Within
the last six years we employed as editors upon the unhappy journal
which it was intended that this article should redeem, no less than
sixteen pickpockets, hoping they would steal him; but with an acute
intelligence of which their writing conveyed but an imperfect idea,
they shunned the glittering bait, as one walks to windward of the
deadly upas tree. We have given him away to friends until we haven't
a friend left; we have offered him at auction-sales, and been
ourselves knocked down; we have decoyed him into strange places and
abandoned him, until we are poor from the payment of unpromised
rewards. In the character of a charitable donation he has been
driven from the door of every orphan asylum, foundling hospital, and
reform school in the State. Not a week passes but we forfeit
exemplary damages for inciting him to fall foul of passing
gentlemen, in the vain hope of getting him slain.

If any one would wish to purchase a cheap dog, we would sell this
beast.

.... A religious journal published in the Far West says that
Brothers Dong, Gong, and Tong are Chinese converts to its church.
There is a fine religious nasality about these names that is
strongly suggestive of the pulpit in the palmy days of the Puritans.

By the way, we should dearly love to know how to baptize a Chinaman.
We have a shrewd suspicion that it is done as the Mongolian
laundryman dampens our linen: by taking the mouth full of water and
spouting it over the convert's head in a fine spray. If so, it
follows that the pastor having most "cheek" is best qualified for
cleansing the pagan soul.

An important question arises here. Suppose Dong, Gong, and Tong to
have been baptized in this way, who pronounced that efficacious
formula, "I baptize thee in the name," etc.? Clearly the parson,
with his mouth full of water, could not have done so at the instant
of baptism, and if the sentence was spoken by any other person it
was a falsehood. It must therefore have been spoken either before
the minister distended his cheeks, or after he had exhausted them.
In either case, according to the learned Dr. Sicklewit, the ceremony
is utterly null and void of effect. (Study of Baptism, vol. ix., ch.
cxix. vi. p. 627, line 13 from bottom.)

Possibly, however, D., G. and T. were not baptized in this way. Then
how the devil were they baptized?-and why?

.... Henry Wolfe, of Kentucky, aged one hundred and eight years, who
had never been sick in his life, lay down one fine day and sawed his
neck asunder with a razor. Henry did not believe in self-slaughter;
he despised it. It was Henry's opinion that as God had placed us
here we should stay until it was His pleasure to remove us. That is
also our opinion, and the opinion of all other good Christians who
would like to die but are afraid to do it. It will be observed that
Henry could not claim originality of opinion.

But there is a point beyond which hope deferred maketh the heart
sick, and Henry had passed that point. He waited patiently till he
was naked of scalp and deaf of ear. He endured without repining the
bent back, the sightless eyes, and the creaking joints incident to
over-maturity. But when he saw a man perish of senility, who in
infancy had called him "Old Hank," Mr. Wolfe thought patience had
ceased to be commendable, and he abandoned his post of duty without
being regularly relieved.

It is to be hoped he will be hotly punished for it.

.... One day an obscure and unimportant person pitched himself among
the rolling porpoises, from a ferry-boat, and an officious
busy-body, not at once clearly apprehending that the matter was none
of his immediate business, hied him down to the engineer and
commanded that official to "back her, hard!" As it is customary upon
the high seas for such orders to emanate from the officer in
command, that particular boat kept forging ahead, and the
unimportant old person carried out his original design-that is, he
went to the bottom like an iron wedge. Rises the press in its wrath
and prates about a Grand Jury! Shrieks an intelligent public, in
chorus, at the heartless engineer!

Meantime the pretty fish are running away with choice bits of God's
image at the bottom of the bay; the cunning crab makes merry with a
dead man's eye, the nipping shrimp sweetens himself for the table
upon the clean juices of a succulent corpse. Below all is peace and
fat feasting; above rolls the sounding ocean of eternal Bosh!

.... There is war! The woman suffrage folk go up against one
another, because that a portion of them cleave to the error that the
Bible is a collection of fables. These will probably divest
themselves of this belief about the time that Mr. Satan stands over
them with a toasting-fork, points significantly to a glowing
gridiron, and says to each suffrager:

"Madame, I beg your pardon, but you will please retire to the
ladies' dressing-room, disrobe, unpad, lay off your back-hair; and
make yourself as comfortable as possible while some fresh coals are
being put on the fire. When you have unmade your toilet you may
touch that bell, and you will be nicely buttered and salted for the
iron. A polite and gentlemanly attendant will occasionally turn you,
and I shall take pleasure in looking in upon you once in a million
years, to see that you are being properly done. Exceedingly sultry
weather, Madame. Au revoir."

.... The funeral of the Rev. Father Byrne took place from the Church
of the Holy Cross. The ceremonies were of the most solemn and
impressive character, and were keenly enjoyed by the empty benches
by which the Protestant clergy were ably represented. Why turned ye
not out, O Biblethump, and Muddletext, and you, Hymnsing? Is it thus
that the Master was wont to treat the dead?

Now get thee into the secret recesses of thy closet, Rev.
Lovepreach; knuckle down upon thy knees and pray to a tolerant God
not to smite thee with a plague. For lo! thou hast been a bigoted,
bat-eyed, cat-hearted fraud-a preacher of peace and a practiser of
strife. For these many years thy tongue hath been dropping gospel
honey, and thy soul secreting bitterness. Thy voice has been as the
sound of glad horns upon a hill, but thy ways are the ways of a
gaunt hound tracking the hunted stag. "Holier than we," are you? And
when the worker of differing faith is gone to his account, you turn
your sleek back upon the God's-image as it is given to the waiting
worms. Perdition seize thee and thy holiness! we'll none of it.

.... Two hundred dollars for biting a woman's neck and arms! That
was the sentence imposed upon the gentle Mr. Hill, because His
Eminence set his incisors into the yielding tissue of Mrs. Langdon,
a lady with whom his wife happened to be debating by means of a
stew-kettle.

If this monstrous decision stand, the writer owes the treasury about
ten thousand dollars. Though by nature of a mild and gentle
appetite, preferring simple roots and herbs, yet it has been his
custom to nip all female necks and arms that have been willingly
submitted unto his teeth. He hath found in this harmless, and he had
supposed lawful, practice, an exceeding sweetness of sensation, and
a satisfaction wherewith the delights of sausage, or the bliss of
pigs' feet, can in nowise compare. Having commonly found the
gratification mutual, he thinks he is justified in maintaining its
innocence.

.... We are tolerably phlegmatic and notoriously hard to provoke. We
look on with considerable composure while our favourite Chinaman is
being dismembered in the streets, and our dog publicly insulted.
Detecting an alien hand in our trousers pocket excites in us only a
feeling of temperate disapprobation, and an open swindle executed
upon our favourite cousin by an unscrupulous shopkeeper we regard
simply as an instance of enterprise which has taken an unfortunate
direction. Slow to anger, quick to forgive, charitable in judgment
and to mercy prone; with unbounded faith in the entire goodness of
man and the complete holiness of woman; seeking ever for palliating
circumstances in the conduct of the blackest criminal-we are at once
a model of moderation and a pattern of forbearance.

But if Mrs. Victoria Woodhull and her swinish crew of free lovers
had but a single body, and that body lay asleep under the upturned
root of a prostrate oak, we would work with a dull jack-knife day
and night-month in and month out-through summer's sun and winter's
storm-to sever that giant trunk, and let that mighty root, clasping
its mountain of inverted earth, back into the position assigned to
it by nature and by nature's God!

.... We like a liar-a thoroughly conscientious, industrious, and
ingenious liar. Not your ordinary prevaricator, who skirts along the
coast of truth, keeping ever within sight of the headlands and
promontories of probability-whose excursions are limited to short,
fair-weather reaches into the ocean of imagination, and who paddles
for port as if the devil were after him whenever a capful of wind
threatens a storm of exposure; but a bold, sea-going liar, who
spurns a continent, striking straight out for blue water, with his
eyes fixed upon the horizon of boundless mendacity.

We have found such a one, and our hat is at half-mast in token of
profound esteem and conscious inferiority. This person gravely tells
us that at the burning of the Archiepiscopal Palace at Bourges,
among other valuable manuscripts destroyed was the original
death-warrant of Jesus Christ, signed at Jerusalem by one Capel, and
dated U. C. 783. Not only so, but he kindly favours us with a
literal translation of it!

One cannot help warming up to a man who can lie like that. Talk
about Chatterton's Rowley deception, Macpherson's Ossian fraud, or
Locke's moon hoax! Compared with this tremendous fib they are as but
the stilly whisper of a hearth-stone cricket to the shrill
trumpeting of a wounded elephant-the piping of a sick cocksparrow to
the brazen clang of a donkey in love!

.... For the memory of the late John Ridd, of Illinois, we entertain
the liveliest contempt. Mr. Ridd recently despatched himself with a
firearm for the following reasons, set forth in a letter that he
left behind.

"Two years ago I discovered that I was worthless. My great failings
are insincerity of character and sly ugliness. Any one who watched
me a little while would discover my unenviable nature."

Now, it is not that Mr. Ridd was worthless that we hold his memory
in reprobation; nor that he was insincere, nor sly, nor ugly. It is
because possessing these qualities he was fool enough to think they
disqualified him for the duties of life, or stood in the way of his
being an ornament to society and an honour to his country.

...."About the first of next month," says a pious contemporary, "we
shall discontinue the publication of our paper in this city, and
shall remove our office and fixtures to--, where we hope for a
blessing upon our work, and a share of advertising patronage."

A numerous editorial staff of intelligent jackasses will accompany
the caravan. In imagination we behold them now, trudging gravely
along behind the moving office fixtures, their goggle eyes cast down
in Christian meditation, their horizontal ears flopping solemnly in
unison with their measured tread. Ever and anon the leader halts,
uprolls the speculative eye, arrests the oscillation of the ears,
laying them rigidly back along the neck, exalts the conscious tail,
drops the lank jaw, and warbles a psalm of praise that shakes the
blind hills from their eternal repose. His companions take up the
parable in turn, "and the echoes, huddling in affright, like Odin's
hounds," go baying down the valleys and clamouring amongst the
pines, like a legion of invisible fiends after a strange cat. Then
again all is hush, and tramp, and sanctity, and flop, and holy
meditation! And so the pilgrimage is accomplished. Selah! Hee-haw!

.... A man in California has in his possession the rope with which
his father was hanged by a vigilance committee in '49 for
horse-stealing. He keeps it neatly coiled away in an old cheese-
box, and every Sunday morning he lays his left hand reverently upon
it, and with uncovered head and a look of stern determination in his
eye, raises his right to heaven, and swears by an avenging God it
served the old man right!

It has not been deemed advisable to put this dutiful son under bonds
to keep the peace.

.... A contemporary has some elaborate obituary commendation of a
boy seven years of age, who was "a child of more than ordinary
sprightliness, loved the Bible, and was deeply impressed with a
veneration for holy things."

Now we would sorrowfully ask our contemporary if he thinks flattery
like this can soothe the dull cold ear of young Dobbin? Dobbin père
may enjoy it as light and entertaining reading, but when the
resurrecting angel shall stir the dust of young Theophilus with his
foot, and sing out "get up, Dobbin," we think that sprightly youth
will whimper three times for molasses gingerbread before he will
signify an audible aspiration for the Bible. A sweet-tooth is often
mistaken for early piety, and licking a sugar archangel may be
easily construed as veneration for holy things.

.... A young physician of Troy became enamoured of a rich female
patient, and continued his visits after she was convalescent. During
one of these he had the misfortune to give her the small-pox, having
neglected to change his clothes after calling on another patient
enjoying that malady. The lady had to be removed to the pest-house,
where the stricken medico sedulously attends her for nothing. His
generosity does not end here: he declares that should she recover he
will marry her-if she be not too badly pitted.

Apparently the legal profession does not enjoy a monopoly of all the
self-sacrifice that is current in the world.

.... A young woman stood before the mirror with a razor. Pensively
she twirled the unaccustomed instrument in her jewelled fingers,
fancying her smooth cheek clothed with a manly beard. In imagination
she saw her pouting lips shaded by the curl of a dark moustache, and
her eyes grew dim with tears that it was not, never could be, so.
And the mirrored image wept back at her a silent sob, the echo of
her grief.

"Ah," she sighed, "why did not God make me a man? Must I still drag
out this hateful, whiskerless existence?"

The girlish tears welled up again and overran her eyes. Thoughtfully
she crossed her right hand over to her left ear; carefully but
timidly she placed the keen, cold edge of the steel against the
smooth alabaster neck, twisted the fingers of her other hand into
her long black hair, drew back her head and ripped away. There was
an apparition in that mirror as of a ripe watermelon opening its
mouth to address a public meeting; there were the thud and jar of a
sudden sitting down; and when the old lady came in from frying
doughnuts in the adjoining room she found something that seemed to
interest her-something still and warm and wet-something kind of
doubled up.

Ah! poor old wretch! your doughnuts shall sizzle and sputter and
swim unheeded in their grease; but the beardless jaw that should
have wagged filially to chew them is dropped in death; the stomach
which they should have distended is crinkled and dry for ever!

.... Miss Olive Logan's lecture upon "girls" has suggested to the
writer the propriety of delivering one upon "boys." He doesn't know
anything about boys, and is therefore entirely unprejudiced. He was
never a boy himself-has always been just as old as he is now; though
the peculiar vagueness of his memory previously to the time of
building the pyramid of Cheops, and his indistinct impressions as to
the personal appearance of Job, lead to the suspicion that his
faculties at that time were partially undeveloped. He regards
himself as the only lecturer extant who can do justice to boys; and
he prefers to do it with an axe-handle, but is willing, like Olive
Logan, to sacrifice his mere preferences for the purpose of making
money.

This lecture will take place as soon as a sum of money has been sent
to this office sufficiently large to justify him in renting a hall
for one hour's uninterrupted profanity-sixty minutes of careful,
accurate, and elaborate cursing. Admission-all the money you have
about you. Boys will be charged in proportion to their estimated
depravity; fifty dollars a head for the younger sorts, and from five
hundred to one thousand for those more advanced in general
diabolism.

.... Some women in New York have set the fashion of having costly
diamonds set into their front teeth. The attention of robbers and
garotters is called to this fact, with the recommendation that no
greater force be used than is necessary. The use of the ordinary
bludgeon or slung shot would be quite needless; a gentle tap on the
head with a clay pipe or a toothpick will place the victim in the
proper condition to be despoiled. Great care should be exercised in
extracting the jewels; instead of the teeth being knocked inwards,
as in ordinary cases of mere purposeless mangling, they should be
artistically lifted out by inserting the point of a crowbar into the
mouth and jumping on the other end.

.... The Coroner having broken his leg, inquests will hereafter be
held by the Justices of the Peace. People intending to commit
suicide will confer a favour by worrying along until the Coroner
shall recover, as the Justices are all new to the business. The
cold, uncharitable world is tolerably hard to endure, but if
unfortunates will secure some respectable employment and go to work
at it they will be surprised to find how glibly the moments will
glide away. The Coroner will probably be ready for their carcases in
about four weeks, and it would be well not to bind themselves to
service for a longer period, lest he should find it necessary to
send for them and do their little business himself. A fair supply of
street-cadavers and water-corpses can usually be counted on, but it
is absolutely necessary to have a certain proportion of suicides.

.... John Reed, of Illinois, is a man who knows his rights, and
knowing dares maintain. Having communicated to a young lady his
intention of conferring upon her the honour of his company at a
Fourth of July celebration, John was pained and disgusted to hear
the proposal quietly declined. John went thoughtfully away to a
neighbour who keeps a double-shotgun. This he secured, and again
sought the object of his hopeless preference. The object was seated
at the dinner-table contending with her lobscouse, and did not feel
his presence near. Mr. Reed poised and sighted his artillery, and
with the very natural remark, "I think this fetcher," he exploded
the twin charges. A moment later might have been seen the rare
spectacle of a headless young lady sitting bolt upright at table,
spooning a wad of hash into the top of her neck. The wall opposite
presented the appearance of having been bombarded with fresh
livers and baptized with sausage-meat.

No one in the vicinity slept any that night. They were busy getting
ready for the Fourth: the gentlemen going about inviting the ladies
to attend the celebration, and the ladies hastily and
unconditionally accepting.

.... In answer to the ladies who are always bothering him for a
photograph, Mr. Grile hopes to satisfy all parties by the following
meagre description of his charms.

In person he is rather thin early in the morning, and a trifle
corpulent after dinner; in complexion pale, with a suspicion of ruby
about the gills. He wears his hair brown, and parted crosswise of
his remarkably fine head. His eyes are of various colours, but
mostly bottle-green, with a glare in them reminding one of incipient
hydrophobia-from which he really suffers. A permanent depression in
the bridge of his nose was inherited from a dying father what time
the son mildly petitioned for a division of the estate to which he
and his seventeen brothers were about to become the heirs. The mouth
is gentlemanly capacious, indicative of high breeding and feeding;
the under jaw projects slightly, forming a beautiful natural
reservoir for the reception of beer and other liquids. The forehead
retreats rapidly whenever a creditor is met, or an offended reader
espied coming toward the office.

His legs are of unequal length, owing to his constant habit of using
one of them to kick people who may happen to present a fairer mark
than the nearest dog. His hand is remarkably slender and white, and
is usually inserted in another man's pocket. In dress he is
wonderfully fastidious, preferring to wear nothing but what is given
him. His gait is something between those of a mud-turtle and a
jackass-rabbit, verging closely on to the latter at periods of
supposed personal danger, as before intimated.

In conversation he is animated and brilliant, some of his lies being
quite equal to those of Coleridge or Bolingbroke; but in repose he
resembles nothing so much as a heap of old clothes. In conclusion,
his respect for letter-writing ladies is so great that he would not
touch one of them with a ten-foot pole.

.... Only one hundred and ten thousand pious pilgrims visited Mount
Ararat in a body this year. The urbane and gentlemanly proprietors
of the Ark Tavern complain that their receipts have hardly been
sufficient to pay for the late improvements in this snug retreat.
These gentlemen continue to keep on hand their usual assortment of
choice wines, liquors, and cigars.

Opposite the Noah House, Shem Street, between Ham and Japhet.

.... It is commonly supposed that President Lopez, of Paraguay, was
killed in battle; but after reading the following slander upon him
and his mother, written some time since by a friend of ours, it is
difficult to believe he did not commit suicide:--

"The telegraph informs us that President Lopez, of Paraguay, has
again murdered his mother for conspiring against his life. That
sprightly, and active old lady has now been executed three thousand
times for the same offence. She is now eighty-three years old, and
erect as a telegraph pole. Time writes no wrinkles on her awful
brow, and her teeth are as sound as on the day of her birth. She
rises every morning punctually at four o'clock and walks ten miles;
then, after a light breakfast, enters her study and proceeds to
hatch out a new conspiracy against her first born. About 2 P. M. it
is discovered, and she is publicly executed. A light toast and a cup
of strong tea finish the day's business; she retires at seven and
goes to sleep with her mouth open. She has pursued this life with
the most unfaltering regularity for the last fifty years. It is only
by this unswerving adherence to hygienic principles that she has
attained her present green old age."

.... There is a person resident in Stockton Street whom we cannot
regard with feelings other than those of lively disapproval. It is
not that the woman-for this person is a mature female--ever did us
any harm, or is likely to; that is not our grievance. What we
seriously object to and actively contemn-yea, bitterly denounce-is
the nose of her. So mighty a nose we have never beheld-so spacious,
and open, and roomy a human snout the unaided imagination is
impotent to picture. It rises from her face like a rock from a
troubled sea-grand, serene, majestic! It turns up at an angle that
fills the spectator with admiration, and impresses him with an awe
that is speechless.

But we have no space for a description of this eternal proboscis.
Suffice it that its existence is a standing menace to society, a
threat to civilization, and a danger to commerce. The woman who will
harbour and cherish such an organ is no better than a pirate. We do
not know who she is, and we have no desire to know. We only know
that all the angels could not pull us past her house with a chain
cable, without giving us one look at that astounding feature. It is
the one prominent landmark of the nineteenth century-the special
wonder of the age-the solitary marvel of a generation!

We would give anything to see her blow it.

.... At the Coroner's inquest in the case of John Harvey there was
considerable difficulty in ascertaining the cause of death, but as
one witness testified that the deceased was pounding fulminate of
mercury at the Powder Works just previously to his lamented demise,
there is good reason to believe he was hoist into heaven with his
own petard. In fact, such fractions of him as have come to hand, up
to date, seem to confirm this view. This evidence is rather
disjointed and fragmentary, but it is sufficient to discourage the
brutal practice of pounding fulminate of mercury when our streets
and Sunday-schools are swarming with available Chinaman who seldom
hit back.

.... We find the following touching tale in all the newspapers. It
belongs to that class of tales concerning which the mildest doubt is
hateful blasphemy.

"A little girl in Ithaca, just before she died, exclaimed: 'Papa,
take hold of my hand and help me across.' Her father had died two
months before. Did she see him?"

There is not a doubt of it; but interested relatives have somewhat
misstated the little girl's exclamation, which was this:--

"Papa, take hold of my hand, and I will help you out of that."

.... We get the most distressing accounts of the famine in Persia.
It is said that cannibalism is as common among the starving
inhabitants as pork-eating in California.

This is very sad; it shows either a very low state of Persian
morality or a conspicuous lack of Persian ingenuity. They ought to
manage it as the conscientious Indians do. In time of famine these
gentle creatures never disgrace themselves by feasting upon each
other: they permit their dogs to devour the dead, and then they eat
the dogs.

.... An old lady was set upon by a fiend in human apparel, and
remorselessly kissed in the presence of her daughter.

This happened a few days since in Iowa, where the fiend now lies
buried. Any man who is so dead to shame, and so callous of soul
generally, as to force his unwelcome endearments upon a poor,
defenceless old lady, while her beautiful young daughter stands
weeping by, equally defenceless, deserves pretty much all the evil
that can be done to him. Splitting him like a fish is so
disgracefully inadequate a punishment, that the man who should
administer it might justly be regarded as an accomplice.

.... From London we have intelligence of the stabbing to death of a
man by mistake. His assassin mistook him for a person related to
himself, whose loss would be his own financial gain. Fancy the utter
dejection of this stabber when he discovered the absurd blunder he
had committed! We believe a slip like that would justify a man in
throwing down the knife and discarding murder for ever; while two
such errors would be ample excuse for him to go into some kind of
business.

.... A small but devout congregation were at worship. When it had
become a free exhibition, in which any brother could enact a part, a
queer-looking person got up and began a pious and learned
exhortation. He spake for some two hours, and was listened to with
profound attention, his discourse punctuated with holy groans and
pious amens from an edified circle of the saintly. Tears fell as the
gentle rains from heaven. Several souls were then and there snatched
as brands from the eternal burning, and started on their way to
heaven rejoicing. At the end of the second hour, and as the inspired
stranger approached "eighty-seventhly," some one became curious to
know who the teacher was, when lo! it turned out that he was an
escaped lunatic from the Asylum.

The curses of the elect were not loud but deep. They fumed with
exceeding wrath, and slopped over with pious indignation at the
swindle put upon them. The inspired, however, escaped, and was
afterwards captured in a cornfield.

The funeral was unostentatious.

.... We hear a great deal of sentiment with regard to the last solar
eclipse. Considerable ink has been consumed in setting forth the
terrible and awe-inspiring features of the scene. As there will be
no other good one this season, the following recipe for producing
one artificially will be found useful:--Suspend a grindstone from the
centre of a room. Take a cheese of nearly the same size, and after
blacking one side of it, pass it slowly across the face of the
grindstone and observe the effect in a mirror placed opposite, on
the cheese side. The effect will be terrific, and may be heightened
by taking a rum punch just at the instant of contact. This plan is
quite superior to that of nature, for with several cheeses graduated
in size, all known varieties of eclipse may be presented. In writing
up the subsequent account, a great many interesting phenomena may be
introduced quite impossible to obtain either by this or any other
process.

.... We have observed with considerable impatience that the authors
of Sunday School books do not seem to know anything; there is no
reason why these pleasant volumes should not be made as effective as
they are deeply interesting. The trouble is in the method of
treating wicked children; instead of being destroyed by appalling
calamities, they should simply be made painfully ridiculous.

For example, the little scoundrel who climbs up an apple-tree to
plunder a bird's-nest, ought never to fall and break his neck. He
should be permitted to garner his unholy harvest of eggs in his
pocket, then lose his balance, catch the seat of his pantaloons on a
knot-hole, and hang doubled up, with the smashed eggs trickling down
his jacket, and getting into his hair and eyes. Then the good little
girls should be lugged in, to poke fun at him, and ask him if he
likes 'em hard or soft. This would be a most impressive warning.

The boy who neglects his prayers to go boating on a Sunday ought not
to be drowned. He should be spilled out into the soft mud along
shore, and stuck fast where the Sunday School scholars could pelt
him with slush, and their teacher have a fair fling at him with a
dead cat.

The small female glutton who steals jam in the pantry ought not to
get poisoned. She should get after a pot of warm glue, which should
be made to miraculously stiffen the moment she gets it into her
mouth, and have to be gouged out of her with a chisel and hammer.

Then there is the swearing party, who is struck by lightning-a very
shallow and unprofitable device. He should open his face to swear,
dislocate his jaw, be unable to get closed up, and the rats should
get in at night, make nests there, and breed.

There are other suggestions that might be made, but these will give
a fair idea of our method, the foundation of which is the
substitution of potent ridicule for the current grave but imbecile
rebuke. It may be gratifying to learn that we are embodying our
views in a whole library of Sunday School literature, adapted to the
meanest capacity, and therefore equally edifying to pupil, pastor,
and parent.

.... A young correspondent, who has lately read a great deal in the
English papers about "baby-farming," wishes to know what that may
be. It is a new method of agriculture, in which the young of our
species are used for manure.

The babies are collected each day and put into large vats containing
equal parts of hydrobicarbonate of oxygenated sulphide, and
oxygenated sulphide of hydrobicarbonate, where they are left to soak
overnight. In the morning they are carefully macerated in a mortar
and are then poured into shallow copper pans, where they remain
until all the liquid portions have been evaporated by the sun. The
residuum is then scraped out, and after the addition of a certain
proportion of quicklime the whole is thrown away. Ordinary bone dust
and charcoal are then used for manure, and the baby farmers seldom
fail of getting a good crop of whatever they plant, provided they
stick the seeds in right end up.

It will be seen that the result depends more upon the
hydrobicarbonate than upon the infants; there isn't much virtue in
babies. But then our correspondent should remember that there is
none at all in adults.

.... A young woman writes to a contemporary, desiring to learn if it
is true that kissing a dead man will cure the tooth-ache. It might;
it sometimes makes a great difference whether you take your medicine
hot or cold. But we would earnestly advise her to try kissing a
multitude of live men before taking so peculiar a prescription. It
is our impression that corpses are absolutely worthless for kissing
purposes, and if one can find no better use for them, they might as
well be handed over to the needy and deserving worm.

.... Mr. Knettle, deceased, became irritated, and fired three shots
from a revolver into the head of his coy sweetheart, while she was
making believe to run away from him. It has seldom been our
lot-except in the cases of a few isolated policemen-to record so
perfectly satisfactory target practice. If that man had lived he
would have made his mark as well as hit it. He died by his own hand
at the beginning of a brilliant career, and although we cannot hope
to emulate his shooting, we may cherish the memory of his virtues
just as if we could bring down our girl every time at ten paces.

.... A pedagogue has been sentenced to the county gaol, for six
months, for whipping a boy in a brutal manner. The public heartily
approves the sentence, and, quite naturally, we dissent. We know
nothing whatever about this particular case, but upon general
principles we favour the extreme flagellation of incipient Man. In
our own case the benefit of the system is apparent; had not our
pious parent administered daily rebukes with such foreign bodies as
he could lay his hands on we might have grown up a Presbyterian
deacon.

Look at us now!

.... A man who played a leading part in a late railroad accident had
had his life insured for twenty thousand dollars. Unfortunately the
policy expired just before he did, and he had neglected to renew it.
This is a happy illustration of the folly of procrastination. Had he
got himself killed a few days sooner his widow would have been
provided with the means of setting up housekeeping with another man.

.... People ought not to pack cocked pistols about in the hip
pockets of their trousers; the custom is wholly indefensible. Such
is the opinion of the last man who leaned up against the counter in
a Marysville drinking-saloon for a quiet chat with the barkeeper.

The odd boot will be given to the poor.

.... A man ninety-seven years of age has just died in the State of
New York. The Sun says he bad conversed with both President
Washington and President Grant.

If there were any further cause of death it is not stated.

.... The letter following was written by the Rev. Reuben
Hankerlockew, a Persian Christian, in relation to the late famine in
his country. The Rev. gentleman took a hopeful view of affairs.

"Peace be with you-bless your eyes! Our country is now suffering the
direst of calamities, compared with which the punishment of
Tarantulus" (we suppose our correspondent meant Tantalus) "was nice,
and the agony of a dyspeptic ostrich in a junk shop is a condition
to be coveted. We are in the midst of plenty, but we can't get
anything that seems to suit. The supply of old man is practically
unlimited, but it is too tough to chew. The market stalls are full
of fresh girl, but the scarcity of salt renders the meat entirely
useless for table purposes. Prime wife is cheap as dirt-and about as
good. There is a 'corner' in pickled baby, and nobody can 'fill.'
The same article on the hoof is all held by a ring of speculators at
figures which appal the man of moderate means. Of the various brands
of 'cemetery,' that of Japan is most abundant, owing to the recent
pestilence, but it is, fishy and rank. As for grain, or vegetable
filling of any kind, there is hone in Persia, except the small lot I
have on hand, which will be disposed of in limited quantities for
ready money. But don't you foreigners bother about us-we shall get
along all right-until I have disposed of my cereals. Persia does not
need any foreign corn until after that."

It is improbable that the Rev. gentleman himself perished of
starvation.

.... We are filled with unspeakable gratification to record the
death of that double girl who has been in everybody's mouth for
months. This shameless little double-ender, with two heads and one
body-two cherries on a single stem, as it were-has been for many
moons afflicting our simple soul with an itching desire that she
might die-the nasty pig! Two half-girls, joined squarely at the
waist, and without any legs, are not a pleasant type of the coming
woman.

Had she lived, she would have been a bone of social, theological,
and political contention, and we should never have heard the end-of
which she had two alike. If she had lived to marry, some
mischief-making scoundrel would have procured the indictment of her
husband for bigamy. The preachers would have fought for her, and if
converted separately, her Methodist end might have always been
thrashing her Episcopal end, or vice versâ. When she came to serve
on a jury, nobody could have decided if there ought to be eleven
others or only ten; and if she ever voted twice, the opposite party
would have had her up for repeating; and if only once, she would
have been read out of her own, for criminal apathy in the exercise
of the highest duty, etc.

We bless God for taking her away, though what He can want with her
is as difficult a problem as herself or Himself. She will have to
wear two golden crowns, thus entailing a double expense; she wont be
able to fly any, and having no legs, she must be constantly watched
to keep her from rolling out of heaven. She will just have to lie on
a soft cloud in some out-of-the-way corner, and eternally toot two
trumpets, without other exercise. If Gabriel is the sensible fellow
we think him, he wont wake her at the Resurrection.

Look at this infant in any light you please, and it is evident that
she was a dead failure and is yet. She did but one good thing, and
that was to teach the Siamese Twins how to die. After they shall
have taken the hint, we hope to have no more foolish experiments in
double folks born that way. Married couples are sufficiently
unpleasing.

.... The head biblesharp of the New York Independent resigned his
position, because the worldly proprietor would insist upon running
the commercial column of that sheet in a secular manner, with an eye
to the goods that perish. The godly party wished him to ignore the
filthy lucre of this world, and lay up for himself treasures in
heaven; but the sordid wretch would seize every covert opportunity
to reach out his little muckrake after the gold of the gentile, to
the neglect of the things that appertain unto salvation. Therefore
did the conscientious driver of the piety-quill betake himself to
some new field.

Will the editors of all similar sheets do likewise? or have they
more elastic consciences? For, behold, the muckrake is likewise
visible in all.

.... Some of the Red Indians on the plains have discarded the songs
of their fathers, and adopted certain of Dr. Watts's hymns, which
they howl at their scalp-dances with much satisfaction.

This is encouraging, certainly, but we dare not counsel the good
missionaries to pack up their libraries and go home with the
impression that the noble red is thoroughly converted. There yet
remains a work to do; he must be taught to mortify, instead of
paint, his countenance, and induced to abandon the savage vice of
stealing for the Christian virtue of cheating. Likewise he must be
made to understand that although conjugal fidelity is highly com-
mendable, all civilized nations are distinguished by a faithful
adherence to the opposite practice.

.... Some raving maniac sends us a mass of stuff, which savours
strongly of Walt Whitman, and which, probably for that reason, he
calls poetry. We have room for but a single bit of description,
which we print as an illustration of the depth of literary depravity
which may be attained by a "poet" in love:--

"Behold, thou art fair, my love: behold, thou art fair; thou hast
dove's eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of goats that
appear from Mt. Gilead. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are
even shorn, which came up from the washing; whereof every one bear
twins, and none is barren among them. Thy lips are like a thread of
scarlet, and thy speech is comely; thy temples are like a piece of
pomegranate within thy locks. Thy neck is a tower of ivory; thine
eyes like the fishpools of Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim; thy
nose is as the tower of Lebanon looking towards Damascus."

Really, we think that will do for one instalment. What the mischief
this "poet" means, with his goat's hair, sheep's teeth, and temples
like a piece of pomegranate, is quite beyond our mental reach. We
would suggest that the ignorance of English grammar displayed in the
phrase "every one bear twins," is not atoned for by comparing his
mistress's eyes to a duck pond, and her nose to the "tower of
Lebanon looking towards Damascus." The latter simile is suggestive
of unpleasant consequences to the inhabitants of that village in
case the young lady should decide to blow that astounding feature!
Our very young contributor will consider himself dismissed with such
ignominy as is implied by our frantic indifference.

.... A liberal reward will be paid by the writer for a suitably
vituperative epithet to be applied to the ordinary street preacher.
The writer has himself laboured with so unflagging a zeal in the
pursuit of the proper word, has expended the midnight oil with so
lavish and matchless a prodigality, has kneaded his brain with such
a singular forgetfulness of self-that he is gone clean daft. And
all, without adequate result! From the profoundest deep of his
teeming invention he succeeded in evolving only such utterly
unsatisfying results as "rhinoceros," "polypus," and "sheeptick" in
the animal kingdom, and "rhubarb," "snakeroot," and "smartweed" in
the vegetable. The mineral world was ransacked, but gave forth only
"old red sandstone," which is tolerably severe, but had been
previously used to stigmatize a member of the Academy of Sciences.

Now, what we wish to secure is a word that shall contain within
itself all the essential principles of downright abuse; the mere
pronouncing of which in the public street would subject one to the
inconvenience of being rent asunder by an infuriated
populace-something so atrociously apt and so exquisitely diabolical
that any person to whom it should be applied would go right away out
and kick himself to death with a jackass. We covenant that the
inventor shall be slain the moment we are in possession of his
infernal secret, as life would of course be a miserable burden to
him ever afterward.

With a calm reliance upon the fertile scurrility of our readers, we
leave the matter in their hands, commending their souls to the
merciful God who contrived them.

.... We have received from a prominent clergyman a long letter of
earnest remonstrance against what he is pleased to term our
"unprovoked attacks upon God's elect."

We emphatically deny that we have ever made any unprovoked attacks
upon them. "God's elect" are always irritating us. They are
eternally lying in wait with some monstrous absurdity, to spring it
upon us at the very moment when we are least prepared. They take a
fiendish delight in torturing us with tantrums, galling us with
gammon, and pelting us with platitudes. Whenever we disguise ourself
in the seemly toggery of the godly, and enter meekly into the
tabernacle, hoping to pass unobserved, the parson is sure to detect
us and explode a bombful of bosh upon our devoted head. No sooner do
we pick up a religious weekly than we stumble and sprawl through a
bewildering succession of inanities, manufactured expressly to
ensnare our simple feet. If we take up a tract we are laid out cold
by an apostolic knock straight from the clerical shoulder. We cannot
walk out of a pleasant Sunday without being keeled Over by a stroke
of pious lightning flashed from the tempestuous eye of an irate
churchman at our secular attire. Should we cast our thoughtless
glance upon the demure Methodist Rachel we are paralysed by a scowl
of disapprobation, which prostrates like the shock of a gymnotus;
and any of our mild pleasantry at the expense of young Squaretoes is
cut short by a Bible rebuke, shot out of his mouth like a rock from
a catapult.

Is it any wonder that we wax gently facetious in conversing of "the
elect?"--that in our weak way we seek to get even? Now, good
clergyman, go thou to the devil, and leave us to our own devices; or
an offended journalist shall skewer thee upon his spit, and roast
thee in a blaze of righteous indignation.

.... The New York Tribune, descanting upon the recent national
misfortune by which the writer's red right hand was quietly chewed
by an envious bear, says it cannot commend the writer's example, but
hopes "his next appearance in print may edify his readers on the
dangers of such a practice."

We had not hitherto deemed it necessary to raise a warning voice to
a universe not much given to fooling with bears anyhow, but embrace
this opportunity to declare ourself firmly and unalterably opposed
to the whole business. We plant our ample feet squarely upon the
platform of non-intervention, so far as affects the social economy
and individual idiosyncrasies of bears. But if the Tribune man
expects a homily upon the sin of feeding oneself in courses to wild
animals, he is informed that we waste no words upon the senseless
wretch who is given to that species of iniquity. We regard him with
ineffable self-contempt.

.... A young girl in Grass Valley having died, her father wrote some
verses upon the occasion, in which she is made to discourse thus:--
"Then do not detain me, for why should I stay When cherubs in heaven
call me away? Earth has no pleasure, no joys that compare, With the
joys that await us in heaven so fair."

As the little darling was only two years and a fraction of age it is
tolerably impossible to divine upon what authority she sought to
throw discredit upon the joys of earth: her observation having been
limited to mother's milk and treacle toffy. But that's just the way
with professing Christians; they are always disparaging the delights
which they are unfitted to enjoy.

.... The Rev. Dr. Cunningham instructs his congregation that it is
not enough to give to the Church what they can spare, but to give
and keep giving until they feel it to be a burden and a sacrifice.
These, brethren, are the inspired words of one who has a deep and
abiding pecuniary interest in what he is talking about. Such a man
cannot err, except by asking too little; and empires have risen and
perished, islands have sprung from the sea, mountains have burnt
their bowels out, and rivers have run dry, since a man of God has
committed this error. OBITUARY NOTICES. CHRISTIANS.

.... It is with a feeling of professional regret that we record the
death of Mr. Jacob Pigwidgeon. Deceased was one of our earliest
pioneers, who came to this State long before he was needed. His age
is a matter of mere conjecture; probably he was less advanced in
years than Methuselah would have been had he practised a reasonable
temperance in eating and drinking. Mr. Pigwidgeon was a gentleman of
sincere but modest piety, profoundly respected by all who fancied
themselves like him. Probably no man of his day exercised so
peculiar an influence upon society. Ever, foremost in every good
work out of which there was anything to be made, an unstinted
dispenser of every species of charity that paid a commission to the
disburser, Mr. Pigwidgeon was a model of generosity; but so modestly
did he lavish his favours that his left hand seldom knew what pocket
his right hand was relieving. During the troubles of '56 he was
closely identified with the Vigilance Committee, being entrusted by
that body with the important mission of going into Nevada and
remaining there. In 1863 he was elected an honorary member of the
Society for the Prevention of Humanity to the Chinese, and there is
little doubt but he might have been anything, so active was the
esteem with which he inspired those for whom it was desired that he
should vote.

Originally born in Massachusetts, but for twenty-one years a native
of California and partially bald, possessing a cosmopolitan nature
that loved an English shilling as well, in proportion to its value,
as a Mexican dollar, the subject of our memoir was one whom it was
an honour to know, and whose close friendship was a luxury that only
the affluent could afford. It shall even be the writer's proudest
boast that he enjoyed it at less than half the usual rates.

The circumstances attending his taking off were most mournful. He
had been for some time very much depressed in spirits of one kind
and another, and on last Wednesday morning was observed to be
foaming at the mouth. No attention was paid to this; his family
believing it to be a symptom of hydrophobia, with which he had been
afflicted from the cradle. Suddenly a dark-eyed stranger entered
the house, took the patient's neck between his thumb and forefinger,
threw the body across his shoulder, winked respectfully to the
bereaved widow, and withdrew by way of the kitchen cellar. Farewell,
pure soul! we shall meet again.

.... We are reluctantly compelled to relate the untimely death of
Mrs. Margaret Ann Picklefinch, which occurred about one o'clock
yesterday morning. The circumstances attending the melancholy event
were these:--

Just before the hour named, her husband, the well-known temperance
lecturer, and less generally known temperance lecturee, came home
from an adjourned meeting of the Cold-Water Legion, and retired
very drunk. His estimable lady got up and pulled off his boots, as
usual. He got into bed and she lay down beside him. She uttered a
mild preliminary oath of endearment and suddenly ceased speaking. It
must have been about this time she died. About daylight he invited
her to get up and make a fire. Detecting no movement in her body he
enforced family discipline. The peculiar hard sound of his wife
striking the floor first aroused his suspicions of the bereavement
he had sustained, and upon rising later in the day he found his
first fears realized; the lady had waived her claim to his further
protection.

We extend to Mr. P. our sincere sympathy in the greatest calamity
that can befall an unmarriageable man. The inconsolable survivor
called at our office last evening, conversed feelingly some moments
about the virtues of the dear departed, and left with the air of a
dog that has had his tail abbreviated and is forced to begin life
anew. Truly the decrees of Providence appear sometimes absurd.

.... Mr. Bildad Gorcas, whose death has cast a wet blanket of gloom
over our community, was a man comparatively unknown, but his life
furnishes an instructive lesson to fast livers. Mr. Gorcas never in
his life tasted ardent spirits, ate spiced meats, or sat up later
than nine o'clock in the evening. He rose, summer and winter, at two
A. M., and passed an hour and three quarters immersed in ice water.
For the last twenty years he has walked fifteen miles daily before
breakfast, and then gone without breakfast. During his waking hours
he was never a moment idle; when not hard at work he was trying to
think. Up to the time of his death, which occurred last Sunday, he
had never spoken to a doctor, never had occasion to curse a dentist,
had a luxurious growth of variegated hair, and there was not a
wrinkle upon any part of his body. If he had not been cut off by
falling across a circular saw at the early age of thirty-two, there
is no telling how long he might have weathered it through.

A life like his is so bright and shining an example that we are
almost sorry he died.

.... During the week just rolled into eternity, our city has been
plunged into the deepest grief. He who doeth all things well, though
to our weak human understanding His acts may sometimes seen to
savour of injustice, has seen fit to remove from amongst us one
whose genius and blameless life had endeared him to friend and foe
alike.

In saying that Mr. Jowler was a dog of preeminent abilities and
exceptional virtues, we but faintly echo the verdict of a bereaved
Universe. Endowed with a gigantic intellect and a warm heart, modest
in his demeanour genial in his intercourse with friends and
acquaintances, and forbearing towards strangers (with whom he ever
maintained the most cordial relations, unmarred by the gross
familiarity-too common among dogs of inferior breeds), inoffensive
in his daily walk and conversation, the deceased was universally
respected and his loss will be even more generally deplored.

It would be a work of supererogation to give a résumé of the public
career of one so well known-one whose name has become a household
word. In private life his character was equally estimable. He had
ever a wag of encouragement for the young, the ill-favoured, the
belaboured, and the mangy. Though his gentle spirit has passed away,
he has left with us the record of his virtues as a shining example
for all puppies; and the writer is pleased to admit that so far as
in him lay he has himself endeavoured to profit by it. PAGANS.

.... Yo Hop is dead! He was last seen alive about three o'clock
yesterday morning by a white labourer who was returning home after
an elongated orgie at a Barbary Coast inn, and at the time seemed to
be in undisputed possession of all his faculties; the remainder of
his personal property having been transferred to the white labourer
aforesaid. At the moment alluded to, Mr. Hop was in the act of
throwing up his arms, as if to ward off some impending danger in the
hands of the sole spectator. An instant later he experienced one of
those sudden deaths which have made this city popularly famous and
surgically interesting.

The lamented was forty years of age; how much longer he might have
lived, in his own country, it is impossible to determine; but it is
to be remarked that the climate of California is a very trying one
to people of his peculiar organization. The body was kindly taken in
charge by a resident of the vicinity, and now lies in state in his
back yard, where it is being carefully prepared for burial by those
skilful meathounds, Messrs. Lassirator, Mangler, and Chure, whose
names are a sufficient guarantee that the mournful rites will be
attended to in a manner befitting the solemn occasion.

We tender the bereaved widow our sincere sympathy at the regular
rates. The cause of Mr. Hop's demise is unknown. It is unimportant.

.... A dead Asian was recently found in a ditch in Nevada county.
His head, like that of a toad, had a precious jewel imbedded in it,
about the size of an ordinary watermelon, and a clear majority of
his fingers, toes, and features had received Christian burial in the
stomachs of several contiguous hogs with roving commissions. As he
seemed unwilling to state who he was, or how he got his deserts, he
was tenderly replaced in his last ditch, and his discoverers
proceeded leisurely for the coroner. Upon the arrival of that public
functionary some days later, a pile of nice clean bones was
discovered, with this touching epitaph inscribed with a lead pencil
upon a segment of the skull:

"Yur lize wot cant be chawd of Chineece jaik; xekewted bi me fur a
plitikle awfens, and et bi mi starven hogs, wich aint hed nuthin
afore sence jaix boss stoal mi korn. BIL ROPER, and ov sich is
Kingdem cum."

.... The following report of an autopsy is of peculiar interest to
physicians and Christians:--Case 81st.--Felo de se. Yow Kow, yellow,
male, Chinese, aged 94; found dead on the street; addicted to opium.
Autopsy-sixteen hours after death. Slobbering at the mouth; head
caved in; immense rigor mortis; eyes dilated and gouged out; abdomen
lacerated; hemorrhage from left ear. Head. Water on the brain; scalp
congested, rather; when burst with a mallet interior of head
resembled a war map. Thorax. Charge of buckshot in left lung;
diaphragm suffused; heart wanting-finger marks in that vicinity;
traces of hobnails outside. Abdomen. Lacerated as aforesaid; small
intestines cumbered with brick dust; slingshot in duodenum;
boot-heel imbedded in pelvis; butcher's knife fixed rigidly in right
kidney.

Remarks: Chinese immigration will ruin any country in the world.






MUSINGS, PHILOSOPHICAL AND THEOLOGICAL.





.... Seated in his den, in the chill gloom of a winter twilight,
comforting his stomach with hoarded bits of cheese and broad
biscuits, Mr. Grile thinketh unto himself after this fashion of
thought:

I. To eat biscuits and cheese before dining is to confess that you
do not expect to dine.

II. "Once bit, twice shy," is a homely saying, but singularly true.
A man who has been swindled will be very cautious the second time,
and the third. The fourth time he may be swindled again more easily
and completely than before.

III. A four-footed beast walks by lifting one foot at a time, but a
four-horse team does not walk by lifting one horse at a time. And
yet you cannot readily explain why this is so.

IV. If a jackass were to describe the Deity he would represent Him
with long ears and a tail. Man's ideal is the higher and truer one;
he pictures Him as somewhat resembling a man.

V. The bald head of a man is a very common spectacle. You have never
seen the bald head of a woman.

VI. Baldheaded women are a very common spectacle.

VII. Piety, like small-pox, comes by infection. Robinson Crusoe,
however, caught it alone on his island. It is probable that he had
it in his blood.

VIII. The doctrine of foreknowledge does not imply the truth of
foreordination. Foreordination is a cause antedating an event.
Foreknowledge is an effect, not of something that is going to occur,
which would be absurd, but the effect of its being going to occur.

IX. Those who cherish the opposite opinion may be very good
citizens.

X. Old shoes are easiest, because they have accommodated themselves
to the feet. Old friends are least intolerable because they have
adapted themselves to the inferior parts of our character.

XI. Between old friends and old shoes there are other points of
resemblance.

XII. Everybody professes to know that it would be difficult to find
a needle in a haystack, but very few reflect that this is because
haystacks seldom contain needles.

XIII. A man with but one leg is a better man than a man with two
legs, for the reason that there is less of him.

XIV. A man without any legs is better than a man with one leg; not
because there is less of him, but because he cannot get about to
enact so much wickedness.

XV. When an ostrich is pursued he conceals his head in a bush; when
a man is pursued he conceals his property. By instinct each knows
his enemy's design.

XVI. There are two things that should be avoided; the deadly upas
tree and soda water. The latter will make you puffy and poddy.

XVII. This list of things to be avoided is necessarily incomplete.

XVIII. In calling a man a hog, it is the man who gets angry, but it
is the hog who is insulted. Men are always taking up the quarrels of
others.

XIX. Give an American a newspaper and a pie and he will make himself
comfortable anywhere.

XX. The world of mind will be divided upon the question of baptism
so long as there are two simple and effective methods of baptising,
and they are equally disagreeable.

XXI. They are not equally disagreeable, but each is disagreeable
enough to attract disciples.

XXII. The face of a pig is a more handsome face than the face of a
man-in the pig's opinion.

XXIII. A pig's opinion upon this question is as likely to be correct
as is a man's opinion.

XXIV. It is better not to take a wife than to take one belonging to
some other man: for if she has been a good wife to him, she has
adapted her nature to his, and will therefore be unsuited to yours.
If she has not been a good wife to him she will not be to you.

XXV. The most gifted people are not always the most favoured: a man
with twelve legs can derive no benefit from ten of them without
crawling like a centipede.

XXVI. A woman and a cow are the two most beautiful creatures in the
world. For proof of the beauty of a cow, the reader is referred to
an ox; for proof of the beauty of a woman, an ox is referred to the
reader.

XXVII. There is reason to believe that a baby is less comely than a
calf, for the reason that all kine esteem the calf the more comely
beast, and there is one man who does not esteem the baby the more
comely beast.

XXVII. To judge of the wisdom of an act by its result is a very
shallow plan. An action is wise or unwise the moment it is decided
upon.

XXIX. If the wisdom of an action may not be determined by the
result, it is very difficult to determine it.

XXX. It is impossible.

XXXI. The moon always presents the same side to the earth because
she is heaviest on that side. The opposite side, however, is more
private and secluded.

XXXII. Camels and Christians receive their burdens kneeling.

XXXIII. It was never intended that men should be saints in heaven
until they are dead and good for nothing else. On earth they are
mostly

XXXIV. Fools.

I, Grile, have arranged these primal truths in the order of their
importance, in the hope that some patient investigator may amplify
and codify them into a coherent body of doctrine, and so establish a
new religion. I would do it myself were it not that a very corpulent
and most unexpected pudding is claiming my present attention.

O, steaming enigma! O, savoury mountain of hidden mysteries! too
long neglected for too long a sermon. Engaging problem, let me
reveal the secrets latent in thy breast, and unfold thine occult
philosophy! [Cutting into the pudding.] Ah! here, and here alone
is-[Eating it]. LAUGHORISMS.

.... When a favourite dog has an incurable pain, you "put him out of
his misery" with a bullet or an axe. A favourite child similarly
afflicted is preserved as long as possible, in torment. I do not say
that this is not right; I claim only that it is not consistent.
There arc two sorts of kindness; one for dogs, and another for
children. A very dear friend, wallowing about in the red mud of a
battle-field, once asked me for some of the dog sort. I suspect, if
no one had been looking, he would have got it.

.... It is to be feared that to most men the sky is but a concave
mirror, showing nothing behind, and in looking into which they see
only their own distorted images, like the reflection of a face in a
spoon. Hence it needs not surprise that they are not very devout
worshippers; it is a great wonder they do not openly scoff.

.... The influence of climate upon civilization has been more
exhaustively treated than studied. Otherwise, we should know how it
is that some countries that have so much climate have no
civilization.

.... Whoso shall insist upon holding your attention while he
expounds to you things that you have always thriven without knowing
resembles one who should go about with a hammer, cracking nuts upon
other people's heads and eating the kernels himself.

.... There are but two kinds of temporary insanity, and each has but
a single symptom. The one was discovered by a coroner, the other by
a lawyer. The one induces you to kill yourself when you are unwell
of life; the other persuades you to kill somebody else when you are
fatigued of seeing him about.

.... People who honour their fathers and their mothers have the
comforting promise that their days shall be long in the land. They
are not sufficiently numerous to make the life assurance companies
think it worth their while to offer them special rates.

.... There are people who dislike to die, for apparently no better
reason than that there are a few vices they have not had the time to
try; but it must be confessed that the fewer there are of these
untasted sweets, the more loth are they to leave them.

.... Men ought to sin less in petty details, and more in the lump;
that they might the more conveniently be brought to repentance when
they are ready. They should imitate the touching solicitude of the
lady for the burglar, whom she spares much trouble by keeping her
jewels well together in a box.

.... I once knew a man who made me a map of the opposite hemisphere
of the moon. He was crazy. I knew another who taught me what country
lay upon the other side of the grave. He was a most acute thinker-as
he had need to be.

.... Those who are horrified at Mr. Darwin's theory, may comfort
themselves with the assurance that, if we are descended from the
ape, we have not descended so far as to preclude all hope of return.

.... There is more poison in aphorisms than in painted candy; but it
is of a less seductive kind.

.... If it were as easy to invent a credible falsehood as it is to
believe one, we should have little else in print. The mechanical
construction of a falsehood is a matter of the gravest import.

.... There is just as much true pleasure in walloping one's own wife
as in the sinful enjoyment of another man's right. Heaven gives to
each man a wife, and intends that he shall cleave to her alone. To
cleave is either to "split" or to "stick." To cleave to your wife is
to split her with a stick.

.... A strong mind is more easily impressed than a weak one: you
shall not as readily convince a fool that you are a philosopher, as
a philosopher that you are a fool.

.... In our intercourse with men, their national peculiarities and
customs are entitled to consideration. In addressing the common
Frenchman take off your hat; in addressing the common Irishman make
him take off his.

.... It is nearly always untrue to say of a man that he wishes to
leave a great property behind him when he dies. Usually he would
like to take it along.

.... Benevolence is as purely selfish as greed. No one would do a
benevolent action if he knew it would entail remorse.

.... If cleanliness is next to godliness, it is a matter of
unceasing wonder that, having gone to the extreme limit of the
former, so many people manage to stop short exactly at the line of
demarcation.

.... Most people have no more definite idea of liberty than that it
consists in being compelled by law to do as they like.

.... Every man is at heart a brute, and the greatest injury you can
put upon any one is to provoke him into displaying his nature. No
gentleman ever forgives the man who makes him let out his beast.

.... The Psalmist never saw the seed of the righteous begging bread.
In our day they sometimes request pennies for keeping the
street-crossings in order.

.... When two wholly irreconcilable propositions are presented to
the mind, the safest way is to thank Heaven that we are not like the
unreasoning brutes, and believe both.

.... If every malefactor in the church were known by his face it
would be necessary to prohibit the secular tongue from crying "stop
thief." Otherwise the church bells could not be heard of a pleasant
Sunday.

.... Truth is more deceptive than falsehood, because it is commonly
employed by those from whom we do not expect it, and so passes for
what it is not.

.... "If people only knew how foolish it is" to take their wine with
a dash of prussic acid, it is probable that they would-prefer to
take it with that addition.

.... "A man's honour," says a philosopher, "is the best protection
he can have." Then most men might find a heartless oppressor in the
predatory oyster.

.... The canary gets his name from the dog, an animal whom he looks
down upon. We get a good many worse things than names from those
beneath us; and they give us a bad name too.

.... Faith is the best evidence in the world; it reconciles
contradictions and proves impossibilities. It is wonderfully
developed in the blind.

.... He who undertakes an "Account of Idiots in All Ages" will find
himself committed to the task of compiling most known biographies.
Some future publisher will affix a life of the compiler.

.... Gratitude is regarded as a precious virtue, because tendered as
a fair equivalent for any conceivable service.

.... A bad marriage is like an electric machine: it makes you dance,
but you can't let go.

.... The symbol of Charity should be a circle. It usually ends
exactly where it begins-at home.

.... Most people redeem a promise as an angler takes in a trout; by
first playing it with a good deal of line.

.... It is a grave mistake to suppose defaulters have no
consciences. Some of them have been known, under favourable
circumstances, to restore as much as ten per cent. of their plunder.

.... There is nothing so progressive as grief, and nothing so
infectious as progress. I have seen an acre of cemetery infected by
a single innovation in spelling cut upon a tombstone.

.... It is wicked to cheat on Sunday. The law recognises this truth,
and shuts up the shops.

.... In the infancy of our language to be "foolish" signified to be
affectionate; to be "fond" was to be silly. We have altered that
now: to be "foolish" is to be silly, to be "fond" is to be
affectionate. But that the change could ever have been made is
significant.

.... If you meet a man on the narrow crossing of a muddy street,
stand quite still. He will turn out and go round you, bowing his
apologies. It is courtesy to accept them.

.... If every hypocrite in the United States were to break his leg
at noon to-day, the country might be successfully invaded at one
o'clock by the warlike hypocrites of Canada.

.... To Dogmatism the Spirit of Inquiry is the same as the Spirit of
Evil; and to pictures of the latter it has appended a tail, to
represent the note of interrogation.

.... We speak of the affections as originating in instinct. This is
a miserable subterfuge to shift the obloquy from the judgment.

.... What we call decency is custom; what we term indecency is
merely customary.

.... The noblest pursuit of Man is the pursuit of Woman.

.... "Immoral" is the solemn judgment of the stalled ox upon the
sun-inspired lamb. "ITEMS" FROM THE PRESS OF INTERIOR CALIFORNIA.

.... A little bit of romance has just transpired to relieve the
monotony of our metropolitan life. Old Sam Choggins, whom the editor
of this paper has so often publicly thrashed, has returned from Mud
Springs with a young wife. He is said to be very fond of her, and
the way he came to get her was this:

Some time ago we courted her, but finding she was "on the make,"
threw her off, after shooting her brother and two cousins. She vowed
revenge, and promised to marry any man who would horsewhip us. This
Sam agreed to undertake, and she married him on that promise.

We shall call on Sam to-morrow with our new shot-gun, and present
our congratulations in the usual form.--Hangtown "Gibbet."

.... The purposeless old party with the boiled shirt, who has for
some days been loafing about the town peddling hymn-books at merely
nominal prices (a clear proof that he stole them), has been disposed
of in a cheap and satisfactory manner. His lode petered out about
six o'clock yesterday afternoon; our evening edition being delayed
until that time, by request. The cause of his death, as nearly as
could be ascertained by a single physician-Dr. Duffer being too
drunk to attend-was Whisky Sam, who, it will be remembered,
delivered a lecture some weeks ago entitled "Dan'l in the Lion's
Den; and How They'd aEt 'Im ef He'd Ever ben Ther"--in which he
triumphantly overthrew revealed religion.

His course yesterday proves that he can act as well as talk.--Devil
Gully "Expositor."

.... There was considerable excitement, in the street yesterday,
owing to the arrival of Bust-Head Dave, formerly of this place, who
came over on the stage from Pudding Springs. He was met at the hotel
by Sheriff Knogg, who leaves a large family, and whose loss will be
universally deplored. Dave walked down the street to the bridge, and
it reminded one of old times to see the people go away as he heaved
in view. It was not through any fear of the man, but from the
knowledge that he had made a threat (first published in this paper)
to clean out the town. Before leaving the place Dave called at our
office to settle for a year's subscription (invariably in advance)
and was informed, through a chink in the logs, that he might leave
his dust in the tin cup at the well.

Dave is looking very much larger than at his last visit just
previous to the funeral of Judge Dawson. He left for Injun Hill at
five o'clock, amidst a good deal of shooting at rather long range,
and there will be an election for Sheriff as soon as a stranger can
be found who will accept the honour.--Yankee Flat "Advertiser."

.... It is to be hoped the people will all turn out to-morrow,
according to advertisement in another column. The men deserve
hanging, no end, but at the same time they are human, and entitled
to some respect; and we shall print the name of every adult male who
does not grace the occasion with his presence. We make this threat
simply because there have been some indications of apathy; and any
man who will stay away when Bob Bolton and Sam Buxter are to be
hanged, is probably either an accomplice or a relation. Old
Blanket-Mouth Dick was not the only blood relation these fellows
have in this vicinity; and the fate that befell him when they could
not be found ought to be a warning to the rest.

We hope to see a full attendance. The bar is just in rear of the
gibbet, and will be run by a brother of ours. Gentlemen who shrink
from publicity will patronize that bar.--San Louis Jones "Gazette."

.... A painful accident occurred in Frog Gulch yesterday which has
cast a good deal of gloom over a hitherto joyous and whisky loving
community. Dan Spigger-or as he was familiarly called, Murderer
Dan-got drunk at his usual hour yesterday, and as is his custom took
down his gun, and started after the fellow who went home with his
girl the night before. He found him at breakfast with his wife and
thirteen children. After killing them he started out to return, but
being weary, stumbled and broke his leg. Dr. Bill found him in that
condition, and having no waggon at hand to convey him to town, shot
him to put him out of his misery.

Dan was dearly loved by all who knew him, and his loss is a
Democratic gain. He seldom disagreed with any but Democrats, and
would have materially reduced the vote of that party had he not been
so untimely cut off.--Jackass Gap "Bulletin."

.... The dance-house at the corner of Moll Duncan Street and
Fish-trap Avenue has been broken up. Our friend, the editor of the
Jamboree, succeeded in getting his cock-eyed sister in there as a
beer-slinger, and the hurdy-gurdy girls all swore they would not
stand her society; and they got up and got. The light fantastic is
not tripped there any more, except when the Jamboree man sneaks in
and dances a jig for his morning pizen.--Murderburg "Herald."

.... The Superintendent of the Mag Davis Mine requests us to state
that the custom of pitching Chinamen and Injins down the shaft will
have to be stopped, as he has resumed work in the mine. The old
well, back of Jo Bowman's, is just as good, and is more centrally
located.--New Jerusalem "Courier."

.... Three women while amusing themselves in Calaveras county met
with a serious accident. They were jumping across a hole eight
hundred feet deep and ten wide. One of them couldn't quite make it,
succeeding only in grasping a sage-bush on the opposite edge, where
she hung suspended. Her companions, who had just stepped into an
adjacent saloon, saw her peril, and as soon as they had finished
drinking went to her assistance. Previously to liberating her, one
of them by way of a joke uprooted the bush. This exasperated the
other, and she, threw her companion half-way across the shaft. She
then attempted to cross over to the other side in two jumps.

The affair has made considerable talk.--Red Head "Tribune."

.... A family who for fifteen years have lived at the bottom of a
mine shaft in Siskiyou county, were all drowned by a rain-storm last
Wednesday night. They had neglected their usual precaution of
putting an umbrella over the mouth of the shaft. The man-who had
always been vacillating in politics-was taken out a stiff
Radical.--Dog Valley "Howl."

.... There is a fellow in town who claims to be the man that
murdered Sheriff White some months ago. We consider him an impostor,
seeking admission into society above his level, and hope people will
stop inviting him to their houses.--Nigger Hill "Patriot."

.... A stranger wearing a stovepipe hat arrived in town yesterday,
putting up at the Nugget House. The boys are having a good time with
that hat this morning, and the funeral will take place at two
o'clock.--Spanish Camp "Flag."

.... The scoundrel who tipped over our office last month will be
hung to-morrow, and no paper will be issued next day.--Sierra
"Fire-cracker."

.... The old grey-headed party who lost his life last Friday at the
jewelled hands of our wife, deserves more than a passing notice at
ours. He came to this city last summer, and started a weekly
Methodist prayer meeting, but being warned by the Police, who was
formerly a Presbyterian, gave up the swindle. He afterward undertook
to introduce Bibles and hymn-books, and, it is said, on one
occasion attempted to preach. This was a little more than an
outraged community could be expected to endure, and at our
suggestion he was tarred and feathered.

For a time this treatment seemed to work a reform, but the heart of
a Methodist is, above all things, deceitful and desperately wicked,
and he was soon after caught in the very act of presenting a
spelling-book to old Ben Spoffer's youngest daughter, Ragged Moll,
since hung. The Vigilance Committee pro tem. waited upon him, when
he was decently shot and left for dead, as was recorded in this
paper, with an obituary notice for which we have never received a
cent. Last Friday, however, he was discovered sneaking into the
potato patch connected with this paper, and our wife, God bless her,
got an axe and finished him then and there.

His name was John Bucknor, and it is reported (we do not know with
how much truth) that at one time there was an improper intimacy
between him and the lady who despatched him. If so, we pity
Sal.--Coyote "Trapper."

.... Our readers may have noticed in yesterday's issue an editorial
article in which we charged Judge Black with having murdered his
father, beaten his wife, and stolen seven mules from Jo Gorman. The
facts are substantially true, though somewhat different from what we
stated. The killing was done by a Dutchman named Moriarty, and the
bruises we happened to see on the face of the Judge's wife were
caused by a fall-she being, doubtless, drunk at the time. The mules
had only strayed into the mountains, and have returned all right.

We consider the Judge's anger at so trifling an error very
ridiculous and insulting, and shall shoot him the first time he
comes to town. An Independent Press is not to be muzzled by any
absurd old buffer with a crooked nose, and a sister who is
considerably more mother than wife. Not as long as we have our usual
success in thinning out the judiciary with buck shot.--Lone Tree
"Sockdolager."

.... Yesterday, as Job Wheeler was returning from a clean-up at the
Buttermilk Flume, he stopped at Hell Tunnel to have a chat with the
boys. John Tooley took a fancy to Job's watch, and asked for it.
Being refused, he slipped away, and going to Job's shanty, killed
his three half-breed children and a valuable pig. This is the third
time John has played some scurvy trick, and it is about time the
Superintendent discharged him. There is entirely too much of this
practical joking amongst the boys, and it will lead to trouble
yet.--Nugget Hill "Pickaxe of Freedom."

.... The stranger from Frisco with the claw-hammer coat, who put up
at the Gag House last Thursday, and was looking for a chance to
invest, was robbed the other night of three hundred ounces of clean
dust. We know who did it, but don't be frightened, John Lowry; we'll
never tell, though we are awful hard up, owing to our subscribers
going back on us.--Choketown "Rocker."

.... Old Mother Gooly, who works a ranch on shares near Whiskyville,
was married last Sunday to the new Episcopalian preacher from
Dogburg. It seems that he laboured more faithfully to convert her
soul than to save the crop, and the bride protested against his
misdirected industry, with a crowbar. The citizens are very much
grieved to lose one whose abilities they never fairly appreciated
until his brain was scraped off the iron and weighed. It was found
to be considerably heavier than the average.

But the verdict of the people is unanimously given. He ought not to
have fooled with Mother Gooly's immortal part, to the neglect of the
wheat crop. That kind of thing is not popular at Whiskyville. It is
not business.--"Bullwhacker's Own."

.... The railroad from this city north-west will be commenced as
soon as the citizens get tired of killing the Chinamen brought up to
do the work, which will probably be within three or four weeks. The
carcases are accumulating about town and begin to become
unpleasant.--Gravel Hill "Thunderbolt."

.... The man who was shot last week at the Gulch will be buried next
Thursday. He is not yet dead, but his physician wishes to visit a
mother-in-law at Lard Springs, and is therefore very anxious to get
the case off his hands. The undertaker describes the patient as "the
longest cuss in that section."--Santa Peggie "Times."

.... There is some dispute about land titles at Little Bilk Bar.
About half a dozen cases were temporarily decided on Wednesday, but
it is supposed the widows will renew the litigation. The only proper
way to prevent these vexatious lawsuits is to hang the Judge of the
County Court.--Cow-County "Outcropper."






POESY.





Ye Idyll of Ye Hippopopotamus.

    With a Methodist hymn in his musical throat,
    The Sun was emitting his ultimate note;
    His quivering larynx enwrinkled the sea
    Like an Ichthyosaurian blowing his tea;
    When sweetly and pensively rattled and rang
    This plaint which an Hippopopotamus sang:

    "O, Camomile, Calabash, Cartilage-pie,
    Spread for my spirit a peppermint fry;
    Crown me with doughnuts, and drape me with cheese,
    Settle my soul with a codliver sneeze.
    Lo, how I stand on my head and repine--
    Lollipop Lumpkin can never be mine!"

    Down sank the Sun with a kick and a plunge,
    Up from the wave rose the head of a Sponge;
    Ropes in his ringlets, eggs in his eyes,
    Tip-tilted nose in a way to surprise.
    These the conundrums he flung to the breeze,
    The answers that Echo returned to him these:

        "Cobblestone, Cobblestone, why do you sigh--
       Why do you turn on the tears?"

        "My mother is crazy on strawberry jam,
       And my father has petrified ears."

        "Liverwort, Liverwort, why do you droop--
       Why do you snuffle and scowl?"

        "My brother has cockle-burs into his eyes,
       And my sister has married an owl."

        "Simia, Simia, why do you laugh--
       Why do you cackle and quake?"

        "My son has a pollywog stuck in his throat,
       And my daughter has bitten a snake."

    Slow sank the head of the Sponge out of sight,
    Soaken with sea-water-then it was night.
    The Moon had now risen for dinner to dress,
    When sweetly the Pachyderm sang from his nest;
    He sang through a pestle of silvery shape,
    Encrusted with custard-empurpled with crape;
    And this was the burden he bore on his lips,
    And blew to the listening Sturgeon that sips
    From the fountain of opium under the lobes
    Of the mountain whose summit in buffalo robes
    The winter envelops, as Venus adorns
    An elephant's trunk with a chaplet of thorns:

        "Chasing mastodons through marshes upon stilts of light ratan,
        Hunting spiders with a shotgun and mosquitoes with an axe,
        Plucking peanuts ready roasted from the branches of the oak,
        Waking echoes in the forest with our hymns of blessed bosh,

       We roamed-my love and I.
        By the margin of the fountain spouting thick with clabbered milk,
        Under spreading boughs of bass-wood all alive with cooing toads,
        Loafing listlessly on bowlders of octagonal design,
        Standing gracefully inverted with our toes together knit,

       We loved-my love and I."
    Hippopopotamus comforts his heart
    Biting half-moons out of strawberry tart.
    Epitaph on George Francis Train.
    (Inscribed on a Pork-barrel.)
    Beneath this casket rots unknown
    A Thing that merits not a stone,
        Save that by passing urchin cast;
    Whose fame and virtues we express
    By transient urn of emptiness,
        With apt inscription (to its past
    Relating-and to his): "Prime Mess."
    No honour had this infidel,
    That doth not appertain, as well,
        To altered caitiff on the drop;
    No wit that would not likewise pass
    For wisdom in the famished ass
        Who breaks his neck a weed to crop,
    When tethered in the luscious grass.
    And now, thank God, his hateful name
    Shall never rescued be from shame,
        Though seas of venal ink be shed;
    No sophistry shall reconcile
    With sympathy for Erin's Isle,
        Or sorrow for her patriot dead,
    The weeping of this crocodile.
    Life's incongruity is past,
    And dirt to dirt is seen at last,
        The worm of worm afoul doth fall.
    The sexton tolls his solemn bell
    For scoundrel dead and gone to-well,
        It matters not, it can't recall
    This convict from his final cell.
    Jerusalem, Old and New.
    Didymus Dunkleton Doty Don John
        Is a parson of high degree;
    He holds forth of Sundays to marvelling crowds
        Who wonder how vice can still be
    When smitten so stoutly by Didymus Don--
        Disciple of Calvin is he.
    But sinners still laugh at his talk of the New
       Jerusalem-ha-ha, te-he!
    And biting their thumbs at the doughty Don-John--
        This parson of high degree--
    They think of the streets of a village they know,
        Where horses still sink to the knee,
    Contrasting its muck with the pavement of gold
        That's laid in the other citee.
    They think of the sign that still swings, uneffaced
        By winds from the salt, salt sea,
    Which tells where he trafficked in tipple, of yore--
        Don Dunkleton Johnny, D. D.
    Didymus Dunkleton Doty Don John
        Still plays on his fiddle--D. D.,
    His lambkins still bleat in full psalmody sweet,
        And the devil still pitches the key.
    Communing with Nature.
    One evening I sat on a heavenward hill,
    The winds were asleep and all nature was still,
    Wee children came round me to play at my knee,
    As my mind floated rudderless over the sea.
    I put out one hand to caress them, but held
    With the other my nose, for these cherubim smelled.
    I cast a few glances upon the old sun;
    He was red in the face from the race he had run,
    But he seemed to be doing, for aught I could see,
    Quite well without any assistance from me.
    And so I directed my wandering eye
    Around to the opposite side of the sky,
    And the rapture that ever with ecstasy thrills
    Through the heart as the moon rises bright from the hills,
    Would in this case have been most exceedingly rare,
    Except for the fact that the moon was not there.
    But the stars looked right lovingly down in the sea,
    And, by Jupiter, Venus was winking at me!
    The gas in the city was flaring up bright,
    Montgomery Street was resplendent with light;
    But I did not exactly appear to advance
    A sentiment proper to that circumstance.
    So it only remains to explain to the town
    That a rainstorm came up before I could come down.
    As the boots I had on were uncommonly thin
    My fancy leaked out as the water leaked in.
    Though dampened my ardour, though slackened my strain,
    I'll "strike the wild lyre" who sings the sweet rain!
    Conservatism and Progress.
    Old Zephyr, dawdling in the West,
    Looked down upon the sea,
    Which slept unfretted at his feet,
    And balanced on its breast a fleet
    That seemed almost to be
    Suspended in the middle air,
    As if a magnet held it there,
    Eternally at rest.
    Then, one by one, the ships released
    Their folded sails, and strove
    Against the empty calm to press
    North, South, or West, or East,
    In vain; the subtle nothingness
    Was impotent to move.
    Ten Zephyr laughed aloud to see:--
    "No vessel moves except by me,
    And, heigh-ho! I shall sleep."
    But lo! from out the troubled North
    A tempest strode impatient forth,
    And trampled white the deep;
    The sloping ships flew glad away,
    Laving their heated sides in spray.
    The West then turned him red with wrath,
    And to the North he shouted:
    "Hold there! How dare you cross my path,
    As now you are about it?"
    The North replied with laboured breath--
    His speed no moment slowing:--
    "My friend, you'll never have a path,
    Unless you take to blowing."
    Inter Arma Silent Leges.
    (An Election Incident.)
    About the polls the freedmen drew,
        To vote the freemen down;
    And merrily their caps up-flew
        As Grant rode through the town.
    From votes to staves they next did turn,
        And beat the freemen down;
    Full bravely did their valour burn
        As Grant rode through the town.
    Then staves for muskets they forsook,
        And shot the freemen down;
    Right royally their banners shook
        As Grant rode through the town.
    Hail, final triumph of our cause!
        Hail, chief of mute renown!
    Grim Magistrate of Silent Laws,
        A-riding freedom down!
    Quintessence.

"To produce these spicy paragraphs, which have been unsuccessfully
imitated by every newspaper in the State, requires the combined
efforts of five able-bodied persons associated on the editorial
staff of this journal."--New York Herald.

Sir Muscle speaks, and nations bend the ear:

    "Hark ye these Notes-our wit quintuple hear;
    Five able-bodied editors combine
    Their strength prodigious in each laboured line!"
    O wondrous vintner! hopeless seemed the task
    To bung these drainings in a single cask;
    The riddle's read-five leathern skins contain
    The working juice, and scarcely feel the strain.
    Saviours of Rome! will wonders never cease?
    A ballad cackled by five tuneful geese!
    Upon one Rosinante five stout knights
    Ride fiercely into visionary fights!
    A cap and bells five sturdy fools adorn,
    Five porkers battle for a grain of corn,
    Five donkeys squeeze into a narrow stall,
    Five tumble-bugs propel a single ball!
    Resurgam.
    Dawns dread and red the fateful morn--
    Lo, Resurrection's Day is born!
    The striding sea no longer strides,
    No longer knows the trick of tides;
    The land is breathless, winds relent,
    All nature waits the dread event.
    From wassail rising rather late,
    Awarding Jove arrives in state;
    O'er yawning graves looks many a league,
    Then yawns himself from sheer fatigue.
    Lifting its finger to the sky,
    A marble shaft arrests his eye--
    This epitaph, in pompous pride,
    Engraven on its polished side:
    "Perfection of Creation's plan,
    Here resteth Universal Man,
    Who virtues, segregated wide,
    Collated, classed, and codified,
    Reduced to practice, taught, explained,
    And strict morality maintained.
    Anticipating death, his pelf
        He lavished on this monolith;
        Because he leaves nor kin nor kith
    He rears this tribute to himself,
    That Virtue's fame may never cease.
    Hic jacet-let him rest in peace!"
    With sober eye Jove scanned the shaft,
    Then turned away and lightly laughed
    "Poor Man! since I have careless been
    In keeping books to note thy sin,
    And thou hast left upon the earth
    This faithful record of thy worth,
    Thy final prayer shall now be heard:
        Of life I'll not renew thy lease,
    But take thee at thy carven word,
        And let thee rest in solemn peace!"

THE END.

"For my own part, I must confess to bear a very singular respect to
this animal, by whom I take human nature to be most admirably held
forth in all its qualities as well as operations; and, therefore,
whatever in my small reading occurs concerning this, our fellow
creature, I do never fail to set it down by way of commonplace; and
when I have occasion to write upon human reason, politics, eloquence
or knowledge, I lay my memorandums before me, and insert them with a
wonderful facility of application."--SWIFT.








MY FAVORITE MURDER


Having murdered my mother under circumstances of singular atrocity, I
was arrested and put upon my trial, which lasted seven years.  In
charging the jury, the judge of the Court of Acquittal remarked that
it was one of the most ghastly crimes that he had ever been called
upon to explain away.

At this, my attorney rose and said:

"May it please your Honor, crimes are ghastly or agreeable only by
comparison.  If you were familiar with the details of my client's
previous murder of his uncle you would discern in his later offense
(if offense it may be called) something in the nature of tender
forbearance and filial consideration for the feelings of the victim.
The appalling ferocity of the former assassination was indeed
inconsistent with any hypothesis but that of guilt; and had it not
been for the fact that the honorable judge before whom he was tried
was the president of a life insurance company that took risks on
hanging, and in which my client held a policy, it is hard to see how
he could decently have been acquitted.  If your Honor would like to
hear about it for instruction and guidance of your Honor's mind, this
unfortunate man, my client, will consent to give himself the pain of
relating it under oath."

The district attorney said: "Your Honor, I object.  Such a statement
would be in the nature of evidence, and the testimony in this case is
closed.  The prisoner's statement should have been introduced three
years ago, in the spring of 1881."

"In a statutory sense," said the judge, "you are right, and in the
Court of Objections and Technicalities you would get a ruling in your
favor.  But not in a Court of Acquittal.  The objection is overruled."

"I except," said the district attorney.

"You cannot do that," the judge said.  "I must remind you that in
order to take an exception you must first get this case transferred
for a time to the Court of Exceptions on a formal motion duly
supported by affidavits.  A motion to that effect by your predecessor
in office was denied by me during the first year of this trial.  Mr.
Clerk, swear the prisoner."

The customary oath having been administered, I made the following
statement, which impressed the judge with so strong a sense of the
comparative triviality of the offense for which I was on trial that he
made no further search for mitigating circumstances, but simply
instructed the jury to acquit, and I left the court, without a stain
upon my reputation:

"I was born in 1856 in Kalamakee, Mich., of honest and reputable
parents, one of whom Heaven has mercifully spared to comfort me in my
later years.  In 1867 the family came to California and settled near
Nigger Head, where my father opened a road agency and prospered beyond
the dreams of avarice.  He was a reticent, saturnine man then, though
his increasing years have now somewhat relaxed the austerity of his
disposition, and I believe that nothing but his memory of the sad
event for which I am now on trial prevents him from manifesting a
genuine hilarity.

"Four years after we had set up the road agency an itinerant preacher
came along, and having no other way to pay for the night's lodging
that we gave him, favored us with an exhortation of such power that,
praise God, we were all converted to religion.  My father at once sent
for his brother, the Hon. William Ridley of Stockton, and on his
arrival turned over the agency to him, charging him nothing for the
franchise nor plant--the latter consisting of a Winchester rifle, a
sawed-off shotgun, and an assortment of masks made out of flour sacks.
The family then moved to Ghost Rock and opened a dance house.  It was
called 'The Saints' Rest Hurdy-Gurdy,' and the proceedings each night
began with prayer.  It was there that my now sainted mother, by her
grace in the dance, acquired the _sobriquet_ of 'The Bucking Walrus.'

"In the fall of '75 I had occasion to visit Coyote, on the road to
Mahala, and took the stage at Ghost Rock.  There were four other
passengers.  About three miles beyond Nigger Head, persons whom I
identified as my Uncle William and his two sons held up the stage.
Finding nothing in the express box, they went through the passengers.
I acted a most honorable part in the affair, placing myself in line
with the others, holding up my hands and permitting myself to be
deprived of forty dollars and a gold watch.  From my behavior no one
could have suspected that I knew the gentlemen who gave the
entertainment.  A few days later, when I went to Nigger Head and asked
for the return of my money and watch my uncle and cousins swore they
knew nothing of the matter, and they affected a belief that my father
and I had done the job ourselves in dishonest violation of commercial
good faith.  Uncle William even threatened to retaliate by starting an
opposition dance house at Ghost Rock.  As 'The Saints' Rest' had
become rather unpopular, I saw that this would assuredly ruin it and
prove a paying enterprise, so I told my uncle that I was willing to
overlook the past if he would take me into the scheme and keep the
partnership a secret from my father.  This fair offer he rejected, and
I then perceived that it would be better and more satisfactory if he
were dead.

"My plans to that end were soon perfected, and communicating them to
my dear parents I had the gratification of receiving their approval.
My father said he was proud of me, and my mother promised that
although her religion forbade her to assist in taking human life I
should have the advantage of her prayers for my success.  As a
preliminary measure looking to my security in case of detection I made
an application for membership in that powerful order, the Knights of
Murder, and in due course was received as a member of the Ghost Rock
commandery.  On the day that my probation ended I was for the first
time permitted to inspect the records of the order and learn who
belonged to it--all the rites of initiation having been conducted in
masks.  Fancy my delight when, in looking over the roll of membership,
I found the third name to be that of my uncle, who indeed was junior
vice-chancellor of the order!  Here was an opportunity exceeding my
wildest dreams--to murder I could add insubordination and treachery.
It was what my good mother would have called 'a special Providence.'

"At about this time something occurred which caused my cup of joy,
already full, to overflow on all sides, a circular cataract of bliss.
Three men, strangers in that locality, were arrested for the stage
robbery in which I had lost my money and watch.  They were brought to
trial and, despite my efforts to clear them and fasten the guilt upon
three of the most respectable and worthy citizens of Ghost Rock,
convicted on the clearest proof.  The murder would now be as wanton
and reasonless as I could wish.

"One morning I shouldered my Winchester rifle, and going over to my
uncle's house, near Nigger Head, asked my Aunt Mary, his wife, if he
were at home, adding that I had come to kill him.  My aunt replied
with her peculiar smile that so many gentlemen called on that errand
and were afterward carried away without having performed it that I
must excuse her for doubting my good faith in the matter.  She said I
did not look as if I would kill anybody, so, as a proof of good faith
I leveled my rifle and wounded a Chinaman who happened to be passing
the house.  She said she knew whole families that could do a thing of
that kind, but Bill Ridley was a horse of another color.  She said,
however, that I would find him over on the other side of the creek in
the sheep lot; and she added that she hoped the best man would win.

"My Aunt Mary was one of the most fair-minded women that I have ever
met.

"I found my uncle down on his knees engaged in skinning a sheep.
Seeing that he had neither gun nor pistol handy I had not the heart to
shoot him, so I approached him, greeted him pleasantly and struck him
a powerful blow on the head with the butt of my rifle.  I have a very
good delivery and Uncle William lay down on his side, then rolled over
on his back, spread out his fingers and shivered.  Before he could
recover the use of his limbs I seized the knife that he had been using
and cut his hamstrings.  You know, doubtless, that when you sever the
_tendo Achillis_ the patient has no further use of his leg; it is just
the same as if he had no leg.  Well, I parted them both, and when he
revived he was at my service.  As soon as he comprehended the
situation, he said:

"'Samuel, you have got the drop on me and can afford to be generous.
I have only one thing to ask of you, and that is that you carry me to
the house and finish me in the bosom of my family.'

"I told him I thought that a pretty reasonable request and I would do
so if he would let me put him into a wheat sack; he would be easier to
carry that way and if we were seen by the neighbors _en route_ it
would cause less remark.  He agreed to that, and going to the barn I
got a sack.  This, however, did not fit him; it was too short and much
wider than he; so I bent his legs, forced his knees up against his
breast and got him into it that way, tying the sack above his head.
He was a heavy man and I had all that I could do to get him on my
back, but I staggered along for some distance until I came to a swing
that some of the children had suspended to the branch of an oak.  Here
I laid him down and sat upon him to rest, and the sight of the rope
gave me a happy inspiration.  In twenty minutes my uncle, still in the
sack, swung free to the sport of the wind.

"I had taken down the rope, tied one end tightly about the mouth of
the bag, thrown the other across the limb and hauled him up about five
feet from the ground.  Fastening the other end of the rope also about
the mouth of the sack, I had the satisfaction to see my uncle
converted into a large, fine pendulum.  I must add that he was not
himself entirely aware of the nature of the change that he had
undergone in his relation to the exterior world, though in justice to
a good man's memory I ought to say that I do not think he would in any
case have wasted much of my time in vain remonstrance.

"Uncle William had a ram that was famous in all that region as a
fighter.  It was in a state of chronic constitutional indignation.
Some deep disappointment in early life had soured its disposition and
it had declared war upon the whole world.  To say that it would butt
anything accessible is but faintly to express the nature and scope of
its military activity: the universe was its antagonist; its methods
that of a projectile.  It fought like the angels and devils, in
mid-air, cleaving the atmosphere like a bird, describing a parabolic
curve and descending upon its victim at just the exact angle of
incidence to make the most of its velocity and weight.  Its momentum,
calculated in foot-tons, was something incredible.  It had been seen
to destroy a four year old bull by a single impact upon that animal's
gnarly forehead.  No stone wall had ever been known to resist its
downward swoop; there were no trees tough enough to stay it; it would
splinter them into matchwood and defile their leafy honors in the
dust.  This irascible and implacable brute--this incarnate
thunderbolt--this monster of the upper deep, I had seen reposing in
the shade of an adjacent tree, dreaming dreams of conquest and glory.
It was with a view to summoning it forth to the field of honor that I
suspended its master in the manner described.

"Having completed my preparations, I imparted to the avuncular
pendulum a gentle oscillation, and retiring to cover behind a
contiguous rock, lifted up my voice in a long rasping cry whose
diminishing final note was drowned in a noise like that of a swearing
cat, which emanated from the sack.  Instantly that formidable sheep
was upon its feet and had taken in the military situation at a glance.
In a few moments it had approached, stamping, to within fifty yards
of the swinging foeman, who, now retreating and anon advancing, seemed
to invite the fray.  Suddenly I saw the beast's head drop earthward as
if depressed by the weight of its enormous horns; then a dim, white,
wavy streak of sheep prolonged itself from that spot in a generally
horizontal direction to within about four yards of a point immediately
beneath the enemy.  There it struck sharply upward, and before it had
faded from my gaze at the place whence it had set out I heard a horrid
thump and a piercing scream, and my poor uncle shot forward, with a
slack rope higher than the limb to which he was attached.  Here the
rope tautened with a jerk, arresting his flight, and back he swung in
a breathless curve to the other end of his arc.  The ram had fallen, a
heap of indistinguishable legs, wool and horns, but pulling itself
together and dodging as its antagonist swept downward it retired at
random, alternately shaking its head and stamping its fore-feet.  When
it had backed about the same distance as that from which it had
delivered the assault it paused again, bowed its head as if in prayer
for victory and again shot forward, dimly visible as before--a
prolonging white streak with monstrous undulations, ending with a
sharp ascension.  Its course this time was at a right angle to its
former one, and its impatience so great that it struck the enemy
before he had nearly reached the lowest point of his arc.  In
consequence he went flying round and round in a horizontal circle
whose radius was about equal to half the length of the rope, which I
forgot to say was nearly twenty feet long.  His shrieks, _crescendo_
in approach and _diminuendo_ in recession, made the rapidity of his
revolution more obvious to the ear than to the eye.  He had evidently
not yet been struck in a vital spot.  His posture in the sack and the
distance from the ground at which he hung compelled the ram to operate
upon his lower extremities and the end of his back.  Like a plant that
has struck its root into some poisonous mineral, my poor uncle was
dying slowly upward.

"After delivering its second blow the ram had not again retired.  The
fever of battle burned hot in its heart; its brain was intoxicated
with the wine of strife.  Like a pugilist who in his rage forgets his
skill and fights ineffectively at half-arm's length, the angry beast
endeavored to reach its fleeting foe by awkward vertical leaps as he
passed overhead, sometimes, indeed, succeeding in striking him feebly,
but more frequently overthrown by its own misguided eagerness.  But as
the impetus was exhausted and the man's circles narrowed in scope and
diminished in speed, bringing him nearer to the ground, these tactics
produced better results, eliciting a superior quality of screams,
which I greatly enjoyed.

"Suddenly, as if the bugles had sung truce, the ram suspended
hostilities and walked away, thoughtfully wrinkling and smoothing its
great aquiline nose, and occasionally cropping a bunch of grass and
slowly munching it.  It seemed to have tired of war's alarms and
resolved to beat the sword into a plowshare and cultivate the arts of
peace.  Steadily it held its course away from the field of fame until
it had gained a distance of nearly a quarter of a mile.  There it
stopped and stood with its rear to the foe, chewing its cud and
apparently half asleep.  I observed, however, an occasional slight
turn of its head, as if its apathy were more affected than real.

"Meantime Uncle William's shrieks had abated with his motion, and
nothing was heard from him but long, low moans, and at long intervals
my name, uttered in pleading tones exceedingly grateful to my ear.
Evidently the man had not the faintest notion of what was being done
to him, and was inexpressibly terrified.  When Death comes cloaked in
mystery he is terrible indeed.  Little by little my uncle's
oscillations diminished, and finally he hung motionless.  I went to
him and was about to give him the _coup de grace_, when I heard and
felt a succession of smart shocks which shook the ground like a series
of light earthquakes, and turning in the direction of the ram, saw a
long cloud of dust approaching me with inconceivable rapidity and
alarming effect!  At a distance of some thirty yards away it stopped
short, and from the near end of it rose into the air what I at first
thought a great white bird.  Its ascent was so smooth and easy and
regular that I could not realize its extraordinary celerity, and was
lost in admiration of its grace.  To this day the impression remains
that it was a slow, deliberate movement, the ram--for it was that
animal--being upborne by some power other than its own impetus, and
supported through the successive stages of its flight with infinite
tenderness and care.  My eyes followed its progress through the air
with unspeakable pleasure, all the greater by contrast with my former
terror of its approach by land.  Onward and upward the noble animal
sailed, its head bent down almost between its knees, its fore-feet
thrown back, its hinder legs trailing to rear like the legs of a
soaring heron.

"At a height of forty or fifty feet, as fond recollection presents it
to view, it attained its zenith and appeared to remain an instant
stationary; then, tilting suddenly forward without altering the
relative position of its parts, it shot downward on a steeper and
steeper course with augmenting velocity, passed immediately above me
with a noise like the rush of a cannon shot and struck my poor uncle
almost squarely on the top of the head!  So frightful was the impact
that not only the man's neck was broken, but the rope too; and the
body of the deceased, forced against the earth, was crushed to pulp
beneath the awful front of that meteoric sheep!  The concussion
stopped all the clocks between Lone Hand and Dutch Dan's, and
Professor Davidson, a distinguished authority in matters seismic, who
happened to be in the vicinity, promptly explained that the vibrations
were from north to southwest.

"Altogether, I cannot help thinking that in point of artistic atrocity
my murder of Uncle William has seldom been excelled."




OIL OF DOG


My name is Boffer Bings.  I was born of honest parents in one of the
humbler walks of life, my father being a manufacturer of dog-oil and
my mother having a small studio in the shadow of the village church,
where she disposed of unwelcome babes.  In my boyhood I was trained to
habits of industry; I not only assisted my father in procuring dogs
for his vats, but was frequently employed by my mother to carry away
the debris of her work in the studio.  In performance of this duty I
sometimes had need of all my natural intelligence for all the law
officers of the vicinity were opposed to my mother's business.  They
were not elected on an opposition ticket, and the matter had never
been made a political issue; it just happened so.  My father's
business of making dog-oil was, naturally, less unpopular, though the
owners of missing dogs sometimes regarded him with suspicion, which
was reflected, to some extent, upon me.  My father had, as silent
partners, all the physicians of the town, who seldom wrote a
prescription which did not contain what they were pleased to designate
as _Ol. can._  It is really the most valuable medicine ever
discovered.  But most persons are unwilling to make personal
sacrifices for the afflicted, and it was evident that many of the
fattest dogs in town had been forbidden to play with me--a fact which
pained my young sensibilities, and at one time came near driving me to
become a pirate.

Looking back upon those days, I cannot but regret, at times, that by
indirectly bringing my beloved parents to their death I was the author
of misfortunes profoundly affecting my future.

One evening while passing my father's oil factory with the body of a
foundling from my mother's studio I saw a constable who seemed to be
closely watching my movements.  Young as I was, I had learned that a
constable's acts, of whatever apparent character, are prompted by the
most reprehensible motives, and I avoided him by dodging into the
oilery by a side door which happened to stand ajar.  I locked it at
once and was alone with my dead.  My father had retired for the night.
The only light in the place came from the furnace, which glowed a
deep, rich crimson under one of the vats, casting ruddy reflections on
the walls.  Within the cauldron the oil still rolled in indolent
ebullition, occasionally pushing to the surface a piece of dog.
Seating myself to wait for the constable to go away, I held the naked
body of the foundling in my lap and tenderly stroked its short, silken
hair.  Ah, how beautiful it was!  Even at that early age I was
passionately fond of children, and as I looked upon this cherub I
could almost find it in my heart to wish that the small, red wound
upon its breast--the work of my dear mother--had not been mortal.

It had been my custom to throw the babes into the river which nature
had thoughtfully provided for the purpose, but that night I did not
dare to leave the oilery for fear of the constable.  "After all," I
said to myself, "it cannot greatly matter if I put it into this
cauldron.  My father will never know the bones from those of a puppy,
and the few deaths which may result from administering another kind of
oil for the incomparable _ol. can._ are not important in a population
which increases so rapidly."  In short, I took the first step in crime
and brought myself untold sorrow by casting the babe into the
cauldron.

The next day, somewhat to my surprise, my father, rubbing his hands
with satisfaction, informed me and my mother that he had obtained the
finest quality of oil that was ever seen; that the physicians to whom
he had shown samples had so pronounced it.  He added that he had no
knowledge as to how the result was obtained; the dogs had been treated
in all respects as usual, and were of an ordinary breed.  I deemed it
my duty to explain--which I did, though palsied would have been my
tongue if I could have foreseen the consequences.  Bewailing their
previous ignorance of the advantages of combining their industries, my
parents at once took measures to repair the error.  My mother removed
her studio to a wing of the factory building and my duties in
connection with the business ceased; I was no longer required to
dispose of the bodies of the small superfluous, and there was no need
of alluring dogs to their doom, for my father discarded them
altogether, though they still had an honorable place in the name of
the oil.  So suddenly thrown into idleness, I might naturally have
been expected to become vicious and dissolute, but I did not.  The
holy influence of my dear mother was ever about me to protect me from
the temptations which beset youth, and my father was a deacon in a
church.  Alas, that through my fault these estimable persons should
have come to so bad an end!

Finding a double profit in her business, my mother now devoted herself
to it with a new assiduity.  She removed not only superfluous and
unwelcome babes to order, but went out into the highways and byways,
gathering in children of a larger growth, and even such adults as she
could entice to the oilery.  My father, too, enamored of the superior
quality of oil produced, purveyed for his vats with diligence and
zeal.  The conversion of their neighbors into dog-oil became, in
short, the one passion of their lives--an absorbing and overwhelming
greed took possession of their souls and served them in place of a
hope in Heaven--by which, also, they were inspired.

So enterprising had they now become that a public meeting was held and
resolutions passed severely censuring them.  It was intimated by the
chairman that any further raids upon the population would be met in a
spirit of hostility.  My poor parents left the meeting broken-hearted,
desperate and, I believe, not altogether sane.  Anyhow, I deemed it
prudent not to enter the oilery with them that night, but slept
outside in a stable.

At about midnight some mysterious impulse caused me to rise and peer
through a window into the furnace-room, where I knew my father now
slept.  The fires were burning as brightly as if the following day's
harvest had been expected to be abundant.  One of the large cauldrons
was slowly "walloping" with a mysterious appearance of self-restraint,
as if it bided its time to put forth its full energy.  My father was
not in bed; he had risen in his night clothes and was preparing a
noose in a strong cord.  From the looks which he cast at the door of
my mother's bedroom I knew too well the purpose that he had in mind.
Speechless and motionless with terror, I could do nothing in
prevention or warning.  Suddenly the door of my mother's apartment was
opened, noiselessly, and the two confronted each other, both
apparently surprised.  The lady, also, was in her night clothes, and
she held in her right hand the tool of her trade, a long,
narrow-bladed dagger.

She, too, had been unable to deny herself the last profit which the
unfriendly action of the citizens and my absence had left her.  For
one instant they looked into each other's blazing eyes and then sprang
together with indescribable fury.  Round and round, the room they
struggled, the man cursing, the woman shrieking, both fighting like
demons--she to strike him with the dagger, he to strangle her with his
great bare hands.  I know not how long I had the unhappiness to
observe this disagreeable instance of domestic infelicity, but at
last, after a more than usually vigorous struggle, the combatants
suddenly moved apart.

My father's breast and my mother's weapon showed evidences of contact.
For another instant they glared at each other in the most unamiable
way; then my poor, wounded father, feeling the hand of death upon him,
leaped forward, unmindful of resistance, grasped my dear mother in his
arms, dragged her to the side of the boiling cauldron, collected all
his failing energies, and sprang in with her!  In a moment, both had
disappeared and were adding their oil to that of the committee of
citizens who had called the day before with an invitation to the
public meeting.

Convinced that these unhappy events closed to me every avenue to an
honorable career in that town, I removed to the famous city of
Otumwee, where these memoirs are written with a heart full of remorse
for a heedless act entailing so dismal a commercial disaster.




AN IMPERFECT CONFLAGRATION


Early one June morning in 1872 I murdered my father--an act which made
a deep impression on me at the time.  This was before my marriage,
while I was living with my parents in Wisconsin.  My father and I were
in the library of our home, dividing the proceeds of a burglary which
we had committed that night.  These consisted of household goods
mostly, and the task of equitable division was difficult.  We got on
very well with the napkins, towels and such things, and the silverware
was parted pretty nearly equally, but you can see for yourself that
when you try to divide a single music-box by two without a remainder
you will have trouble.  It was that music-box which brought disaster
and disgrace upon our family.  If we had left it my poor father might
now be alive.

It was a most exquisite and beautiful piece of workmanship--inlaid
with costly woods and carven very curiously.  It would not only play a
great variety of tunes, but would whistle like a quail, bark like a
dog, crow every morning at daylight whether it was wound up or not,
and break the Ten Commandments.  It was this last mentioned
accomplishment that won my father's heart and caused him to commit the
only dishonorable act of his life, though possibly he would have
committed more if he had been spared: he tried to conceal that
music-box from me, and declared upon his honor that he had not taken
it, though I know very well that, so far as he was concerned, the
burglary had been undertaken chiefly for the purpose of obtaining it.

My father had the music-box hidden under his cloak; we had worn cloaks
by way of disguise.  He had solemnly assured me that he did not take
it.  I knew that he did, and knew something of which he was evidently
ignorant; namely, that the box would crow at daylight and betray him
if I could prolong the division of profits till that time.  All
occurred as I wished: as the gaslight began to pale in the library and
the shape of the windows was seen dimly behind the curtains, a long
cock-a-doodle-doo came from beneath the old gentleman's cloak,
followed by a few bars of an aria from _Tannhauser_, ending with a
loud click.  A small hand-axe, which we had used to break into the
unlucky house, lay between us on the table; I picked it up.  The old
man seeing that further concealment was useless took the box from
under his cloak and set it on the table.  "Cut it in two if you prefer
that plan," said he; "I tried to save it from destruction."

He was a passionate lover of music and could himself play the
concertina with expression and feeling.

I said: "I do not question the purity of your motive: it would be
presumptuous of me to sit in judgment on my father.  But business is
business, and with this axe I am going to effect a dissolution of our
partnership unless you will consent in all future burglaries to wear a
bell-punch."

"No," he said, after some reflection, "no, I could not do that; it
would look like a confession of dishonesty.  People would say that you
distrusted me."

I could not help admiring his spirit and sensitiveness; for a moment I
was proud of him and disposed to overlook his fault, but a glance at
the richly jeweled music-box decided me, and, as I said, I removed the
old man from this vale of tears.  Having done so, I was a trifle
uneasy.  Not only was he my father--the author of my being--but the
body would be certainly discovered.  It was now broad daylight and my
mother was likely to enter the library at any moment.  Under the
circumstances, I thought it expedient to remove her also, which I did.
Then I paid off all the servants and discharged them.

That afternoon I went to the chief of police, told him what I had done
and asked his advice.  It would be very painful to me if the facts
became publicly known.  My conduct would be generally condemned; the
newspapers would bring it up against me if ever I should run for
office.  The chief saw the force of these considerations; he was
himself an assassin of wide experience.  After consulting with the
presiding judge of the Court of Variable Jurisdiction he advised me to
conceal the bodies in one of the bookcases, get a heavy insurance on
the house and burn it down.  This I proceeded to do.

In the library was a book-case which my father had recently purchased
of some cranky inventor and had not filled.  It was in shape and size
something like the old-fashioned "ward-robes" which one sees in
bed-rooms without closets, but opened all the way down, like a woman's
night-dress.  It had glass doors.  I had recently laid out my parents
and they were now rigid enough to stand erect; so I stood them in this
book-case, from which I had removed the shelves.  I locked them in and
tacked some curtains over the glass doors.  The inspector from the
insurance office passed a half-dozen times before the case without
suspicion.

That night, after getting my policy, I set fire to the house and
started through the woods to town, two miles away, where I managed to
be found about the time the excitement was at its height.  With cries
of apprehension for the fate of my parents, I joined the rush and
arrived at the fire some two hours after I had kindled it.  The whole
town was there as I dashed up.  The house was entirely consumed, but
in one end of the level bed of glowing embers, bolt upright and
uninjured, was that book-case!  The curtains had burned away, exposing
the glass-doors, through which the fierce, red light illuminated the
interior.  There stood my dear father "in his habit as he lived," and
at his side the partner of his joys and sorrows.  Not a hair of them
was singed, their clothing was intact.  On their heads and throats the
injuries which in the accomplishment of my designs I had been
compelled to inflict were conspicuous.  As in the presence of a
miracle, the people were silent; awe and terror had stilled every
tongue.  I was myself greatly affected.

Some three years later, when the events herein related had nearly
faded from my memory, I went to New York to assist in passing some
counterfeit United States bonds.  Carelessly looking into a furniture
store one day, I saw the exact counterpart of that book-case.  "I
bought it for a trifle from a reformed inventor," the dealer
explained.  "He said it was fireproof, the pores of the wood being
filled with alum under hydraulic pressure and the glass made of
asbestos.  I don't suppose it is really fireproof--you can have it at
the price of an ordinary book-case."

"No," I said, "if you cannot warrant it fireproof I won't take
it"--and I bade him good morning.

I would not have had it at any price: it revived memories that were
exceedingly disagreeable.




THE HYPNOTIST


By those of my friends who happen to know that I sometimes amuse
myself with hypnotism, mind reading and kindred phenomena, I am
frequently asked if I have a clear conception of the nature of
whatever principle underlies them.  To this question I always reply
that I neither have nor desire to have.  I am no investigator with an
ear at the key-hole of Nature's workshop, trying with vulgar curiosity
to steal the secrets of her trade.  The interests of science are as
little to me as mine seem to have been to science.

Doubtless the phenomena in question are simple enough, and in no way
transcend our powers of comprehension if only we could find the clew;
but for my part I prefer not to find it, for I am of a singularly
romantic disposition, deriving more gratification from mystery than
from knowledge.  It was commonly remarked of me when I was a child
that my big blue eyes appeared to have been made rather to look into
than look out of--such was their dreamful beauty, and in my frequent
periods of abstraction, their indifference to what was going on.  In
those peculiarities they resembled, I venture to think, the soul which
lies behind them, always more intent upon some lovely conception which
it has created in its own image than concerned about the laws of
nature and the material frame of things.  All this, irrelevant and
egotistic as it may seem, is related by way of accounting for the
meagreness of the light that I am able to throw upon a subject that
has engaged so much of my attention, and concerning which there is so
keen and general a curiosity.  With my powers and opportunities,
another person might doubtless have an explanation for much of what I
present simply as narrative.

My first knowledge that I possessed unusual powers came to me in my
fourteenth year, when at school.  Happening one day to have forgotten
to bring my noon-day luncheon, I gazed longingly at that of a small
girl who was preparing to eat hers.  Looking up, her eyes met mine and
she seemed unable to withdraw them.  After a moment of hesitancy she
came forward in an absent kind of way and without a word surrendered
her little basket with its tempting contents and walked away.
Inexpressibly pleased, I relieved my hunger and destroyed the basket.
After that I had not the trouble to bring a luncheon for myself: that
little girl was my daily purveyor; and not infrequently in satisfying
my simple need from her frugal store I combined pleasure and profit by
constraining her attendance at the feast and making misleading proffer
of the viands, which eventually I consumed to the last fragment.  The
girl was always persuaded that she had eaten all herself; and later in
the day her tearful complaints of hunger surprised the teacher,
entertained the pupils, earned for her the sobriquet of Greedy-Gut and
filled me with a peace past understanding.

A disagreeable feature of this otherwise satisfactory condition of
things was the necessary secrecy: the transfer of the luncheon, for
example, had to be made at some distance from the madding crowd, in a
wood; and I blush to think of the many other unworthy subterfuges
entailed by the situation.  As I was (and am) naturally of a frank and
open disposition, these became more and more irksome, and but for the
reluctance of my parents to renounce the obvious advantages of the new
regime I would gladly have reverted to the old.  The plan that I
finally adopted to free myself from the consequences of my own powers
excited a wide and keen interest at the time, and that part of it
which consisted in the death of the girl was severely condemned, but
it is hardly pertinent to the scope of this narrative.

For some years afterward I had little opportunity to practice
hypnotism; such small essays as I made at it were commonly barren of
other recognition than solitary confinement on a bread-and-water diet;
sometimes, indeed, they elicited nothing better than the
cat-o'-nine-tails.  It was when I was about to leave the scene of
these small disappointments that my one really important feat was
performed.

I had been called into the warden's office and given a suit of
civilian's clothing, a trifling sum of money and a great deal of
advice, which I am bound to confess was of a much better quality than
the clothing.  As I was passing out of the gate into the light of
freedom I suddenly turned and looking the warden gravely in the eye,
soon had him in control.

"You are an ostrich," I said.

At the post-mortem examination the stomach was found to contain a
great quantity of indigestible articles mostly of wood or metal.
Stuck fast in the esophagus and constituting, according to the
Coroner's jury, the immediate cause of death, one door-knob.

I was by nature a good and affectionate son, but as I took my way into
the great world from which I had been so long secluded I could not
help remembering that all my misfortunes had flowed like a stream from
the niggard economy of my parents in the matter of school luncheons;
and I knew of no reason to think they had reformed.

On the road between Succotash Hill and South Asphyxia is a little open
field which once contained a shanty known as Pete Gilstrap's Place,
where that gentleman used to murder travelers for a living.  The death
of Mr. Gilstrap and the diversion of nearly all the travel to another
road occurred so nearly at the same time that no one has ever been
able to say which was cause and which effect.  Anyhow, the field was
now a desolation and the Place had long been burned.  It was while
going afoot to South Asphyxia, the home of my childhood, that I found
both my parents on their way to the Hill.  They had hitched their team
and were eating luncheon under an oak tree in the center of the field.
The sight of the luncheon called up painful memories of my school
days and roused the sleeping lion in my breast.  Approaching the
guilty couple, who at once recognized me, I ventured to suggest that I
share their hospitality.

"Of this cheer, my son," said the author of my being, with
characteristic pomposity, which age had not withered, "there is
sufficient for but two.  I am not, I hope, insensible to the
hunger-light in your eyes, but--"

My father has never completed that sentence; what he mistook for
hunger-light was simply the earnest gaze of the hypnotist.  In a few
seconds he was at my service.  A few more sufficed for the lady, and
the dictates of a just resentment could be carried into effect.  "My
former father," I said, "I presume that it is known to you that you
and this lady are no longer what you were?"

"I have observed a certain subtle change," was the rather dubious
reply of the old gentleman; "it is perhaps attributable to age."

"It is more than that," I explained; "it goes to character--to
species.  You and the lady here are, in truth, two broncos--wild
stallions both, and unfriendly."

"Why, John," exclaimed my dear mother, "you don't mean to say that I
am--"

"Madam," I replied, solemnly, fixing my eyes again upon hers, "you
are."

Scarcely had the words fallen from my lips when she dropped upon her
hands and knees, and backing up to the old man squealed like a demon
and delivered a vicious kick upon his shin!  An instant later he was
himself down on all-fours, headed away from her and flinging his feet
at her simultaneously and successively.  With equal earnestness but
inferior agility, because of her hampering body-gear, she plied her
own.  Their flying legs crossed and mingled in the most bewildering
way; their feet sometimes meeting squarely in midair, their bodies
thrust forward, falling flat upon the ground and for a moment
helpless.  On recovering themselves they would resume the combat,
uttering their frenzy in the nameless sounds of the furious brutes
which they believed themselves to be--the whole region rang with their
clamor!  Round and round they wheeled, the blows of their feet falling
"like lightnings from the mountain cloud."  They plunged and reared
backward upon their knees, struck savagely at each other with awkward
descending blows of both fists at once, and dropped again upon their
hands as if unable to maintain the upright position of the body.
Grass and pebbles were torn from the soil by hands and feet; clothing,
hair, faces inexpressibly defiled with dust and blood.  Wild,
inarticulate screams of rage attested the delivery of the blows;
groans, grunts and gasps their receipt.  Nothing more truly military
was ever seen at Gettysburg or Waterloo: the valor of my dear parents
in the hour of danger can never cease to be to me a source of pride
and gratification.  At the end of it all two battered, tattered,
bloody and fragmentary vestiges of mortality attested the solemn fact
that the author of the strife was an orphan.

Arrested for provoking a breach of the peace, I was, and have ever
since been, tried in the Court of Technicalities and Continuances
whence, after fifteen years of proceedings, my attorney is moving
heaven and earth to get the case taken to the Court of Remandment for
New Trials.

Such are a few of my principal experiments in the mysterious force or
agency known as hypnotic suggestion.  Whether or not it could be
employed by a bad man for an unworthy purpose I am unable to say.







