
FROM MISS MIRANDA MOPE, IN PARIS, TO MRS. ABRAHAM C. MOPE, AT BANGOR,
MAINE.

September 5th, 1879.

My dear mother--I have kept you posted as far as Tuesday week last, and,
although my letter will not have reached you yet, I will begin another
before my news accumulates too much.  I am glad you show my letters round
in the family, for I like them all to know what I am doing, and I can't
write to every one, though I try to answer all reasonable expectations.
But there are a great many unreasonable ones, as I suppose you know--not
yours, dear mother, for I am bound to say that you never required of me
more than was natural.  You see you are reaping your reward: I write to
you before I write to any one else.

There is one thing, I hope--that you don't show any of my letters to
William Platt.  If he wants to see any of my letters, he knows the right
way to go to work.  I wouldn't have him see one of these letters, written
for circulation in the family, for anything in the world.  If he wants
one for himself, he has got to write to me first.  Let him write to me
first, and then I will see about answering him.  You can show him this if
you like; but if you show him anything more, I will never write to you
again.

I told you in my last about my farewell to England, my crossing the
Channel, and my first impressions of Paris.  I have thought a great deal
about that lovely England since I left it, and all the famous historic
scenes I visited; but I have come to the conclusion that it is not a
country in which I should care to reside.  The position of woman does not
seem to me at all satisfactory, and that is a point, you know, on which I
feel very strongly.  It seems to me that in England they play a very
faded-out part, and those with whom I conversed had a kind of depressed
and humiliated tone; a little dull, tame look, as if they were used to
being snubbed and bullied, which made me want to give them a good
shaking.  There are a great many people--and a great many things,
too--over here that I should like to perform that operation upon.  I
should like to shake the starch out of some of them, and the dust out of
the others.  I know fifty girls in Bangor that come much more up to my
notion of the stand a truly noble woman should take, than those young
ladies in England.  But they had a most lovely way of speaking (in
England), and the men are _remarkably handsome_.  (You can show this to
William Platt, if you like.)

I gave you my first impressions of Paris, which quite came up to my
expectations, much as I had heard and read about it.  The objects of
interest are extremely numerous, and the climate is remarkably cheerful
and sunny.  I should say the position of woman here was considerably
higher, though by no means coming up to the American standard.  The
manners of the people are in some respects extremely peculiar, and I feel
at last that I am indeed in _foreign parts_.  It is, however, a truly
elegant city (very superior to New York), and I have spent a great deal
of time in visiting the various monuments and palaces.  I won't give you
an account of all my wanderings, though I have been most indefatigable;
for I am keeping, as I told you before, a most _exhaustive_ journal,
which I will allow you the _privilege_ of reading on my return to Bangor.
I am getting on remarkably well, and I must say I am sometimes surprised
at my universal good fortune.  It only shows what a little energy and
common-sense will accomplish.  I have discovered none of these objections
to a young lady travelling in Europe by herself of which we heard so much
before I left, and I don't expect I ever shall, for I certainly don't
mean to look for them.  I know what I want, and I always manage to get
it.

I have received a great deal of politeness--some of it really most
pressing, and I have experienced no drawbacks whatever.  I have made a
great many pleasant acquaintances in travelling round (both ladies and
gentlemen), and had a great many most interesting talks.  I have
collected a great deal of information, for which I refer you to my
journal.  I assure you my journal is going to be a splendid thing.  I do
just exactly as I do in Bangor, and I find I do perfectly right; and at
any rate, I don't care if I don't.  I didn't come to Europe to lead a
merely conventional life; I could do that at Bangor.  You know I never
_would_ do it at Bangor, so it isn't likely I am going to make myself
miserable over here.  So long as I accomplish what I desire, and make my
money hold out, I shall regard the thing as a success.  Sometimes I feel
rather lonely, especially in the evening; but I generally manage to
interest myself in something or in some one.  In the evening I usually
read up about the objects of interest I have visited during the day, or I
post up my journal.  Sometimes I go to the theatre; or else I play the
piano in the public parlour.  The public parlour at the hotel isn't much;
but the piano is better than that fearful old thing at the Sebago House.
Sometimes I go downstairs and talk to the lady who keeps the books--a
French lady, who is remarkably polite.  She is very pretty, and always
wears a black dress, with the most beautiful fit; she speaks a little
English; she tells me she had to learn it in order to converse with the
Americans who come in such numbers to this hotel.  She has given me a
great deal of information about the position of woman in France, and much
of it is very encouraging.  But she has told me at the same time some
things that I should not like to write to you (I am hesitating even about
putting them into my journal), especially if my letters are to be handed
round in the family.  I assure you they appear to talk about things here
that we never think of mentioning at Bangor, or even of thinking about.
She seems to think she can tell me everything, because I told her I was
travelling for general culture.  Well, I _do_ want to know so much that
it seems sometimes as if I wanted to know everything; and yet there are
some things that I think I don't want to know.  But, as a general thing,
everything is intensely interesting; I don't mean only everything that
this French lady tells me, but everything I see and hear for myself.  I
feel really as if I should gain all I desire.

I meet a great many Americans, who, as a general thing, I must say, are
not as polite to me as the people over here.  The people over
here--especially the gentlemen--are much more what I should call
_attentive_.  I don't know whether Americans are more _sincere_; I
haven't yet made up my mind about that.  The only drawback I experience
is when Americans sometimes express surprise that I should be travelling
round alone; so you see it doesn't come from Europeans.  I always have my
answer ready; "For general culture, to acquire the languages, and to see
Europe for myself;" and that generally seems to satisfy them.  Dear
mother, my money holds out very well, and it _is_ real interesting.




CHAPTER II


FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.

September 16th.

Since I last wrote to you I have left that hotel, and come to live in a
French family.  It's a kind of boarding-house combined with a kind of
school; only it's not like an American hoarding-house, nor like an
American school either.  There are four or five people here that have
come to learn the language--not to take lessons, but to have an
opportunity for conversation.  I was very glad to come to such a place,
for I had begun to realise that I was not making much progress with the
French.  It seemed to me that I should feel ashamed to have spent two
months in Paris, and not to have acquired more insight into the language.
I had always heard so much of French conversation, and I found I was
having no more opportunity to practise it than if I had remained at
Bangor.  In fact, I used to hear a great deal more at Bangor, from those
French Canadians that came down to cut the ice, than I saw I should ever
hear at that hotel.  The lady that kept the books seemed to want so much
to talk to me in English (for the sake of practice, too, I suppose), that
I couldn't bear to let her know I didn't like it.  The chambermaid was
Irish, and all the waiters were German, so that I never heard a word of
French spoken.  I suppose you might hear a great deal in the shops; only,
as I don't buy anything--I prefer to spend my money for purposes of
culture--I don't have that advantage.

I have been thinking some of taking a teacher, but I am well acquainted
with the grammar already, and teachers always keep you bothering over the
verbs.  I was a good deal troubled, for I felt as if I didn't want to go
away without having, at least, got a general idea of French conversation.
The theatre gives you a good deal of insight, and as I told you in my
last, I go a good deal to places of amusement.  I find no difficulty
whatever in going to such places alone, and am always treated with the
politeness which, as I told you before, I encounter everywhere.  I see
plenty of other ladies alone (mostly French), and they generally seem to
be enjoying themselves as much as I.  But at the theatre every one talks
so fast that I can scarcely make out what they say; and, besides, there
are a great many vulgar expressions which it is unnecessary to learn.  But
it was the theatre, nevertheless, that put me on the track.  The very
next day after I wrote to you last I went to the Palais Royal, which is
one of the principal theatres in Paris.  It is very small, but it is very
celebrated, and in my guide-book it is marked with _two stars_, which is
a sign of importance attached only to _first-class_ objects of interest.
But after I had been there half an hour I found I couldn't understand a
single word of the play, they gabbled it off so fast, and they made use
of such peculiar expressions.  I felt a good deal disappointed and
troubled--I was afraid I shouldn't gain all I had come for.  But while I
was thinking it over--thinking what I _should_ do--I heard two gentlemen
talking behind me.  It was between the acts, and I couldn't help
listening to what they said.  They were talking English, but I guess they
were Americans.

"Well," said one of them, "it all depends on what you are after.  I'm
French; that's what I'm after."

"Well," said the other, "I'm after Art."

"Well," said the first, "I'm after Art too; but I'm after French most."

Then, dear mother, I am sorry to say the second one swore a little.  He
said, "Oh, damn French!"

"No, I won't damn French," said his friend.  "I'll acquire it--that's
what I'll do with it.  I'll go right into a family."

"What family'll you go into?"

"Into some French family.  That's the only way to do--to go to some place
where you can talk.  If you're after Art, you want to stick to the
galleries; you want to go right through the Louvre, room by room; you
want to take a room a day, or something of that sort.  But, if you want
to acquire French, the thing is to look out for a family.  There are lots
of French families here that take you to board and teach you.  My second
cousin--that young lady I told you about--she got in with a crowd like
that, and they booked her right up in three months.  They just took her
right in and they talked to her.  That's what they do to you; they set
you right down and they talk _at_ you.  You've got to understand them;
you can't help yourself.  That family my cousin was with has moved away
somewhere, or I should try and get in with them.  They were very smart
people, that family; after she left, my cousin corresponded with them in
French.  But I mean to find some other crowd, if it takes a lot of
trouble!"

I listened to all this with great interest, and when he spoke about his
cousin I was on the point of turning around to ask him the address of the
family that she was with; but the next moment he said they had moved
away; so I sat still.  The other gentleman, however, didn't seem to be
affected in the same way as I was.

"Well," he said, "you may follow up that if you like; I mean to follow up
the pictures.  I don't believe there is ever going to be any considerable
demand in the United States for French; but I can promise you that in
about ten years there'll be a big demand for Art!  And it won't be
temporary either."

That remark may be very true, but I don't care anything about the demand;
I want to know French for its own sake.  I don't want to think I have
been all this while without having gained an insight . . . The very next
day, I asked the lady who kept the books at the hotel whether she knew of
any family that could take me to board and give me the benefit of their
conversation.  She instantly threw up her hands, with several little
shrill cries (in their French way, you know), and told me that her
dearest friend kept a regular place of that kind.  If she had known I was
looking out for such a place she would have told me before; she had not
spoken of it herself, because she didn't wish to injure the hotel by
being the cause of my going away.  She told me this was a charming
family, who had often received American ladies (and others as well) who
wished to follow up the language, and she was sure I should be delighted
with them.  So she gave me their address, and offered to go with me to
introduce me.  But I was in such a hurry that I went off by myself; and I
had no trouble in finding these good people.  They were delighted to
receive me, and I was very much pleased with what I saw of them.  They
seemed to have plenty of conversation, and there will be no trouble about
that.

I came here to stay about three days ago, and by this time I have seen a
great deal of them.  The price of board struck me as rather high; but I
must remember that a quantity of conversation is thrown in.  I have a
very pretty little room--without any carpet, but with seven mirrors, two
clocks, and five curtains.  I was rather disappointed after I arrived to
find that there are several other Americans here for the same purpose as
myself.  At least there are three Americans and two English people; and
also a German gentleman.  I am afraid, therefore, our conversation will
be rather mixed, but I have not yet time to judge.  I try to talk with
Madame de Maisonrouge all I can (she is the lady of the house, and the
_real_ family consists only of herself and her two daughters).  They are
all most elegant, interesting women, and I am sure we shall become
intimate friends.  I will write you more about them in my next.  Tell
William Platt I don't care what he does.




CHAPTER III


FROM MISS VIOLET RAY, IN PARIS, TO MISS AGNES RICH, IN NEW YORK.

September 21st.

We had hardly got here when father received a telegram saying he would
have to come right back to New York.  It was for something about his
business--I don't know exactly what; you know I never understand those
things, never want to.  We had just got settled at the hotel, in some
charming rooms, and mother and I, as you may imagine, were greatly
annoyed.  Father is extremely fussy, as you know, and his first idea, as
soon as he found he should have to go back, was that we should go back
with him.  He declared he would never leave us in Paris alone, and that
we must return and come out again.  I don't know what he thought would
happen to us; I suppose he thought we should be too extravagant.  It's
father's theory that we are always running up bills, whereas a little
observation would show him that we wear the same old _rags_ FOR MONTHS.
But father has no observation; he has nothing but theories.  Mother and
I, however, have, fortunately, a great deal of _practice_, and we
succeeded in making him understand that we wouldn't budge from Paris, and
that we would rather be chopped into small pieces than cross that
dreadful ocean again.  So, at last, he decided to go back alone, and to
leave us here for three months.  But, to show you how fussy he is, he
refused to let us stay at the hotel, and insisted that we should go into
a _family_.  I don't know what put such an idea into his head, unless it
was some advertisement that he saw in one of the American papers that are
published here.

There are families here who receive American and English people to live
with them, under the pretence of teaching them French.  You may imagine
what people they are--I mean the families themselves.  But the Americans
who choose this peculiar manner of seeing Paris must be actually just as
bad.  Mother and I were horrified, and declared that main force should
not remove us from the hotel.  But father has a way of arriving at his
ends which is more efficient than violence.  He worries and fusses; he
"nags," as we used to say at school; and, when mother and I are quite
worn out, his triumph is assured.  Mother is usually worn out more easily
than I, and she ends by siding with father; so that, at last, when they
combine their forces against poor little me, I have to succumb.  You
should have heard the way father went on about this "family" plan; he
talked to every one he saw about it; he used to go round to the banker's
and talk to the people there--the people in the post-office; he used to
try and exchange ideas about it with the waiters at the hotel.  He said
it would be more safe, more respectable, more economical; that I should
perfect my French; that mother would learn how a French household is
conducted; that he should feel more easy, and five hundred reasons more.
They were none of them good, but that made no difference.  It's all
humbug, his talking about economy, when every one knows that business in
America has completely recovered, that the prostration is all over, and
that immense fortunes are being made.  We have been economising for the
last five years, and I supposed we came abroad to reap the benefits of
it.

As for my French, it is quite as perfect as I want it to be.  (I assure
you I am often surprised at my own fluency, and, when I get a little more
practice in the genders and the idioms, I shall do very well in this
respect.)  To make a long story short, however, father carried his point,
as usual; mother basely deserted me at the last moment, and, after
holding out alone for three days, I told them to do with me what they
pleased!  Father lost three steamers in succession by remaining in Paris
to argue with me.  You know he is like the schoolmaster in Goldsmith's
"Deserted Village"--"e'en though vanquished, he would argue still." He
and mother went to look at some seventeen families (they had got the
addresses somewhere), while I retired to my sofa, and would have nothing
to do with it.  At last they made arrangements, and I was transported to
the establishment from which I now write you.  I write you from the bosom
of a Parisian menage--from the depths of a second-rate boarding-house.

Father only left Paris after he had seen us what he calls comfortably
settled here, and had informed Madame de Maisonrouge (the mistress of the
establishment--the head of the "family") that he wished my French
pronunciation especially attended to.  The pronunciation, as it happens,
is just what I am most at home in; if he had said my genders or my idioms
there would have been some sense.  But poor father has no tact, and this
defect is especially marked since he has been in Europe.  He will be
absent, however, for three months, and mother and I shall breathe more
freely; the situation will be less intense.  I must confess that we
breathe more freely than I expected, in this place, where we have been
for about a week.  I was sure, before we came, that it would prove to be
an establishment of the _lowest description_; but I must say that, in
this respect, I am agreeably disappointed.  The French are so clever that
they know even how to manage a place of this kind.  Of course it is very
disagreeable to live with strangers, but as, after all, if I were not
staying with Madame de Maisonrouge I should not be living in the Faubourg
St. Germain, I don't know that from the point of view of exclusiveness it
is any great loss to be here.

Our rooms are very prettily arranged, and the table is remarkably good.
Mamma thinks the whole thing--the place and the people, the manners and
customs--very amusing; but mamma is very easily amused.  As for me, you
know, all that I ask is to be let alone, and not to have people's society
forced upon me.  I have never wanted for society of my own choosing, and,
so long as I retain possession of my faculties, I don't suppose I ever
shall.  As I said, however, the place is very well managed, and I succeed
in doing as I please, which, you know, is my most cherished pursuit.
Madame de Maisonrouge has a great deal of tact--much more than poor
father.  She is what they call here a belle femme, which means that she
is a tall, ugly woman, with style.  She dresses very well, and has a
great deal of talk; but, though she is a very good imitation of a lady, I
never see her behind the dinner-table, in the evening, smiling and
bowing, as the people come in, and looking all the while at the dishes
and the servants, without thinking of a _dame de comptoir_ blooming in a
corner of a shop or a restaurant.  I am sure that, in spite of her fine
name, she was once a _dame de comptoir_.  I am also sure that, in spite
of her smiles and the pretty things she says to every one, she hates us
all, and would like to murder us.  She is a hard, clever Frenchwoman, who
would like to amuse herself and enjoy her Paris, and she must be bored to
death at passing all her time in the midst of stupid English people who
mumble broken French at her.  Some day she will poison the soup or the
_vin rouge_; but I hope that will not be until after mother and I shall
have left her.  She has two daughters, who, except that one is decidedly
pretty, are meagre imitations of herself.

The "family," for the rest, consists altogether of our beloved
compatriots, and of still more beloved Englanders.  There is an
Englishman here, with his sister, and they seem to be rather nice people.
He is remarkably handsome, but excessively affected and patronising,
especially to us Americans; and I hope to have a chance of biting his
head off before long.  The sister is very pretty, and, apparently, very
nice; but, in costume, she is Britannia incarnate.  There is a very
pleasant little Frenchman--when they are nice they are charming--and a
German doctor, a big blonde man, who looks like a great white bull; and
two Americans, besides mother and me.  One of them is a young man from
Boston,--an aesthetic young man, who talks about its being "a real Corot
day," etc., and a young woman--a girl, a female, I don't know what to
call her--from Vermont, or Minnesota, or some such place.  This young
woman is the most extraordinary specimen of artless Yankeeism that I ever
encountered; she is really too horrible.  I have been three times to
Clementine about your underskirt, etc.




CHAPTER IV


FROM LOUIS LEVERETT, IN PARIS, TO HARVARD TREMONT, IN BOSTON.

September 25th.

My dear Harvard--I have carried out my plan, of which I gave you a hint
in my last, and I only regret that I should not have done it before.  It
is human nature, after all, that is the most interesting thing in the
world, and it only reveals itself to the truly earnest seeker.  There is
a want of earnestness in that life of hotels and railroad trains, which
so many of our countrymen are content to lead in this strange Old World,
and I was distressed to find how far I, myself; had been led along the
dusty, beaten track.  I had, however, constantly wanted to turn aside
into more unfrequented ways; to plunge beneath the surface and see what I
should discover.  But the opportunity had always been missing; somehow, I
never meet those opportunities that we hear about and read about--the
things that happen to people in novels and biographies.  And yet I am
always on the watch to take advantage of any opening that may present
itself; I am always looking out for experiences, for sensations--I might
almost say for adventures.

The great thing is to _live_, you know--to feel, to be conscious of one's
possibilities; not to pass through life mechanically and insensibly, like
a letter through the post-office.  There are times, my dear Harvard, when
I feel as if I were really capable of everything--capable _de tout_, as
they say here--of the greatest excesses as well as the greatest heroism.
Oh, to be able to say that one has lived--_qu'on a vecu_, as they say
here--that idea exercises an indefinable attraction for me.  You will,
perhaps, reply, it is easy to say it; but the thing is to make people
believe you!  And, then, I don't want any second-hand, spurious
sensations; I want the knowledge that leaves a trace--that leaves strange
scars and stains and reveries behind it!  But I am afraid I shock you,
perhaps even frighten you.

If you repeat my remarks to any of the West Cedar Street circle, be sure
you tone them down as your discretion will suggest.  For yourself; you
will know that I have always had an intense desire to see something of
_real French life_.  You are acquainted with my great sympathy with the
French; with my natural tendency to enter into the French way of looking
at life.  I sympathise with the artistic temperament; I remember you used
sometimes to hint to me that you thought my own temperament too artistic.
I don't think that in Boston there is any real sympathy with the artistic
temperament; we tend to make everything a matter of right and wrong.  And
in Boston one can't _live--on ne peut pas vivre_, as they say here.  I
don't mean one can't reside--for a great many people manage that; but one
can't live aesthetically--I may almost venture to say, sensuously.  This
is why I have always been so much drawn to the French, who are so
aesthetic, so sensuous.  I am so sorry that Theophile Gautier has passed
away; I should have liked so much to go and see him, and tell him all
that I owe him.  He was living when I was here before; but, you know, at
that time I was travelling with the Johnsons, who are not aesthetic, and
who used to make me feel rather ashamed of my artistic temperament.  If I
had gone to see the great apostle of beauty, I should have had to go
clandestinely--_en cachette_, as they say here; and that is not my
nature; I like to do everything frankly, freely, _naivement, au grand
jour_.  That is the great thing--to be free, to be frank, to be _naif_.
Doesn't Matthew Arnold say that somewhere--or is it Swinburne, or Pater?

When I was with the Johnsons everything was superficial; and, as regards
life, everything was brought down to the question of right and wrong.
They were too didactic; art should never be didactic; and what is life
but an art?  Pater has said that so well, somewhere.  With the Johnsons I
am afraid I lost many opportunities; the tone was gray and cottony, I
might almost say woolly.  But now, as I tell you, I have determined to
take right hold for myself; to look right into European life, and judge
it without Johnsonian prejudices.  I have taken up my residence in a
French family, in a real Parisian house.  You see I have the courage of
my opinions; I don't shrink from carrying out my theory that the great
thing is to _live_.

You know I have always been intensely interested in Balzac, who never
shrank from the reality, and whose almost _lurid_ pictures of Parisian
life have often haunted me in my wanderings through the old
wicked-looking streets on the other side of the river.  I am only sorry
that my new friends--my French family--do not live in the old city--_au
coeur du vieux Paris_, as they say here.  They live only in the Boulevard
Haussman, which is less picturesque; but in spite of this they have a
great deal of the Balzac tone.  Madame de Maisonrouge belongs to one of
the oldest and proudest families in France; but she has had reverses
which have compelled her to open an establishment in which a limited
number of travellers, who are weary of the beaten track, who have the
sense of local colour--she explains it herself; she expresses it so
well--in short, to open a sort of boarding-house.  I don't see why I
should not, after all, use that expression, for it is the correlative of
the term _pension bourgeoise_, employed by Balzac in the _Pere Goriot_.
Do you remember the _pension bourgeoise_ of Madame Vauquer _nee_ de
Conflans?  But this establishment is not at all like that: and indeed it
is not at all _bourgeois_; there is something distinguished, something
aristocratic, about it.  The Pension Vauquer was dark, brown, sordid,
_graisseuse_; but this is in quite a different tone, with high, clear,
lightly-draped windows, tender, subtle, almost morbid, colours, and
furniture in elegant, studied, reed-like lines.  Madame de Maisonrouge
reminds me of Madame Hulot--do you remember "la belle Madame Hulot?"--in
_Les Barents Pauvres_.  She has a great charm; a little artificial, a
little fatigued, with a little suggestion of hidden things in her life;
but I have always been sensitive to the charm of fatigue, of duplicity.

I am rather disappointed, I confess, in the society I find here; it is
not so local, so characteristic, as I could have desired.  Indeed, to
tell the truth, it is not local at all; but, on the other hand, it is
cosmopolitan, and there is a great advantage in that.  We are French, we
are English, we are American, we are German; and, I believe, there are
some Russians and Hungarians expected.  I am much interested in the study
of national types; in comparing, contrasting, seizing the strong points,
the weak points, the point of view of each.  It is interesting to shift
one's point of view--to enter into strange, exotic ways of looking at
life.

The American types here are not, I am sorry to say, so interesting as
they might be, and, excepting myself; are exclusively feminine.  We are
_thin_, my dear Harvard; we are pale, we are sharp.  There is something
meagre about us; our line is wanting in roundness, our composition in
richness.  We lack temperament; we don't know how to live; _nous ne
savons pas vivre_, as they say here.  The American temperament is
represented (putting myself aside, and I often think that my temperament
is not at all American) by a young girl and her mother, and another young
girl without her mother--without her mother or any attendant or appendage
whatever.  These young girls are rather curious types; they have a
certain interest, they have a certain grace, but they are disappointing
too; they don't go far; they don't keep all they promise; they don't
satisfy the imagination.  They are cold, slim, sexless; the physique is
not generous, not abundant; it is only the drapery, the skirts and
furbelows (that is, I mean in the young lady who has her mother) that are
abundant.  They are very different: one of them all elegance, all
expensiveness, with an air of high fashion, from New York; the other a
plain, pure, clear-eyed, straight-waisted, straight-stepping maiden from
the heart of New England.  And yet they are very much alike too--more
alike than they would care to think themselves for they eye each other
with cold, mistrustful, deprecating looks.  They are both specimens of
the emancipated young American girl--practical, positive, passionless,
subtle, and knowing, as you please, either too much or too little.  And
yet, as I say, they have a certain stamp, a certain grace; I like to talk
with them, to study them.

The fair New Yorker is, sometimes, very amusing; she asks me if every one
in Boston talks like me--if every one is as "intellectual" as your poor
correspondent.  She is for ever throwing Boston up at me; I can't get rid
of Boston.  The other one rubs it into me too; but in a different way;
she seems to feel about it as a good Mahommedan feels toward Mecca, and
regards it as a kind of focus of light for the whole human race.  Poor
little Boston, what nonsense is talked in thy name!  But this New England
maiden is, in her way, a strange type: she is travelling all over Europe
alone--"to see it," she says, "for herself."  For herself!  What can that
stiff slim self of hers do with such sights, such visions!  She looks at
everything, goes everywhere, passes her way, with her clear quiet eyes
wide open; skirting the edge of obscene abysses without suspecting them;
pushing through brambles without tearing her robe; exciting, without
knowing it, the most injurious suspicions; and always holding her course,
passionless, stainless, fearless, charmless!  It is a little figure in
which, after all, if you can get the right point of view, there is
something rather striking.

By way of contrast, there is a lovely English girl, with eyes as shy as
violets, and a voice as sweet!  She has a sweet Gainsborough head, and a
great Gainsborough hat, with a mighty plume in front of it, which makes a
shadow over her quiet English eyes.  Then she has a sage-green robe,
"mystic, wonderful," all embroidered with subtle devices and flowers, and
birds of tender tint; very straight and tight in front, and adorned
behind, along the spine, with large, strange, iridescent buttons.  The
revival of taste, of the sense of beauty, in England, interests me
deeply; what is there in a simple row of spinal buttons to make one
dream--to _donnor a rever_, as they say here?  I think that a great
aesthetic renascence is at hand, and that a great light will be kindled
in England, for all the world to see.  There are spirits there that I
should like to commune with; I think they would understand me.

This gracious English maiden, with her clinging robes, her amulets and
girdles, with something quaint and angular in her step, her carriage
something mediaeval and Gothic, in the details of her person and dress,
this lovely Evelyn Vane (isn't it a beautiful name?) is deeply,
delightfully picturesque.  She is much a woman--elle _est bien femme_, as
they say here; simpler, softer, rounder, richer than the young girls I
spoke of just now.  Not much talk--a great, sweet silence.  Then the
violet eye--the very eye itself seems to blush; the great shadowy hat,
making the brow so quiet; the strange, clinging, clutching, pictured
raiment!  As I say, it is a very gracious, tender type.  She has her
brother with her, who is a beautiful, fair-haired, gray-eyed young
Englishman.  He is purely objective; and he, too, is very plastic.




CHAPTER V


FROM MIRANDA HOPE TO HER MOTHER.

September 26th.

You must not be frightened at not hearing from me oftener; it is not
because I am in any trouble, but because I am getting on so well.  If I
were in any trouble I don't think I should write to you; I should just
keep quiet and see it through myself.  But that is not the case at
present and, if I don't write to you, it is because I am so deeply
interested over here that I don't seem to find time.  It was a real
providence that brought me to this house, where, in spite of all
obstacles, I am able to do much good work.  I wonder how I find the time
for all I do; but when I think that I have only got a year in Europe, I
feel as if I wouldn't sacrifice a single hour.

The obstacles I refer to are the disadvantages I have in learning French,
there being so many persons around me speaking English, and that, as you
may say, in the very bosom of a French family.  It seems as if you heard
English everywhere; but I certainly didn't expect to find it in a place
like this.  I am not discouraged, however, and I talk French all I can,
even with the other English boarders.  Then I have a lesson every day
from Miss Maisonrouge (the elder daughter of the lady of the house), and
French conversation every evening in the salon, from eight to eleven,
with Madame herself, and some friends of hers that often come in.  Her
cousin, Mr. Verdier, a young French gentleman, is fortunately staying
with her, and I make a point of talking with him as much as possible.  I
have _extra private lessons_ from him, and I often go out to walk with
him.  Some night, soon, he is to accompany me to the opera.  We have also
a most interesting plan of visiting all the galleries in Paris together.
Like most of the French, he converses with great fluency, and I feel as
if I should really gain from him.  He is remarkably handsome, and
extremely polite--paying a great many compliments, which, I am afraid,
are not always _sincere_.  When I return to Bangor I will tell you some
of the things he has said to me.  I think you will consider them
extremely curious, and very beautiful _in their way_.

The conversation in the parlour (from eight to eleven) is often
remarkably brilliant, and I often wish that you, or some of the Bangor
folks, could be there to enjoy it.  Even though you couldn't understand
it I think you would like to hear the way they go on; they seem to
express so much.  I sometimes think that at Bangor they don't express
enough (but it seems as if over there, there was less to express).  It
seems as if; at Bangor, there were things that folks never _tried_ to
say; but here, I have learned from studying French that you have no idea
what you _can_ say, before you try.  At Bangor they seem to give it up
beforehand; they don't make any effort.  (I don't say this in the least
for William Platt, _in particular_.)

I am sure I don't know what they will think of me when I get back.  It
seems as if; over here, I had learned to come out with everything.  I
suppose they will think I am not sincere; but isn't it more sincere to
come out with things than to conceal them?  I have become very good
friends with every one in the house--that is (you see, I _am_ sincere),
with _almost_ every one.  It is the most interesting circle I ever was
in.  There's a girl here, an American, that I don't like so much as the
rest; but that is only because she won't let me.  I should like to like
her, ever so much, because she is most lovely and most attractive; but
she doesn't seem to want to know me or to like me.  She comes from New
York, and she is remarkably pretty, with beautiful eyes and the most
delicate features; she is also remarkably elegant--in this respect would
bear comparison with any one I have seen over here.  But it seems as if
she didn't want to recognise me or associate with me; as if she wanted to
make a difference between us.  It is like people they call "haughty" in
books.  I have never seen any one like that before--any one that wanted
to make a difference; and at first I was right down interested, she
seemed to me so like a proud young lady in a novel.  I kept saying to
myself all day, "haughty, haughty," and I wished she would keep on so.
But she did keep on; she kept on too long; and then I began to feel hurt.
I couldn't think what I have done, and I can't think yet.  It's as if she
had got some idea about me, or had heard some one say something.  If some
girls should behave like that I shouldn't make any account of it; but
this one is so refined, and looks as if she might be so interesting if I
once got to know her, that I think about it a good deal.  I am bound to
find out what her reason is--for of course she has got some reason; I am
right down curious to know.

I went up to her to ask her the day before yesterday; I thought that was
the best way.  I told her I wanted to know her better, and would like to
come and see her in her room--they tell me she has got a lovely room--and
that if she had heard anything against me, perhaps she would tell me when
I came.  But she was more distant than ever, and she just turned it off;
said that she had never heard me mentioned, and that her room was too
small to receive visitors.  I suppose she spoke the truth, but I am sure
she has got some reason, all the same.  She has got some idea, and I am
bound to find out before I go, if I have to ask everybody in the house.  I
_am_ right down curious.  I wonder if she doesn't think me refined--or if
she had ever heard anything against Bangor?  I can't think it is that.
Don't you remember when Clara Barnard went to visit New York, three years
ago, how much attention she received?  And you know Clara _is_ Bangor, to
the soles of her shoes.  Ask William Platt--so long as he isn't a
native--if he doesn't consider Clara Barnard refined.

Apropos, as they say here, of refinement, there is another American in
the house--a gentleman from Boston--who is just crowded with it.  His
name is Mr. Louis Leverett (such a beautiful name, I think), and he is
about thirty years old.  He is rather small, and he looks pretty sick; he
suffers from some affection of the liver.  But his conversation is
remarkably interesting, and I delight to listen to him--he has such
beautiful ideas.  I feel as if it were hardly right, not being in French;
but, fortunately, he uses a great many French expressions.  It's in a
different style from the conversation of Mr. Verdier--not so
complimentary, but more intellectual.  He is intensely fond of pictures,
and has given me a great many ideas about them which I should never have
gained without him; I shouldn't have known where to look for such ideas.
He thinks everything of pictures; he thinks we don't make near enough of
them.  They seem to make a good deal of them here; but I couldn't help
telling him the other day that in Bangor I really don't think we do.

If I had any money to spend I would buy some and take them back, to hang
up.  Mr. Leverett says it would do them good--not the pictures, but the
Bangor folks.  He thinks everything of the French, too, and says we don't
make nearly enough of _them_.  I couldn't help telling him the other day
that at any rate they make enough of themselves.  But it is very
interesting to hear him go on about the French, and it is so much gain to
me, so long as that is what I came for.  I talk to him as much as I dare
about Boston, but I do feel as if this were right down wrong--a stolen
pleasure.

I can get all the Boston culture I want when I go back, if I carry out my
plan, my happy vision, of going there to reside.  I ought to direct all
my efforts to European culture now, and keep Boston to finish off.  But
it seems as if I couldn't help taking a peep now and then, in
advance--with a Bostonian.  I don't know when I may meet one again; but
if there are many others like Mr. Leverett there, I shall be certain not
to want when I carry out my dream.  He is just as full of culture as he
can live.  But it seems strange how many different sorts there are.

There are two of the English who I suppose are very cultivated too; but
it doesn't seem as if I could enter into theirs so easily, though I try
all I can.  I do love their way of speaking, and sometimes I feel almost
as if it would be right to give up trying to learn French, and just try
to learn to speak our own tongue as these English speak it.  It isn't the
things they say so much, though these are often rather curious, but it is
in the way they pronounce, and the sweetness of their voice.  It seems as
if they must _try_ a good deal to talk like that; but these English that
are here don't seem to try at all, either to speak or do anything else.
They are a young lady and her brother.  I believe they belong to some
noble family.  I have had a good deal of intercourse with them, because I
have felt more free to talk to them than to the Americans--on account of
the language.  It seems as if in talking with them I was almost learning
a new one.

I never supposed, when I left Bangor, that I was coming to Europe to
learn _English_!  If I do learn it, I don't think you will understand me
when I get back, and I don't think you'll like it much.  I should be a
good deal criticised if I spoke like that at Bangor.  However, I verily
believe Bangor is the most critical place on earth; I have seen nothing
like it over here.  Tell them all I have come to the conclusion that they
are _a great deal too fastidious_.  But I was speaking about this English
young lady and her brother.  I wish I could put them before you.  She is
lovely to look at; she seems so modest and retiring.  In spite of this,
however, she dresses in a way that attracts great attention, as I
couldn't help noticing when one day I went out to walk with her.  She was
ever so much looked at; but she didn't seem to notice it, until at last I
couldn't help calling attention to it.  Mr. Leverett thinks everything of
it; he calls it the "costume of the future."  I should call it rather the
costume of the past--you know the English have such an attachment to the
past.  I said this the other day to Madame do Maisonrouge--that Miss Vane
dressed in the costume of the past.  _De l'an passe, vous voulez dire_?
said Madame, with her little French laugh (you can get William Platt to
translate this, he used to tell me he knew so much French).

You know I told you, in writing some time ago, that I had tried to get
some insight into the position of woman in England, and, being here with
Miss Vane, it has seemed to me to be a good opportunity to get a little
more.  I have asked her a great deal about it; but she doesn't seem able
to give me much information.  The first time I asked her she told me the
position of a lady depended upon the rank of her father, her eldest
brother, her husband, etc.  She told me her own position was very good,
because her father was some relation--I forget what--to a lord.  She
thinks everything of this; and that proves to me that the position of
woman in her country cannot be satisfactory; because, if it were, it
wouldn't depend upon that of your relations, even your nearest.  I don't
know much about lords, and it does try my patience (though she is just as
sweet as she can live) to hear her talk as if it were a matter of course
that I should.

I feel as if it were right to ask her as often as I can if she doesn't
consider every one equal; but she always says she doesn't, and she
confesses that she doesn't think she is equal to "Lady
Something-or-other," who is the wife of that relation of her father.  I
try and persuade her all I can that she is; but it seems as if she didn't
want to be persuaded; and when I ask her if Lady So-and-so is of the same
opinion (that Miss Vane isn't her equal), she looks so soft and pretty
with her eyes, and says, "Of course she is!"  When I tell her that this
is right down bad for Lady So-and-so, it seems as if she wouldn't believe
me, and the only answer she will make is that Lady So-and-so is
"extremely nice."  I don't believe she is nice at all; if she were nice,
she wouldn't have such ideas as that.  I tell Miss Vane that at Bangor we
think such ideas vulgar; but then she looks as though she had never heard
of Bangor.  I often want to shake her, though she _is_ so sweet.  If she
isn't angry with the people who make her feel that way, I am angry for
her.  I am angry with her brother too, for she is evidently very much
afraid of him, and this gives me some further insight into the subject.
She thinks everything of her brother, and thinks it natural that she
should be afraid of him, not only physically (for this _is_ natural, as
he is enormously tall and strong, and has very big fists), but morally
and intellectually.  She seems unable, however, to take in any argument,
and she makes me realise what I have often heard--that if you are timid
nothing will reason you out of it.

Mr. Vane, also (the brother), seems to have the same prejudices, and when
I tell him, as I often think it right to do, that his sister is not his
subordinate, even if she does think so, but his equal, and, perhaps in
some respects his superior, and that if my brother, in Bangor, were to
treat me as he treates this poor young girl, who has not spirit enough to
see the question in its true light, there would be an indignation,
meeting of the citizens to protest against such an outrage to the
sanctity of womanhood--when I tell him all this, at breakfast or dinner,
he bursts out laughing so loud that all the plates clatter on the table.

But at such a time as this there is always one person who seems
interested in what I say--a German gentleman, a professor, who sits next
to me at dinner, and whom I must tell you more about another time.  He is
very learned, and has a great desire for information; he appreciates a
great many of my remarks, and after dinner, in the salon, he often comes
to me to ask me questions about them.  I have to think a little,
sometimes, to know what I did say, or what I do think.  He takes you
right up where you left off; and he is almost as fond of discussing
things as William Platt is.  He is splendidly educated, in the German
style, and he told me the other day that he was an "intellectual broom."
Well, if he is, he sweeps clean; I told him that.  After he has been
talking to me I feel as if I hadn't got a speck of dust left in my mind
anywhere.  It's a most delightful feeling.  He says he's an observer; and
I am sure there is plenty over here to observe.  But I have told you
enough for to-day.  I don't know how much longer I shall stay here; I am
getting on so fast that it sometimes seems as if I shouldn't need all the
time I have laid out.  I suppose your cold weather has promptly begun, as
usual; it sometimes makes me envy you.  The fall weather here is very
dull and damp, and I feel very much as if I should like to be braced up.




CHAPTER VI


FROM MISS EVELYN VANE, IN PARIS, TO THE LADY AUGUSTA FLEMING, AT
BRIGHTON.

Paris, September 30th.

Dear Lady Augusta--I am afraid I shall not be able to come to you on
January 7th, as you kindly proposed at Homburg.  I am so very, very
sorry; it is a great disappointment to me.  But I have just heard that it
has been settled that mamma and the children are coming abroad for a part
of the winter, and mamma wishes me to go with them to Hyeres, where
Georgina has been ordered for her lungs.  She has not been at all well
these three months, and now that the damp weather has begun she is very
poorly indeed; so that last week papa decided to have a consultation, and
he and mamma went with her up to town and saw some three or four doctors.
They all of them ordered the south of France, but they didn't agree about
the place; so that mamma herself decided for Hyeres, because it is the
most economical.  I believe it is very dull, but I hope it will do
Georgina good.  I am afraid, however, that nothing will do her good until
she consents to take more care of herself; I am afraid she is very wild
and wilful, and mamma tells me that all this month it has taken papa's
positive orders to make her stop in-doors.  She is very cross (mamma
writes me) about coming abroad, and doesn't seem at all to mind the
expense that papa has been put to--talks very ill-naturedly about losing
the hunting, etc.  She expected to begin to hunt in December, and wants
to know whether anybody keeps hounds at Hyeres.  Fancy a girl wanting to
follow the hounds when her lungs are so bad!  But I daresay that when she
gets there she will he glad enough to keep quiet, as they say that the
heat is intense.  It may cure Georgina, but I am sure it will make the
rest of us very ill.

Mamma, however, is only going to bring Mary and Gus and Fred and Adelaide
abroad with her; the others will remain at Kingscote until February
(about the 3d), when they will go to Eastbourne for a month with Miss
Turnover, the new governess, who has turned out such a very nice person.
She is going to take Miss Travers, who has been with us so long, but who
is only qualified for the younger children, to Hyeres, and I believe some
of the Kingscote servants.  She has perfect confidence in Miss T.; it is
only a pity she has such an odd name.  Mamma thought of asking her if she
would mind taking another when she came; but papa thought she might
object.  Lady Battledown makes all her governesses take the same name;
she gives 5 pounds more a year for the purpose.  I forget what it is she
calls them; I think it's Johnson (which to me always suggests a lady's
maid).  Governesses shouldn't have too pretty a name; they shouldn't have
a nicer name than the family.

I suppose you heard from the Desmonds that I did not go back to England
with them.  When it began to be talked about that Georgina should be
taken abroad, mamma wrote to me that I had better stop in Paris for a
month with Harold, so that she could pick me up on their way to Hyeres.
It saves the expense of my journey to Kingscote and back, and gives me
the opportunity to "finish" a little in French.

You know Harold came here six weeks ago, to get up his French for those
dreadful examinations that he has to pass so soon.  He came to live with
some French people that take in young men (and others) for this purpose;
it's a kind of coaching place, only kept by women.  Mamma had heard it
was very nice; so she wrote to me that I was to come and stop here with
Harold.  The Desmonds brought me and made the arrangement, or the
bargain, or whatever you call it.  Poor Harold was naturally not at all
pleased; but he has been very kind, and has treated me like an angel.  He
is getting on beautifully with his French; for though I don't think the
place is so good as papa supposed, yet Harold is so immensely clever that
he can scarcely help learning.  I am afraid I learn much less, but,
fortunately, I have not to pass an examination--except if mamma takes it
into her head to examine me.  But she will have so much to think of with
Georgina that I hope this won't occur to her.  If it does, I shall be, as
Harold says, in a dreadful funk.

This is not such a nice place for a girl as for a young man, and the
Desmonds thought it _exceedingly odd_ that mamma should wish me to come
here.  As Mrs. Desmond said, it is because she is so very unconventional.
But you know Paris is so very amusing, and if only Harold remains good-
natured about it, I shall be content to wait for the caravan (that's what
he calls mamma and the children).  The person who keeps the
establishment, or whatever they call it, is rather odd, and _exceedingly
foreign_; but she is wonderfully civil, and is perpetually sending to my
door to see if I want anything.  The servants are not at all like English
servants, and come bursting in, the footman (they have only one) and the
maids alike, at all sorts of hours, in the _most sudden way_.  Then when
one rings, it is half an hour before they come.  All this is very
uncomfortable, and I daresay it will be worse at Hyeres.  There, however,
fortunately, we shall have our own people.

There are some very odd Americans here, who keep throwing Harold into
fits of laughter.  One is a dreadful little man who is always sitting
over the fire, and talking about the colour of the sky.  I don't believe
he ever saw the sky except through the window--pane.  The other day he
took hold of my frock (that green one you thought so nice at Homburg) and
told me that it reminded him of the texture of the Devonshire turf.  And
then he talked for half an hour about the Devonshire turf; which I
thought such a very extraordinary subject.  Harold says he is mad.  It is
very strange to be living in this way with people one doesn't know.  I
mean that one doesn't know as one knows them in England.

The other Americans (beside the madman) are two girls, about my own age,
one of whom is rather nice.  She has a mother; but the mother is always
sitting in her bedroom, which seems so very odd.  I should like mamma to
ask them to Kingscote, but I am afraid mamma wouldn't like the mother,
who is rather vulgar.  The other girl is rather vulgar too, and is
travelling about quite alone.  I think she is a kind of schoolmistress;
but the other girl (I mean the nicer one, with the mother) tells me she
is more respectable than she seems.  She has, however, the most
extraordinary opinions--wishes to do away with the aristocracy, thinks it
wrong that Arthur should have Kingscote when papa dies, etc.  I don't see
what it signifies to her that poor Arthur should come into the property,
which will be so delightful--except for papa dying.  But Harold says she
is mad.  He chaffs her tremendously about her radicalism, and he is so
immensely clever that she can't answer him, though she is rather clever
too.

There is also a Frenchman, a nephew, or cousin, or something, of the
person of the house, who is extremely nasty; and a German professor, or
doctor, who eats with his knife and is a great bore.  I am so very sorry
about giving up my visit.  I am afraid you will never ask me again.




CHAPTER VII


FROM LEON VERDIER, IN PARIS, TO PROSPER GOBAIN, AT LILLE.

September 28th.

My Dear Prosper--It is a long time since I have given you of my news, and
I don't know what puts it into my head to-night to recall myself to your
affectionate memory.  I suppose it is that when we are happy the mind
reverts instinctively to those with whom formerly we shared our
exaltations and depressions, and _je t'eu ai trop dit, dans le bon temps,
mon gros Prosper_, and you always listened to me too imperturbably, with
your pipe in your mouth, your waistcoat unbuttoned, for me not to feel
that I can count upon your sympathy to-day.  _Nous en sommes nous
flanquees des confidences_--in those happy days when my first thought in
seeing an adventure _poindre a l'horizon_ was of the pleasure I should
have in relating it to the great Prosper.  As I tell thee, I am happy;
decidedly, I am happy, and from this affirmation I fancy you can
construct the rest.  Shall I help thee a little?  Take three adorable
girls . . . three, my good Prosper--the mystic number--neither more nor
less.  Take them and place thy insatiable little Leon in the midst of
them!  Is the situation sufficiently indicated, and do you apprehend the
motives of my felicity?

You expected, perhaps, I was going to tell you that I had made my
fortune, or that the Uncle Blondeau had at last decided to return into
the breast of nature, after having constituted me his universal legatee.
But I needn't remind you that women are always for something in the
happiness of him who writes to thee--for something in his happiness, and
for a good deal more in his misery.  But don't let me talk of misery now;
time enough when it comes; _ces demoiselles_ have gone to join the
serried ranks of their amiable predecessors.  Excuse me--I comprehend
your impatience.  I will tell you of whom _ces demoiselles_ consist.

You have heard me speak of my _cousine_ de Maisonrouge, that grande
_belle femme_, who, after having married, _en secondes_ noces--there had
been, to tell the truth, some irregularity about her first union--a
venerable relic of the old noblesse of Poitou, was left, by the death of
her husband, complicated by the indulgence of expensive tastes on an
income of 17,000 francs, on the pavement of Paris, with two little demons
of daughters to bring up in the path of virtue.  She managed to bring
them up; my little cousins are rigidly virtuous.  If you ask me how she
managed it, I can't tell you; it's no business of mine, and, _a fortiori_
none of yours.  She is now fifty years old (she confesses to
thirty-seven), and her daughters, whom she has never been able to marry,
are respectively twenty-seven and twenty-three (they confess to twenty
and to seventeen).  Three years ago she had the thrice-blessed idea of
opening a sort of _pension_ for the entertainment and instruction of the
blundering barbarians who come to Paris in the hope of picking up a few
stray particles of the language of Voltaire--or of Zola.  The idea _lui a
porte bonheur_; the shop does a very good business.  Until within a few
months ago it was carried on by my cousins alone; but lately the need of
a few extensions and embellishments has caused itself to be felt.  My
cousin has undertaken them, regardless of expense; she has asked me to
come and stay with her--board and lodging gratis--and keep an eye on the
grammatical eccentricities of her _pensionnaires_.  I am the extension,
my good Prosper; I am the embellishment!  I live for nothing, and I
straighten up the accent of the prettiest English lips.  The English lips
are not all pretty, heaven knows, but enough of them are so to make it a
gaining bargain for me.

Just now, as I told you, I am in daily conversation with three separate
pairs.  The owner of one of them has private lessons; she pays extra.  My
cousin doesn't give me a sou of the money; but I make bold, nevertheless,
to say that my trouble is remunerated.  But I am well, very well, with
the proprietors of the two other pairs.  One of them is a little
Anglaise, of about twenty--a little _figure de keepsake_; the most
adorable miss that you ever, or at least that I ever beheld.  She is
decorated all over with beads and bracelets and embroidered dandelions;
but her principal decoration consists of the softest little gray eyes in
the world, which rest upon you with a profundity of confidence--a
confidence that I really feel some compunction in betraying.  She has a
tint as white as this sheet of paper, except just in the middle of each
cheek, where it passes into the purest and most transparent, most liquid,
carmine.  Occasionally this rosy fluid overflows into the rest of her
face--by which I mean that she blushes--as softly as the mark of your
breath on the window-pane.

Like every Anglaise, she is rather pinched and prim in public; but it is
very easy to see that when no one is looking _elle ne demande qu'a se
laisser aller_!  Whenever she wants it I am always there, and I have
given her to understand that she can count upon me.  I have reason to
believe that she appreciates the assurance, though I am bound in honesty
to confess that with her the situation is a little less advanced than
with the others.  _Que voulez-vous_?  The English are heavy, and the
Anglaises move slowly, that's all.  The movement, however, is
perceptible, and once this fact is established I can let the pottage
simmer.  I can give her time to arrive, for I am over-well occupied with
her _concurrentes_.  _Celles-ci_ don't keep me waiting, _par exemple_!

These young ladies are Americans, and you know that it is the national
character to move fast.  "All right--go ahead!"  (I am learning a great
deal of English, or, rather, a great deal of American.)  They go ahead at
a rate that sometimes makes it difficult for me to keep up.  One of them
is prettier than the other; but this hatter (the one that takes the
private lessons) is really _une file prodigieuse_.  _Ah, par exemple,
elle brule ses vais-seux cella-la_!  She threw herself into my arms the
very first day, and I almost owed her a grudge for having deprived me of
that pleasure of gradation, of carrying the defences, one by one, which
is almost as great as that of entering the place.

Would you believe that at the end of exactly twelve minutes she gave me a
rendezvous?  It is true it was in the Galerie d'Apollon, at the Louvre;
but that was respectable for a beginning, and since then we have had them
by the dozen; I have ceased to keep the account.  _Non, c'est une file
qui me depasse_.

The little one (she has a mother somewhere, out of sight, shut up in a
closet or a trunk) is a good deal prettier, and, perhaps, on that account
_elle y met plus de facons_.  She doesn't knock about Paris with me by
the hour; she contents herself with long interviews in the _petit salon_,
with the curtains half-drawn, beginning at about three o'clock, when
every one is _a la promenade_.  She is admirable, this little one; a
little too thin, the bones rather accentuated, but the detail, on the
whole, most satisfactory.  And you can say anything to her.  She takes
the trouble to appear not to understand, but her conduct, half an hour
afterwards, reassures you completely--oh, completely!

However, it is the tall one, the one of the private lessons, that is the
most remarkable.  These private lessons, my good Prosper, are the most
brilliant invention of the age, and a real stroke of genius on the part
of Miss Miranda!  They also take place in the _petit salon_, but with the
doors tightly closed, and with explicit directions to every one in the
house that we are not to be disturbed.  And we are not, my good Prosper;
we are not!  Not a sound, not a shadow, interrupts our felicity.  My
_cousine_ is really admirable; the shop deserves to succeed.  Miss
Miranda is tall and rather flat; she is too pale; she hasn't the adorable
_rougeurs_ of the little Anglaise.  But she has bright, keen, inquisitive
eyes, superb teeth, a nose modelled by a sculptor, and a way of holding
up her head and looking every one in the face, which is the most finished
piece of impertinence I ever beheld.  She is making the _tour du monde_
entirely alone, without even a soubrette to carry the ensign, for the
purpose of seeing for herself _a quoi s'en tenir sur les hommes et les
choses--on les hommes_ particularly.  _Dis donc_, Prosper, it must be a
_drole de pays_ over there, where young persons animated by this ardent
curiosity are manufactured!  If we should turn the tables, some day, thou
and I, and go over and see it for ourselves.  It is as well that we
should go and find them _chez elles_, as that they should come out here
after us.  _Dis donc, mon gras Prosper_ . . .




CHAPTER VIII


FROM DR. RUDOLF STAUB, IN PARIS, TO DR. JULIUS HIRSCH, AT GOTTINGEN.

My dear brother in Science--I resume my hasty notes, of which I sent you
the first instalment some weeks ago.  I mentioned then that I intended to
leave my hotel, not finding it sufficiently local and national.  It was
kept by a Pomeranian, and the waiters, without exception, were from the
Fatherland.  I fancied myself at Berlin, Unter den Linden, and I
reflected that, having taken the serious step of visiting the
head-quarters of the Gallic genius, I should try and project myself; as
much as possible, into the circumstances which are in part the
consequence and in part the cause of its irrepressible activity.  It
seemed to me that there could be no well-grounded knowledge without this
preliminary operation of placing myself in relations, as slightly as
possible modified by elements proceeding from a different combination of
causes, with the spontaneous home-life of the country.

I accordingly engaged a room in the house of a lady of pure French
extraction and education, who supplements the shortcomings of an income
insufficient to the ever-growing demands of the Parisian system of sense-
gratification, by providing food and lodging for a limited number of
distinguished strangers.  I should have preferred to have my room alone
in the house, and to take my meals in a brewery, of very good appearance,
which I speedily discovered in the same street; but this arrangement,
though very lucidly proposed by myself; was not acceptable to the
mistress of the establishment (a woman with a mathematical head), and I
have consoled myself for the extra expense by fixing my thoughts upon the
opportunity that conformity to the customs of the house gives me of
studying the table-manners of my companions, and of observing the French
nature at a peculiarly physiological moment, the moment when the
satisfaction of the _taste_, which is the governing quality in its
composition, produces a kind of exhalation, an intellectual
transpiration, which, though light and perhaps invisible to a superficial
spectator, is nevertheless appreciable by a properly adjusted instrument.

I have adjusted my instrument very satisfactorily (I mean the one I carry
in my good square German head), and I am not afraid of losing a single
drop of this valuable fluid, as it condenses itself upon the plate of my
observation.  A prepared surface is what I need, and I have prepared my
surface.

Unfortunately here, also, I find the individual native in the minority.
There are only four French persons in the house--the individuals
concerned in its management, three of whom are women, and one a man.  This
preponderance of the feminine element is, however, in itself
characteristic, as I need not remind you what an abnormally--developed
part this sex has played in French history.  The remaining figure is
apparently that of a man, but I hesitate to classify him so
superficially.  He appears to me less human than simian, and whenever I
hear him talk I seem to myself to have paused in the street to listen to
the shrill clatter of a hand-organ, to which the gambols of a hairy
_homunculus_ form an accompaniment.

I mentioned to you before that my expectation of rough usage, in
consequence of my German nationality, had proved completely unfounded.  No
one seems to know or to care what my nationality is, and I am treated, on
the contrary, with the civility which is the portion of every traveller
who pays the bill without scanning the items too narrowly.  This, I
confess, has been something of a surprise to me, and I have not yet made
up my mind as to the fundamental cause of the anomaly.  My determination
to take up my abode in a French interior was largely dictated by the
supposition that I should be substantially disagreeable to its inmates.  I
wished to observe the different forms taken by the irritation that I
should naturally produce; for it is under the influence of irritation
that the French character most completely expresses itself.  My presence,
however, does not appear to operate as a stimulus, and in this respect I
am materially disappointed.  They treat me as they treat every one else;
whereas, in order to be treated differently, I was resigned in advance to
be treated worse.  I have not, as I say, fully explained to myself this
logical contradiction; but this is the explanation to which I tend.  The
French are so exclusively occupied with the idea of themselves, that in
spite of the very definite image the German personality presented to them
by the war of 1870, they have at present no distinct apprehension of its
existence.  They are not very sure that there are any Germans; they have
already forgotten the convincing proofs of the fact that were presented
to them nine years ago.  A German was something disagreeable, which they
determined to keep out of their conception of things.  I therefore think
that we are wrong to govern ourselves upon the hypothesis of the
_revanche_; the French nature is too shallow for that large and powerful
plant to bloom in it.

The English-speaking specimens, too, I have not been willing to neglect
the opportunity to examine; and among these I have paid special attention
to the American varieties, of which I find here several singular
examples.  The two most remarkable are a young man who presents all the
characteristics of a period of national decadence; reminding me strongly
of some diminutive Hellenised Roman of the third century.  He is an
illustration of the period of culture in which the faculty of
appreciation has obtained such a preponderance over that of production
that the latter sinks into a kind of rank sterility, and the mental
condition becomes analogous to that of a malarious bog.  I learn from him
that there is an immense number of Americans exactly resembling him, and
that the city of Boston, indeed, is almost exclusively composed of them.
(He communicated this fact very proudly, as if it were greatly to the
credit of his native country; little perceiving the truly sinister
impression it made upon me.)

What strikes one in it is that it is a phenomenon to the best of my
knowledge--and you know what my knowledge is--unprecedented and unique in
the history of mankind; the arrival of a nation at an ultimate stage of
evolution without having passed through the mediate one; the passage of
the fruit, in other words, from crudity to rottenness, without the
interposition of a period of useful (and ornamental) ripeness.  With the
Americans, indeed, the crudity and the rottenness are identical and
simultaneous; it is impossible to say, as in the conversation of this
deplorable young man, which is one and which is the other; they are
inextricably mingled.  I prefer the talk of the French _homunculus_; it
is at least more amusing.

It is interesting in this manner to perceive, so largely developed, the
germs of extinction in the so-called powerful Anglo-Saxon family.  I find
them in almost as recognisable a form in a young woman from the State of
Maine, in the province of New England, with whom I have had a good deal
of conversation.  She differs somewhat from the young man I just
mentioned, in that the faculty of production, of action, is, in her, less
inanimate; she has more of the freshness and vigour that we suppose to
belong to a young civilisation.  But unfortunately she produces nothing
but evil, and her tastes and habits are similarly those of a Roman lady
of the lower Empire.  She makes no secret of them, and has, in fact,
elaborated a complete system of licentious behaviour.  As the
opportunities she finds in her own country do not satisfy her, she has
come to Europe "to try," as she says, "for herself."  It is the doctrine
of universal experience professed with a cynicism that is really most
extraordinary, and which, presenting itself in a young woman of
considerable education, appears to me to be the judgment of a society.

Another observation which pushes me to the same induction--that of the
premature vitiation of the American population--is the attitude of the
Americans whom I have before me with regard to each other.  There is
another young lady here, who is less abnormally developed than the one I
have just described, but who yet bears the stamp of this peculiar
combination of incompleteness and effeteness.  These three persons look
with the greatest mistrust and aversion upon each other; and each has
repeatedly taken me apart and assured me, secretly, that he or she only
is the real, the genuine, the typical American.  A type that has lost
itself before it has been fixed--what can you look for from this?

Add to this that there are two young Englanders in the house, who hate
all the Americans in a lump, making between them none of the distinctions
and favourable comparisons which they insist upon, and you will, I think,
hold me warranted in believing that, between precipitate decay and
internecine enmities, the English-speaking family is destined to consume
itself; and that with its decline the prospect of general pervasiveness,
to which I alluded above, will brighten for the deep-lunged children of
the Fatherland!




CHAPTER IX


MIRANDA HOPE TO HER MOTHER.

October 22d

Dear Mother--I am off in a day or two to visit some new country; I
haven't yet decided which.  I have satisfied myself with regard to
France, and obtained a good knowledge of the language.  I have enjoyed my
visit to Madame de Maisonrouge deeply, and feel as if I were leaving a
circle of real friends.  Everything has gone on beautifully up to the
end, and every one has been as kind and attentive as if I were their own
sister, especially Mr. Verdier, the French gentleman, from whom I have
gained more than I ever expected (in six weeks), and with whom I have
promised to correspond.  So you can imagine me dashing off the most
correct French letters; and, if you don't believe it, I will keep the
rough draft to show you when I go back.

The German gentleman is also more interesting, the more you know him; it
seems sometimes as if I could fairly drink in his ideas.  I have found
out why the young lady from New York doesn't like me!  It is because I
said one day at dinner that I admired to go to the Louvre.  Well, when I
first came, it seemed as if I _did_ admire everything!

Tell William Platt his letter has come.  I knew he would have to write,
and I was bound I would make him!  I haven't decided what country I will
visit yet; it seems as if there were so many to choose from.  But I shall
take care to pick out a good one, and to meet plenty of fresh
experiences.

Dearest mother, my money holds out, and it _is_ most interesting!






Introductory


Though the good city of Paris appears to be less in fashion than in
other days with those representatives of our race--not always, perhaps,
acknowledged as the soundest and stiffest--curious of foreign
opportunity and addicted to foreign sojourns, it probably none the less
remains true that such frequentations of France as may be said still to
flourish among us have as much as ever the wondrous capital, and the
wondrous capital alone, for their object. The taste for Paris, at all
events, is--or perhaps I should say was, alluding as I do, I fear, to a
vanished order--a taste by itself; singularly little bound up, of
necessity, with such an interest in the country at large as would be
implied by an equal devotion, in other countries, to other capitals.
Putting aside the economic inducement, which may always operate, and
limiting the matter to the question of free choice, it is sufficiently
striking that the free chooser would have to be very fond of England to
quarter himself in London, very fond of Germany to quarter himself in
Berlin, very fond of America to quarter himself in New York. It had, on
the other hand, been a common reflection for the author of these light
pages that the fondness for France (throughout the company of strangers
more or less qualified) was oddly apt to feed only on such grounds for
it as made shift to spread their surface between the Arc de Triomphe and
the Gymnase Theatre: as if there were no good things in the _doux pays_
that could not be harvested in that field. It matters little how the
assumption began to strike him as stupid, especially since he himself
had doubtless equally shared in the guilt of it. The light pages in
question are but the simple record of a small personal effort to shake
it off. He took, it must be confessed, no extraordinary measures; he
merely started, one rainy morning in mid-September, for the charming
little city of Tours, where he felt that he might as immediately as
anywhere else see it demonstrated that, though France might be Paris,
Paris was by no means France. The beauty of the demonstration--quite as
prompt as he could have desired--drew him considerably farther, and his
modest but eminently successful adventure begot, as aids to amused
remembrance, a few informal notes.

[Illustration]




Chapter i

[Tours]


I am ashamed to begin with saying that Touraine is the garden of France;
that remark has long ago lost its bloom. The town of Tours, however, has
something sweet and bright, which suggests that it is surrounded by a
land of fruits. It is a very agreeable little city; few towns of its
size are more ripe, more complete, or, I should suppose, in better
humour with themselves and less disposed to envy the responsibilities of
bigger places. It is truly the capital of its smiling province; a region
of easy abundance, of good living, of genial, comfortable, optimistic,
rather indolent opinions. Balzac says in one of his tales that the real
Tourangeau will not make an effort, or displace himself even, to go in
search of a pleasure; and it is not difficult to understand the sources
of this amiable cynicism. He must have a vague conviction that he can
only lose by almost any change. Fortune has been kind to him: he lives
in a temperate, reasonable, sociable climate, on the banks of a river
which, it is true, sometimes floods the country around it, but of which
the ravages appear to be so easily repaired that its aggressions may
perhaps be regarded (in a region where so many good things are certain)
merely as an occasion for healthy suspense. He is surrounded by fine old
traditions, religious, social, architectural, culinary; and he may have
the satisfaction of feeling that he is French to the core. No part of
his admirable country is more characteristically national. Normandy is
Normandy, Burgundy is Burgundy, Provence is Provence; but Touraine is
essentially France. It is the land of Rabelais, of Descartes, of Balzac,
of good books and good company, as well as good dinners and good houses.
George Sand has somewhere a charming passage about the mildness, the
convenient quality, of the physical conditions of central France--"son
climat souple et chaud, ses pluies abondantes et courtes." In the autumn
of 1882 the rains perhaps were less short than abundant; but when the
days were fine it was impossible that anything in the way of weather
could be more charming. The vineyards and orchards looked rich in the
fresh, gay light; cultivation was everywhere, but everywhere it seemed
to be easy. There was no visible poverty; thrift and success presented
themselves as matters of good taste. The white caps of the women
glittered in the sunshine, and their well-made sabots clicked cheerfully
on the hard, clean roads. Touraine is a land of old châteaux,--a gallery
of architectural specimens and of large hereditary properties. The
peasantry have less of the luxury of ownership than in most other parts
of France; though they have enough of it to give them quite their share
of that shrewdly conservative look which, in the little chaffering
_place_ of the market-town, the stranger observes so often in the
wrinkled brown masks that surmount the agricultural blouse. This is,
moreover, the heart of the old French monarchy; and as that monarchy was
splendid and picturesque, a reflection of the splendour still glitters
in the current of the Loire. Some of the most striking events of French
history have occurred on the banks of that river, and the soil it waters
bloomed for a while with the flowering of the Renaissance. The Loire
gives a great "style" to a landscape of which the features are not, as
the phrase is, prominent, and carries the eye to distances even more
poetic than the green horizons of Touraine. It is a very fitful stream,
and is sometimes observed to run thin and expose all the crudities of
its channel--a great defect certainly in a river which is so much
depended upon to give an air to the places it waters. But I speak of it
as I saw it last; full, tranquil, powerful, bending in large slow curves
and sending back half the light of the sky. Nothing can be finer than
the view of its course which you get from the battlements and terraces
of Amboise. As I looked down on it from that elevation one lovely Sunday
morning, through a mild glitter of autumn sunshine, it seemed the very
model of a generous, beneficent stream. The most charming part of Tours
is naturally the shaded quay that overlooks it, and looks across too at
the friendly faubourg of Saint Symphorien and at the terraced heights
which rise above this. Indeed, throughout Touraine it is half the charm
of the Loire that you can travel beside it. The great dyke which
protects it, or protects the country from it, from Blois to Angers, is
an admirable road; and on the other side as well the highway constantly
keeps it company. A wide river, as you follow a wide road, is excellent
company; it brightens and shortens the way.

The inns at Tours are in another quarter, and one of them, which is
midway between the town and the station, is very good. It is worth
mentioning for the fact that every one belonging to it is
extraordinarily polite--so unnaturally polite as at first to excite your
suspicion that the hotel has some hidden vice, so that the waiters and
chambermaids are trying to pacify you in advance. There was one waiter
in especial who was the most accomplished social being I have ever
encountered; from morning till night he kept up an inarticulate murmur
of urbanity, like the hum of a spinning-top. I may add that I discovered
no dark secrets at the Hôtel de l'Univers; for it is not a secret to any
traveller to-day that the obligation to partake of a lukewarm dinner in
an overheated room is as imperative as it is detestable. For the rest,
at Tours there is a certain Rue Royale which has pretensions to the
monumental; it was constructed a hundred years ago, and the houses, all
alike, have on a moderate scale a pompous eighteenth-century look. It
connects the Palais de Justice, the most important secular building in
the town, with the long bridge which spans the Loire--the spacious,
solid bridge pronounced by Balzac, in "Le Curé de Tours," "one of the
finest monuments of French architecture." The Palais de Justice was the
seat of the Government of Léon Gambetta in the autumn of 1870, after the
dictator had been obliged to retire in his balloon from Paris and before
the Assembly was constituted at Bordeaux. The Germans occupied Tours
during that terrible winter: it is astonishing, the number of places
the Germans occupied. It is hardly too much to say that, wherever one
goes in certain parts of France, one encounters two great historic
facts: one is the Revolution; the other is the German invasion. The
traces of the Revolution remain in a hundred scars and bruises and
mutilations, but the visible marks of the war of 1870 have passed away.
The country is so rich, so living, that she has been able to dress her
wounds, to hold up her head, to smile again, so that the shadow of that
darkness has ceased to rest upon her. But what you do not see you still
may hear; and one remembers with a certain shudder that only a few short
years ago this province, so intimately French, was under the heel of a
foreign foe. To be intimately French was apparently not a safeguard; for
so successful an invader it could only be a challenge. Peace and plenty,
however, have succeeded that episode; and among the gardens and
vineyards of Touraine it seems only a legend the more in a country of
legends.

It was not, all the same, for the sake of this chequered story that I
mentioned the Palais de Justice and the Rue Royale. The most interesting
fact, to my mind, about the high-street of Tours was that as you walk
toward the bridge on the right hand _trottoir_ you can look up at the
house, on the other side of the way, in which Honoré de Balzac first saw
the light. That violent and complicated genius was a child of the
good-humoured and succulent Touraine. There is something anomalous in
this fact, though, if one thinks about it a little, one may discover
certain correspondences between his character and that of his native
province. Strenuous, laborious, constantly infelicitous in spite of his
great successes, he suggests at times a very different set of
influences. But he had his jovial, full-feeding side--the side that
comes out in the "Contes Drolatiques," which are the romantic and
epicurean chronicle of the old manors and abbeys of this region. And he
was, moreover, the product of a soil into which a great deal of history
had been trodden. Balzac was genuinely as well as affectedly
monarchical, and he was saturated with a sense of the past. Number 39
Rue Royale--of which the basement, like all the basements in the Rue
Royale, is occupied by a shop--is not shown to the public; and I know
not whether tradition designates the chamber in which the author of "Le
Lys dans la Vallée" opened his eyes into a world in which he was to see
and to imagine such extraordinary things. If this were the case I would
willingly have crossed its threshold; not for the sake of any relic of
the great novelist which it may possibly contain, nor even for that of
any mystic virtue which may be supposed to reside within its walls, but
simply because to look at those four modest walls can hardly fail to
give one a strong impression of the force of human endeavour. Balzac, in
the maturity of his vision, took in more of human life than any one,
since Shakspeare, who has attempted to tell us stories about it; and the
very small scene on which his consciousness dawned is one end of the
immense scale that he traversed. I confess it shocked me a little to
find that he was born in a house "in a row"--a house, moreover, which at
the date of his birth must have been only about twenty years old. All
that is contradictory. If the tenement selected for this honour could
not be ancient and embrowned, it should at least have been detached.

There is a charming description in his little tale of "La Grenadière" of
the view of the opposite side of

[Illustration: TOURS--THE HOUSE OF BALZAC]

the Loire as you have it from the square at the end of the Rue Royale--a
square that has some pretensions to grandeur, overlooked as it is by the
Hôtel de Ville and the Musée, a pair of edifices which directly
contemplate the river, and ornamented with marble images of François
Rabelais and René Descartes. The former, erected a few years since, is a
very honourable production; the pedestal of the latter could, as a
matter of course, only be inscribed with the _Cogito ergo Sum_. The two
statues mark the two opposite poles to which the wondrous French mind
has travelled; and if there were an effigy of Balzac at Tours it ought
to stand midway between them. Not that he by any means always struck the
happy mean between the sensible and the metaphysical; but one may say of
him that half of his genius looks in one direction and half in the
other. The side that turns toward François Rabelais would be, on the
whole, the side that takes the sun. But there is no statue of Balzac at
Tours; there is only in one of the chambers of the melancholy museum a
rather clever, coarse bust. The description in "La Grenadière" of which
I just spoke is too long to quote; neither have I space for anyone of
the brilliant attempts at landscape-painting which are woven into the
shimmering texture of "Le Lys dans la Vallée." The little manor of
Clochegourde, the residence of Madame de Mortsauf, the heroine of that
extraordinary work, was within a moderate walk of Tours, and the picture
in the novel is presumably a copy from an original which it would be
possible to-day to discover. I did not, however, even make the attempt.
There are so many châteaux in Touraine commemorated in history that it
would take one too far to look up those which have been commemorated in
fiction. The most I did was to endeavour to identify the former
residence of Mademoiselle Gamard, the sinister old maid of "Le Curé de
Tours." This terrible woman occupied a small house in the rear of the
cathedral, where I spent a whole morning in wondering rather stupidly
which house it could be. To reach the cathedral from the little _place_
where we stopped just now to look across at the Grenadière, without, it
must be confessed, very vividly seeing it, you follow the quay to the
right and pass out of sight of the charming _côteau_ which, from beyond
the river, faces the town--a soft agglomeration of gardens, vineyards,
scattered villas, gables and turrets of slate-roofed châteaux, terraces
with grey balustrades, moss-grown walls draped in scarlet
Virginia-creeper. You turn into the town again beside a great military
barrack which is ornamented with a rugged mediæval tower, a relic of the
ancient fortifications, known to the Tourangeaux of to-day as the Tour
de Guise. The young Prince of Joinville, son of that Duke of Guise who
was murdered by the order of Henry II. at Blois, was, after the death of
his father, confined here for more than two years, but made his escape
one summer evening in 1591, under the nose of his keepers, with a
gallant audacity which has attached the memory of the exploit to his
sullen-looking prison. Tours has a garrison of five regiments, and the
little red-legged soldiers light up the town. You see them stroll upon
the clean, uncommercial quay, where there are no signs of navigation,
not even by oar, no barrels nor bales, no loading nor unloading, no
masts against the sky nor booming of steam in the air. The most active
business that goes on there is that patient and fruitless angling in
which the French, as the votaries of art for art, excel all other
people. The little soldiers, weighed down by the contents of their
enormous pockets, pass with respect from one of these masters of the rod
to the other, as he sits soaking an indefinite bait in the large,
indifferent stream. After you turn your back to the quay you have only
to go a little way before you reach the cathedral.

[Illustration]




Chapter ii

[Tours: the Cathedral]


It is a very beautiful church of the second order of importance, with a
charming mouse-coloured complexion and a pair of fantastic towers. There
is a commodious little square in front of it, from which you may look up
at its very ornamental face; but for purposes of frank admiration the
sides and the rear are perhaps not sufficiently detached. The cathedral
of Tours, which is dedicated to Saint Gatianus, took a long time to
build. Begun in 1170, it was finished only in the first half of the
sixteenth century; but the ages and the weather have interfused so well
the tone of the different parts that it presents, at first at least, no
striking incongruities, and looks even exceptionally harmonious and
complete. There are many grander cathedrals, but there are probably few
more pleasing; and this effect of delicacy and grace is at its best
towards the close of a quiet afternoon, when the densely decorated
towers, rising above the little Place de l'Archevêché, lift their
curious lanterns into the slanting light and offer a multitudinous perch
to troops of circling pigeons. The whole front, at such a time, has an
appearance of great richness, although the niches which surround the
three high doors (with recesses deep enough for several circles of
sculpture) and indent the four great buttresses that ascend beside the
huge rose-window, carry no figures beneath their little chiselled
canopies. The blast of the great Revolution blew down most of the
statues in France, and the wind has never set very strongly towards
putting them up again. The embossed and crocketed cupolas which crown
the towers of Saint Gatien are not very pure in taste; but, like a good
many impurities, they have a certain character. The interior has a
stately slimness with which no fault is to be found and which in the
choir, rich in early glass and surrounded by a broad passage, becomes
very bold and noble. Its principal treasure perhaps is the charming
little tomb of the two children (who died young) of Charles VIII. and
Anne of Brittany, in white marble embossed with symbolic dolphins and
exquisite arabesques. The little boy and girl lie side by side on a slab
of black marble, and a pair of small kneeling angels, both at their head
and at their feet, watch over them. Nothing could be more elegant than
this monument, which is the work of Michel Colomb, one of the earlier
glories of the French Renaissance; it is really a lesson in good taste.
Originally placed in the great abbey-church of Saint Martin, which was
for so many ages the holy place of Tours, it happily survived the
devastation to which that edifice, already sadly shattered by the wars
of religion and successive profanations, finally succumbed in 1797. In
1815 the tomb found an asylum in a quiet corner of the cathedral.

I ought perhaps to be ashamed to acknowledge that I found the profane
name of Balzac capable of adding an interest even to this venerable
sanctuary. Those who have read the terrible little story of "Le Curé de
Tours" will perhaps remember that, as I have already mentioned, the
simple and childlike old Abbé Birotteau, victim of the infernal
machinations of the Abbé Troubert and Mademoiselle Gamard, had his
quarters in the house of that lady (she had a specialty of letting
lodgings to priests), which stood on the north side of the cathedral, so
close under its walls that the supporting pillar of one of the great
flying buttresses was planted in the spinster's garden. If you wander
round behind the church in search of this more than historic habitation
you will have occasion to see that the side and rear of Saint Gatien
make a delectable and curious figure. A narrow lane passes beside the
high wall which conceals from sight the palace of the archbishop and
beneath the flying buttresses, the far-projecting gargoyles, and the
fine south porch of the church. It terminates in a little dead
grass-grown square entitled the Place Grégoire de Tours. All this part
of the exterior of the cathedral is very brown, ancient, Gothic,
grotesque; Balzac calls the whole place "a desert of stone." A
battered and gabled wing or out-house (as it appears to be) of the
hidden palace, with a queer old stone pulpit jutting out from it, looks
down on this melancholy spot, on the other side of which is a seminary
for young priests, one of whom issues from a door in a quiet corner,
and, holding it open a moment behind him, shows a glimpse of a sunny
garden, where you may fancy other black young figures strolling up and
down. Mademoiselle Gamard's house, where she took her two abbés to
board, and basely conspired with one against the other, is still farther
round the cathedral. You cannot quite put your hand upon it to-day, for
the dwelling of which you say to yourself that it must have been
Mademoiselle Gamard's does not fulfil all the conditions mentioned in
Balzac's description. The edifice in question, however, fulfils
conditions enough; in particular, its little court offers hospitality to
the big buttress of the church. Another buttress, corresponding with
this (the two, between them, sustain the gable of the north transept),
is planted in the small cloister, of which the door on the farther side
of the little soundless Rue de la Psalette, where nothing seems ever to
pass, opens opposite to that of Mademoiselle Gamard. There is a very
genial old sacristan, who introduced me to this cloister from the
church. It is very small and solitary, and much mutilated; but it
nestles with a kind of wasted friendliness beneath the big walls of the
cathedral. Its lower arcades have been closed, and it has a small plot
of garden in the middle, with fruit-trees which I should imagine to be
too much overshadowed. In one corner is a remarkably picturesque turret,
the cage of a winding staircase which ascends (no great distance) to an
upper gallery, where an old priest, the _chanoine-gardien_ of the
church, was walking to and fro with his breviary. The turret, the
gallery, and even the chanoine-gardien, belonged, that sweet September
morning, to the class of objects that are dear to painters in
water-colours.

[Illustration]




Chapter iii

[Tours: Saint Martin]


I have mentioned the church of Saint Martin, which was for many years
the sacred spot, the shrine of pilgrimage, of Tours. Originally the
simple burial-place of the great apostle who in the fourth century
Christianised Gaul and who, in his day a brilliant missionary and worker
of miracles, is chiefly known to modern fame as the worthy that cut his
cloak in two at the gate of Amiens to share it with a beggar (tradition
fails to say, I believe, what he did with the other half), the abbey of
Saint Martin, through the Middle Ages, waxed rich and powerful, till it
was known at last as one of the most luxurious religious houses in
Christendom, with kings for its titular abbots (who, like Francis I.,
sometimes turned and despoiled it) and a great treasure of precious
things. It passed, however, through many vicissitudes. Pillaged by the
Normans in the ninth century and by the Huguenots in the sixteenth, it
received its death-blow from the Revolution, which must have brought to
bear upon it an energy of destruction proportionate to its mighty bulk.
At the end of the last century a huge group of ruins alone remained, and
what we see to-day may be called the ruin of a ruin. It is difficult to
understand how so vast an edifice can have been so completely
obliterated. Its site is given up to several ugly streets, and a pair of
tall towers, separated by a space which speaks volumes as to the size of
the church and looking across the close-pressed roofs to the happier
spires of the cathedral, preserve for the modern world the memory of a
great fortune, a great abuse, perhaps, and at all events a great
penalty. One may believe that to this day a considerable part of the
foundations of the great abbey is buried in the soil of Tours. The two
surviving towers, which are dissimilar in shape, are enormous; with
those of the cathedral they form the great landmarks of the town. One of
them bears the name of the Tour de l'Horloge; the other, the so-called
Tour Charlemagne, was erected (two centuries after her death) over the
tomb of Luitgarde, wife of the great Emperor, who died at Tours in 800.
I do not pretend to understand in what relation these very mighty and
effectually detached masses of masonry stood to each other, but in their
grey elevation and loneliness they are striking and suggestive to-day;
holding their hoary heads far above the modern life of the town and
looking sad and conscious, as they had outlived all uses. I know not
what is supposed to have become of the bones

[Illustration: TOURS--THE TOWERS OF ST. MARTIN]

of the blessed saint during the various scenes of confusion in which
they may have got mislaid; but a mystic connection with his
wonder-working relics may be perceived in a strange little sanctuary on
the left of the street, which opens in front of the Tour
Charlemagne--whose immemorial base, by the way, inhabited like a cavern,
with a diminutive doorway where, as I passed, an old woman stood
cleaning a pot, and a little dark window decorated with homely flowers,
would be appreciated by a painter in search of "bits." The present
shrine of Saint Martin is enclosed (provisionally, I suppose) in a very
modern structure of timber, where in a dusky cellar, to which you
descend by a wooden staircase adorned with votive tablets and paper
roses, is placed a tabernacle surrounded by twinkling tapers and
prostrate worshippers. Even this crepuscular vault, however, fails, I
think, to attain solemnity; for the whole place is strangely vulgar and
garish. The Catholic Church, as churches go to-day, is certainly the
most spectacular; but it must feel that it has a great fund of
impressiveness to draw upon when it opens such sordid little shops of
sanctity as this. It is impossible not to be struck with the
grotesqueness of such an establishment as the last link in the chain of
a great ecclesiastical tradition.

In the same street, on the other side, a little below, is something
better worth your visit than the shrine of Saint Martin. Knock at a high
door in a white wall (there is a cross above it), and a fresh-faced
sister of the convent of the Petit Saint Martin will let you into the
charming little cloister, or rather fragment of cloister. Only one side
of this surpassing structure remains, but the whole place is effective.
In front of the beautiful arcade, which is terribly bruised and
obliterated, is one of those walks of interlaced _tilleuls_ which are so
frequent in Touraine, and into which the green light filters so softly
through a lattice of clipped twigs. Beyond this is a garden, and beyond
the garden are the other buildings of the convent, where the placid
sisters keep a school--a test, doubtless, of placidity. The imperfect
arcade, which dates from the beginning of the sixteenth century (I know
nothing of it but what is related in Mrs. Pattison's "Renaissance in
France"), is a truly enchanting piece of work; the cornice and the
angles of the arches being covered with the daintiest sculpture of
arabesques, flowers, fruit, medallions, cherubs, griffins, all in the
finest and most attenuated relief. It is like the chasing of a bracelet
in stone. The taste, the fancy, the elegance, the refinement, are of the
order that straightens up again our drooping standard of distinction.
Such a piece of work is the purest flower of the French Renaissance;
there is nothing more delicate in all Touraine.

[Tours: Saint Julian]

There is another fine thing at Tours which is not particularly delicate,
but which makes a great impression--the very interesting old church of
Saint Julian, lurking in a crooked corner at the right of the Rue
Royale, near the point at which this indifferent thoroughfare emerges,
with its little cry of admiration, on the bank of the Loire. Saint
Julian stands to-day in a kind of neglected hollow, where it is much
shut in by houses; but in the year 1225, when the edifice was begun, the
site was doubtless, as the architects say, more eligible. At present
indeed, when once you have caught a glimpse of the stout, serious
Romanesque tower--which is not high, but strong--you feel that the
building has something to say and that you must stop to listen to it.
Within, it has a vast and splendid nave, of immense height, the nave of
a cathedral, with a shallow choir and transepts and some admirable old
glass. I spent half an hour there one morning, listening to what the
church had to say, in perfect solitude. Not a worshipper entered, not
even an old man with a broom. I have always thought there be a sex in
fine buildings; and Saint Julian, with its noble nave, is of the gender
of the name of its patron.

It was that same morning, I think, that I went in search of the old
houses of Tours; for the town contains several goodly specimens of the
domestic architecture of the past. The dwelling to which the average
Anglo-Saxon will most promptly direct his steps, and the only one I have
space to mention, is the so-called Maison de Tristan l'Hermite--a
gentleman whom the readers of "Quentin Durward" will not have
forgotten--the hangman-in-ordinary to that great and prompt chastener
Louis XI. Unfortunately the house of Tristan is not the house of Tristan
at all; this illusion has been cruelly dispelled. There are no illusions
left at all, in the good city of Tours, with regard to Louis XI. His
terrible castle of Plessis, the picture of which sends a shiver through
the youthful reader of Scott, has been reduced to suburban
insignificance; and the residence of his _triste compère_, on the front
of which a festooned rope figures as a motive for decoration, is
observed to have been erected in the succeeding century. The Maison de
Tristan may be visited for itself, however, if not for Sir Walter; it is
an exceedingly picturesque old façade, to which you pick your way
through a narrow and tortuous street--a street terminating, a little
beyond it, in the walk beside the river. An elegant Gothic doorway is
let into the rusty-red brickwork, and strange little beasts crouch at
the angles of the windows, which are surmounted by a tall graduated
gable, pierced with a small orifice, where the large surface of brick,
lifted out of the shadow of the street, looks yellow and faded. The
whole thing is disfigured and decayed; but it is a capital subject for a
sketch in colours. Only I must wish the sketcher better luck--or a
better temper--than my own. If he ring the bell to be admitted to see
the court, which I believe is more sketchable still, let him have
patience to wait till the bell is answered. He can do the outside while
they are coming.

[Tours: Plessis-les-Tours]

The Maison de Tristan, I say, may be visited for itself; but I hardly
know for what the remnants of Plessis-les-Tours may be investigated. To
reach them you wander through crooked suburban lanes, down the course of
the Loire, to a rough, undesirable, incongruous spot, where a small,
crude building of red brick is pointed out to you by your cabman (if you
happen to drive) as the legendary frame of the grim portrait, and where
a strong odour of pigsties and other unclean things so prostrates you
for the moment that you have no energy to protest against this obvious
fiction. You enter a yard encumbered with rubbish and a defiant dog, and
an old woman emerges from a shabby lodge and assures you that you stand
deep in historic dust. The red brick building, which looks like a small
factory, rises on the ruins of the favourite residence of the dreadful
Louis. It is now occupied by a company of night-scavengers, whose huge
carts are drawn up in a row before it. I know not whether this be what
is called the irony of fate; in any case, the effect of it is to
accentuate strongly the fact (and through the most susceptible of our
senses) that there is no honour for the authors of great wrongs. The
dreadful Louis is reduced simply to an offence to the nostrils. The old
woman shows you a few fragments--several dark, damp, much-encumbered
vaults, denominated dungeons, and an old tower staircase in good
condition. There are the outlines of the old moat; there is also the
outline of the old guard-room, which is now a stable; and there are
other silhouettes of the undistinguishable, which I have forgotten. You
need all your imagination, and even then you cannot make out that
Plessis was a castle of large extent, though the old woman, as your eye
wanders over the neighbouring _potagers_, discourses much of the gardens
and the park. The place looks mean and flat; and as you drive away you
scarcely know whether to be glad or sorry that all those bristling
horrors have been reduced to the commonplace.

[Tours: Marmoutier]

A certain flatness of impression awaits you also, I think, at
Marmoutier, which is the other indispensable excursion in the near
neighbourhood of Tours. The remains of this famous abbey lie on the
other bank of the stream, about a mile and a half from the town. You
follow the edge of the big brown river; of a fine afternoon you will be
glad to go farther still. The abbey has gone the way of most abbeys; but
the place is a restoration as well as a ruin, inasmuch as the Sisters of
the Sacred Heart have erected a terribly modern convent here. A large
Gothic doorway, in a high fragment of ancient wall, admits you to a
garden-like enclosure, of great extent, from which you are further
introduced into an extraordinarily tidy little parlour, where two good
nuns sit at work. One of these came out with me and showed me over the
place--a very definite little woman, with pointed features, an intensely
distinct enunciation, and those pretty manners which (for whatever other
teachings it may be responsible) the Catholic Church so often instils
into its functionaries. I have never seen a woman who had got her lesson
better than this little trotting, murmuring, edifying nun. The interest
of Marmoutier to-day is not so much an interest of vision, so to speak,
as an interest of reflection--that is, if you choose to reflect (for
instance) upon the wondrous legend of the seven sleepers (you may see
where they lie in a row), who lived together--they were brothers and
cousins--in primitive piety, in the sanctuary constructed by the blessed
Saint Martin (emulous of his precursor, Saint Gatianus), in the face of
the hillside that overhung the Loire, and who, twenty-five years after
his death, yielded up their seven souls at the same moment and enjoyed
the rare convenience of retaining in their faces, in spite of mortality,
every aspect of health. The abbey of Marmoutier, which sprang from the
grottos in the cliff to which Saint Gatianus and Saint Martin retired to
pray, was therefore the creation of the latter worthy, as the other
great abbey, in the town proper, was the monument of his repose. The
cliff is still there; and a winding staircase, in the latest taste,
enables you conveniently to explore its recesses. These sacred niches
are scooped out of the rock, and will give you an impression if you
cannot do without one. You will feel them to be sufficiently venerable
when you learn that the particular pigeon-hole of Saint Gatianus, the
first Christian missionary to Gaul, dates from the third century. They
have been dealt with as the Catholic Church deals with most of such
places to-day; polished and furbished up, labelled and
ticketed--_edited_, with notes, in short, like an old book. The process
is a mistake--the early editions had more sanctity. The modern buildings
(of the Sacred Heart), on which you look down from these points of
vantage, are in the vulgar taste which sets its so mechanical stamp on
all new Catholic work; but there was nevertheless a great sweetness in
the scene. The afternoon was lovely, and it was flushing to a close. The
large garden stretched beneath us, blooming with fruit and and wine and
succulent promise, and beyond it flowed the shining river. The air was
still, the shadows were long, and the place, after all, was full of
memories, most of which might pass for virtuous. It certainly was better
than Plessis-les-Tours.

[Illustration]




Chapter iv

[Blois]


Your business at Tours is to make excursions; and if you make them all
you will be always under arms. The land is a rich reliquary, and an
hour's drive from the town in almost any direction will bring you to the
knowledge of some curious fragment of domestic or ecclesiastical
architecture, some turreted manor, some lonely tower, some gabled
village, some scene of something. Yet even if you do everything--which
was not my case--you cannot hope to tell everything, and, fortunately
for you, the excursions divide themselves into the greater and the less.
You may achieve most of the greater in a week or two; but a summer in
Touraine (which, by the way, must be a

[Illustration: BLOIS]

delectable thing) would hold none too many days for the others. If you
come down to Tours from Paris your best economy is to spend a few days
at Blois, where a clumsy but rather attractive little inn on the edge of
the river will offer you a certain amount of that familiar and
intermittent hospitality which a few weeks spent in the French provinces
teaches you to regard as the highest attainable form of accommodation.
Such an economy I was unable to practise. I could only go to Blois (from
Tours) to spend the day; but this feat I accomplished twice over. It is
a very sympathetic little town, as we say nowadays, and a week there
would be sociable even without company. Seated on the north bank of the
Loire, it presents a bright, clean face to the sun and has that aspect
of cheerful leisure which belongs to all white towns that reflect
themselves in shining waters. It is the water-front only of Blois,
however, that exhibits this fresh complexion; the interior is of a
proper brownness, as old sallow books are bound in vellum. The only
disappointment is perforce the discovery that the castle, which is the
special object of one's pilgrimage, does not overhang the river, as I
had always allowed myself to understand. It overhangs the town, but is
scarcely visible from the stream. That peculiar good fortune is reserved
for Amboise and Chaumont.

The Château de Blois is one of the most beautiful and elaborate of all
the old royal residences of this part of France, and I suppose it should
have all the honours of my description. As you cross its threshold you
step straight into the sunshine and storm of the French Renaissance. But
it is too rich to describe--I can only pick out the high lights. It must
be premised that in speaking of it as we see it to-day we speak of a
monument unsparingly restored. The work of restoration has been as
ingenious as it is profuse, but it rather chills the imagination. This
is perhaps almost the first thing you feel as you approach the castle
from the streets of the town. These little streets, as they leave the
river, have pretensions to romantic steepness; one of them, indeed,
which resolves itself into a high staircase with divergent wings (the
_escalier monumental_), achieved this result so successfully as to
remind me vaguely--I hardly know why--of the great slope of the Capitol,
beside the Ara Coeli, at Rome. The view of that part of the castle which
figures to-day as the back (it is the only aspect I had seen reproduced)
exhibits the marks of restoration with the greatest assurance. The long
façade, consisting only of balconied windows deeply recessed, erects
itself on the summit of a considerable hill, which gives a fine,
plunging movement to its foundations. The deep niches of the windows are
all aglow with colour. They have been repainted with red and blue,
relieved with gold figures; and each of them looks more like the royal
box at a theatre than like the aperture of a palace dark with memories.
For all this, however, and in spite of the fact that, as in some others
of the châteaux of Touraine (always excepting the colossal Chambord,
which is not in Touraine), there is less vastness than one had expected,
the least hospitable aspect of Blois is abundantly impressive. Here, as
elsewhere, lightness and grace are the keynote; and the recesses of the
windows, with their happy proportions, their sculpture and their colour,
are the hollow sockets of the human ornament. They need the figure of a
Francis I. to complete them, or of a Diane de Poitiers, or even of a
Henry III. The stand of this empty gilt cage emerges from a bed of light
verdure which has been allowed to mass itself there and which
contributes

[Illustration: BLOIS--THE CHÂTEAU]

to the springing look of the walls; while on the right it joins the most
modern portion of the castle, the building erected, on foundations of
enormous height and solidity, in 1635, by Gaston d'Orléans. This fine
frigid mansion--the proper view of it is from the court within--is one
of the masterpieces of François Mansard, whom a kind providence did not
allow to make over the whole palace in the superior manner of his
superior age. That had been a part of Gaston's plan--he was a blunderer
born, and this precious project was worthy of him. This execution of it
would surely have been one of the great misdeeds of history. Partially
performed, the misdeed is not altogether to be regretted; for as one
stands in the court of the castle and lets one's eye wander from the
splendid wing of Francis I.--which is the last word of free and joyous
invention--to the ruled lines and blank spaces of the ponderous pavilion
of Mansard, one makes one's reflections upon the advantage, in even the
least personal of the arts, of having something to say, and upon the
stupidity of a taste which had ended by becoming an aggregation of
negatives. Gaston's wing, taken by itself, has much of the _bel air_
which was to belong to the architecture of Louis XIV.; but, taken in
contrast to its flowering, laughing, living neighbour, it marks the
difference between inspiration and calculation. We scarcely grudge it
its place, however, for it adds a price to the rest of the pile.

We have entered the court, by the way, by jumping over the walls. The
more orthodox method is to follow a modern terrace which leads to the
left, from the side of the edifice that I began by speaking of, and
passes round, ascending, to a little square on a considerably higher
level, a square not, like the rather prosaic space on which the back (as
I have called it) looks out, a thoroughfare. This small empty _place_,
oblong in form, at once bright and quiet, and which ought to be
grass-grown, offers an excellent setting to the entrance-front of the
palace--the wing of Louis XII. The restoration here has been lavish; but
it was perhaps but an inevitable reaction against the injuries, still
more lavish, by which the unfortunate building had long been
overwhelmed. It had fallen into a state of ruinous neglect, relieved
only by the misuse proceeding from successive generations of soldiers,
for whom its charming chambers served as barrack-room. Whitewashed,
mutilated, dishonoured, the castle of Blois may be said to have escaped
simply with its life. This is the history of Amboise as well, and is to
a certain extent the history of Chambord. Delightful, at any rate, was
the refreshed façade of Louis XII. as I stood and looked at it one
bright September morning. In that soft, clear, merry light of Touraine,
everything shows, everything speaks. Charming are the taste, the happy
proportions, the colour of this beautiful front, to which the new
feeling for a purely domestic architecture--an architecture of security
and tranquillity, in which art could indulge itself--gave an air of
youth and gladness. It is true that for a long time to come the castle
of Blois was neither very safe nor very quiet; but its dangers came from
within, from the evil passions of its inhabitants, and not from siege or
invasion. The front of Louis XII. is of red brick, crossed here and
there with purple; and the purple slate of the high roof, relieved with
chimneys beautifully treated and with the embroidered caps of pinnacles
and arches, with the porcupine of Louis, the ermine and the festooned
rope which formed the devices of Anne of Brittany--the tone of this
decorative roof carries out the mild glow of the wall. The wide, fair
windows open as if they had expanded to let in the rosy dawn of the
Renaissance. Charming, for that matter, are the windows of all the
châteaux of Touraine, with their squareness corrected (as it is not in
the Tudor architecture) by the curve of the upper corners, which gives
this line the look, above the expressive aperture, of a pencilled
eyebrow. The low door of this front is crowned by a high, deep niche, in
which, under a splendid canopy, stiffly astride of a stiffly-draped
charger, sits in profile an image of the good King Louis. Good as he had
been--the father of his people, as he was called (I believe he remitted
various taxes)--he was not good enough to pass muster at the Revolution;
and the effigy I have just described is no more than a reproduction of
the primitive statue demolished at that period.

Pass beneath it into the court, and the sixteenth century closes round
you. It is a pardonable flight of fancy to say that the expressive faces
of an age in which human passions lay very near the surface seem to peep
out at you from the windows, from the balconies, from the thick foliage
of the sculpture. The portion of the wing of Louis XII. that fronts
toward the court is supported on a deep arcade. On your right is the
wing erected by Francis I., the reverse of the mass of building which
you see on approaching the castle. This exquisite, this extravagant,
this transcendent piece of architecture is the most joyous utterance of
the French Renaissance. It is covered with an embroidery of sculpture in
which every detail is worthy of the hand of a goldsmith. In the middle
of it, or rather a little to the left, rises the famous winding
staircase (plausibly, but I believe not religiously, restored), which
even the ages which most misused it must vaguely have admired. It forms
a kind of chiselled cylinder, with wide interstices, so that the stairs
are open to the air. Every inch of this structure, of its balconies, its
pillars, its great central columns, is wrought over with lovely images,
strange and ingenious devices, prime among which is the great heraldic
salamander of Francis I. The salamander is everywhere at Blois--over the
chimneys, over the doors, on the walls. This whole quarter of the castle
bears the stamp of that eminently pictorial prince. The running cornice
along the top of the front is like an unfolded, an elongated bracelet.
The windows of the attic are like shrines for saints. The gargoyles, the
medallions, the statuettes, the festoons are like the elaboration of
some precious cabinet rather than the details of a building exposed to
the weather and to the ages. In the interior there is a profusion of
restoration, and it is all restoration in colour. This has been,
evidently, a work of great energy and cost, but it will easily strike
you as overdone. The universal freshness is a discord, a false note; it
seems to light up the dusky past with an unnatural glare. Begun in the
reign of Louis Philippe, this terrible process--the more terrible always
the better case you conceive made out for it--has been carried so far
that there is now scarcely a square inch of the interior that preserves
the colour of the past. It is true that the place had been so coated
over with modern abuse that something was needed to keep it alive; it is
only perhaps a pity the clever doctors, not content with saving its
life, should have undertaken to restore its bloom. The love of
consistency, in such a business, is a dangerous lure. All the old
apartments have been rechristened, as it were; the geography of the
castle has been re-established. The guard-rooms, the bedrooms, the
closets, the oratories have recovered their identity. Every spot
connected with the murder of the Duke of Guise is pointed out by a
small, shrill boy, who takes you from room to room and who has learned
his lesson in perfection. The place is full of Catherine de'Medici, of
Henry III., of memories, of ghosts, of echoes, of possible evocations
and revivals. It is covered with crimson and gold. The fireplaces and
the ceilings are magnificent; they look like expensive "sets" at the
grand opera.

I should have mentioned that below, in the court, the front of the wing
of Gaston d'Orléans faces you as you enter, so that the place is a
course of French history. Inferior in beauty and grace to the other
portions of the castle, the wing is yet a nobler monument than the
memory of Gaston deserves. The second of the sons of Henry IV.--who was
no more fortunate as a father than as a husband--younger brother of
Louis XIII. and father of the great Mademoiselle, the most celebrated,
most ambitious, most self-complacent and most unsuccessful _fille à
marier_ in French history, passed in enforced retirement at the castle
of Blois the close of a life of clumsy intrigues against Cardinal
Richelieu, in which his rashness was only equalled by his pusillanimity
and his ill-luck by his inaccessibility to correction, and which, after
so many follies and shames, was properly summed up in the
project--begun, but not completed--of demolishing the beautiful
habitation of his exile in order to erect a better one. With Gaston
d'Orléans, however, who lived there without dignity, the history of the
Château de Blois declines. Its interesting period is that of the wars of
religion. It was the chief residence of Henry III., and the scene of the
principal events of his depraved and dramatic rule. It has been restored
more than enough, as I have said, by architects and decorators; the
visitor, as he moves through its empty rooms, which are at once
brilliant and ill-lighted (they have not been refurnished), undertakes a
little restoration of his own. His imagination helps itself from the
things that remain; he tries to see the life of the sixteenth century in
its form and dress--its turbulence, its passions, its loves and hates,
its treacheries, falsities, sincerities, faith, its latitude of personal
development, its presentation of the whole nature, its nobleness of
costume, charm of speech, splendour of taste, unequalled
picturesqueness. The picture is full of movement, of contrasted light
and darkness, full altogether of abominations. Mixed up with them all is
the great theological motive, so that the drama wants little to make it
complete. What episode was ever more perfect--looked at as a dramatic
occurrence--than the murder of the Duke of Guise? The insolent
prosperity of the victim; the weakness, the vices, the terrors, of the
author of the deed; the perfect execution of the plot; the accumulation
of horror in what followed it--render it, as a crime, one of the classic
things.

But we must not take the Château de Blois too hard: I went there, after
all, by way of entertainment. If among these sinister memories your
visit should threaten to prove a tragedy, there is an excellent way of
removing the impression. You may treat yourself at Blois to a very
cheerful afterpiece. There is a charming industry practised there, and
practised in charming conditions. Follow the bright little quay down the
river till you get quite out of the town and reach the point where the
road beside the Loire becomes sinuous and attractive, turns the corner
of diminutive headlands and makes you wonder what is beyond. Let not
your curiosity induce you, however, to pass by a modest white villa
which overlooks the stream, enclosed in a fresh little court; for here
dwells an artist--an artist in faience. There is no sort of sign, and
the place looks peculiarly private. But if you ring at the gate you will
not be turned away. You will, on the contrary, be ushered upstairs into
a parlour--there is nothing resembling a shop--encumbered with specimens
of remarkably handsome pottery. The ware is of the best, a careful
reproduction of old forms, colours, devices; and the master of the
establishment is one of those completely artistic types that are often
found in France. His reception is as friendly as his work is ingenious;
and I think it is not too much to say that you like the work better
because he has produced it. His vases, cups and jars, lamps, platters,
_plaques_, with their brilliant glaze, their innumerable figures, their
family likeness and wide variations, are scattered through his occupied
rooms; they serve at once as his stock-in-trade and as household
ornament. As we all know, this is an age of prose, of machinery, of
wholesale production, of coarse and hasty processes. But one brings away
from the establishment of the very intelligent M. Ulysse the sense of a
less eager activity and a greater search for perfection. He has but a
few workmen and he gives them plenty of time. The place makes a little
vignette, leaves an impression--the quiet white house in its garden on
the road by the wide, clear river, without the smoke, the bustle, the
ugliness, of so much of our modern industry. It struck me as an effort
Mr. Ruskin might have inspired and Mr. William Morris--though that be
much to say--have forgiven.

[Illustration]




Chapter v

[Chambord]


The second time I went to Blois I took a carriage for Chambord, and came
back by the Château de Cheverny and the forest of Russy--a charming
little expedition, to which the beauty of the afternoon (the finest in a
rainy season that was spotted with bright days) contributed not a
little. To go to Chambord you cross the Loire, leave it on one side and
strike away through a country in which salient features become less and
less numerous and which at last has no other quality than a look of
intense and peculiar rurality--the characteristic, even when it be not
the charm, of so much of the landscape of France. This is not the
appearance of wildness, for it goes with great cultivation; it is simply
the presence of the delving, drudging, economising peasant. But it is a
deep, unrelieved rusticity. It is a peasant's landscape; not, as in
England, a landlord's. On the way to Chambord you enter the flat and
sandy Sologne. The wide horizon opens out like a great _potager_,
without interruptions, without an eminence, with here and there a long,
low stretch of wood. There is an absence of hedges, fences, signs of
property; everything is absorbed in the general flatness--the patches of
vineyard, the scattered cottages, the villages, the children (planted
and staring and almost always pretty), the women in the fields, the
white caps, the faded blouses, the big sabots. At the end of an hour's
drive (they assure you at Blois that even with two horses you will spend
double that time), I passed through a sort of gap in a wall which does
duty as the gateway of the domain of a proscribed pretender. I followed
a straight avenue through a disfeatured park--the park of Chambord has
twenty-one miles of circumference; a very sandy, scrubby, melancholy
plantation, in which the timber must have been cut many times over and
is to-day a mere tangle of brushwood. Here, as in so many spots in
France, the traveller perceives that he is in a land of revolutions.
Nevertheless its great extent and the long perspective of its avenues
give this frugal shrubbery a certain state; just as its shabbiness
places it in agreement with one of the strongest impressions awaiting
you. You pursue one of these long perspectives a proportionate time, and
at last you see the chimneys and pinnacles of Chambord rise apparently
out of the ground. The filling-in of the wide moats that formerly
surrounded it has, in vulgar parlance, let it down and given it a
monstrous over-crowned air that is at the same time a magnificent
Orientalism. The towers, the turrets, the cupolas, the gables, the
lanterns, the chimneys look more like the spires of a city than the
salient points of a single building. You emerge from the avenue and
find yourself at the foot of an enormous fantastic mass. Chambord has a
strange mixture of society and solitude. A little village clusters
within view of its liberal windows, and a couple of inns near by offer
entertainment to pilgrims. These things of course are incidents of the
political proscription which hangs its thick veil over the place.
Chambord is truly royal--royal in its great scale, its grand air, its
indifference to common considerations. If a cat may look at a king, a
tavern may look at a palace. I enjoyed my visit to this extraordinary
structure as much as if I had been a legitimist; and indeed there is
something interesting in any monument of a great system, any bold
presentation of a tradition.

You leave your vehicle at one of the inns, which are very decent and
tidy and in which every one is very civil, as if in this latter respect
the neighbourhood of a Court veritably set the fashion, and you proceed
across the grass and the gravel to a small door, a door infinitely
subordinate and conferring no title of any kind on those who enter it.
Here you ring a bell, which a highly respectable person answers (a
person perceptibly affiliated, again, to the old regime), after which
she ushers you over a vestibule into an inner court. Perhaps the
strongest impression I got at Chambord came to me as I stood in this
court. The woman who admitted me did not come with me; I was to find my
guide somewhere else. The specialty of Chambord is its prodigious round
towers. There are, I believe, no less than eight of them, placed at each
angle of the inner and outer square of buildings; for the castle is in
the form of a larger structure which encloses a smaller one. One of
these towers stood before me in the court; it seemed to fling its
shadow

[Illustration: CHAMBORD]

over the place; while above, as I looked up, the pinnacles and gables,
the enormous chimneys, soared into the bright blue air. The place was
empty and silent; shadows of gargoyles, of extraordinary projections,
were thrown across the clear grey surfaces. One felt that the whole
thing was monstrous. A cicerone appeared, a languid young man in a
rather shabby livery, and led me about with a mixture of the impatient
and the desultory, of condescension and humility. I do not profess to
understand the plan of Chambord, and I may add that I do not even desire
to do so; for it is much more entertaining to think of it, as you can so
easily, as an irresponsible, insoluble labyrinth. Within it is a
wilderness of empty chambers, a royal and romantic barrack. The exiled
prince to whom it gives its title has not the means to keep up four
hundred rooms; he contents himself with preserving the huge outside. The
repairs of the prodigious roof alone must absorb a large part of his
revenue. The great feature of the interior is the celebrated double
staircase, rising straight through the building, with two courses of
steps, so that people may ascend and descend without meeting. This
staircase is a truly majestic piece of humour; it gives you the note, as
it were, of Chambord. It opens on each landing to a vast guard-room, in
four arms, radiations of the winding shaft. My guide made me climb to
the great open-work lantern which, springing from the roof at the
termination of the rotund staircase (surmounted here by a smaller one),
forms the pinnacle of the bristling crown of the pile. This lantern is
tipped with a huge _fleur-de-lis_ in stone--the only one, I believe,
that the Revolution did not succeed in pulling down. Here, from narrow
windows, you look over the wide, flat country and the tangled,
melancholy park, with the rotation of its straight avenues. Then you
walk about the roof in a complication of galleries, terraces, balconies,
through the multitude of chimneys and gables. This roof, which is in
itself a sort of castle in the air, has an extravagant, fabulous
quality, and with its profuse ornamentation--the salamander of Francis
I. is a constant motive--its lonely pavements, its sunny niches, the
balcony that looks down over the closed and grass-grown main entrance, a
strange, half-sad, half-brilliant charm. The stonework is covered with
fine mould. There are places that reminded me of some of those quiet
mildewed corners of courts and terraces into which the traveller who
wanders through the Vatican looks down from neglected windows. They show
you two or three furnished rooms, with Bourbon portraits, hideous
tapestries from the ladies of France, a collection of the toys of the
_enfant du miracle_, all military and of the finest make. "Tout cela
fonctionne," the guide said of these miniature weapons; and I wondered,
if he should take it into his head to fire off his little cannon, how
much harm the Comte de Chambord would do.

From below the castle would look crushed by the redundancy of its upper
protuberances if it were not for the enormous girth of its round towers,
which appear to give it a robust lateral development. These towers,
however, fine as they are in their way, struck me as a little stupid;
they are the exaggeration of an exaggeration. In a building erected
after the days of defence and proclaiming its peaceful character from
its hundred embroideries and cupolas, they seem to indicate a want of
invention. I shall risk the accusation of bad taste if I say that,
impressive as it is, the Château de Chambord seemed to me to have
altogether a touch of that quality of stupidity. The trouble is that it
stands for nothing very momentous; it has not happened, in spite of
sundry vicissitudes, to have a strongly-marked career. Compared with
that of Blois and Amboise its past is rather vacant; and one feels to a
certain extent the contrast between its pompous appearance and its
spacious but somewhat colourless annals. It had indeed the good fortune
to be erected by Francis I., whose name by itself expresses a good deal
of history. Why he should have built a palace in those sandy plains will
ever remain an unanswered question, for kings have never been obliged to
give reasons. In addition to the fact that the country was rich in game
and that Francis was a passionate hunter, it is suggested by M. de la
Saussaye, the author of the very complete little account of the place
which you may buy at the bookseller's at Blois, that he was governed in
his choice of the site by the chance that a charming woman had
previously lived there. The Comtesse de Thoury had a manor in the
neighbourhood, and the Comtesse de Thoury had been the object of a
youthful passion on the part of the most susceptible of princes before
his accession to the throne. This great pile was reared, therefore,
according to M. de la Saussaye, as a _souvenir de premières amours_! It
is certainly a very massive memento; and if these tender passages were
proportionate to the building that commemorates them, the flame blazed
indeed. There has been much discussion as to the architect employed by
Francis I., and the honour of having designed this splendid residence
has been claimed for several of the Italian artists who early in the
sixteenth century came to seek patronage in France. It seems well
established to-day, however, that Chambord was the work neither of
Primaticcio, of Vignola, nor of Il Rosso, all of whom have left some
trace of their sojourn in France; but of an obscure yet very complete
genius, Pierre Nepveu, known as Pierre Trinqueau, who is designated in
the papers which preserve in some degree the history of the origin of
the edifice, as the _maistre de l'oeuvre de maçonnerie_. Behind this
modest title, apparently, we must recognise one of the most original
talents of the French Renaissance; and it is a proof of the vigour of
the artistic life of that period that, brilliant production being
everywhere abundant, an artist of so high a value should not have been
treated by his contemporaries as a celebrity. We make our celebrities
to-day at smaller cost.

The immediate successors of Francis I. continued to visit Chambord; but
it was neglected by Henry IV. and was never afterwards a favourite
residence of any French king. Louis XIV. appeared there on several
occasions, and the apparition was characteristically brilliant; but
Chambord could not long detain a monarch who had gone to the expense of
creating a Versailles ten miles from Paris. With Versailles,
Fontainebleau, Saint-Germain and Saint-Cloud within easy reach of their
capital, the later French sovereigns had little reason to take the air
in the dreariest province of their kingdom. Chambord therefore suffered
from royal indifference, though in the last century a use was found for
its deserted halls. In 1725 it was occupied by the luckless Stanislaus
Leczynski, who spent the greater part of his life in being elected King
of Poland and being ousted from his throne, and who, at this time a
refugee in France, had found a compensation for some of his misfortunes
in marrying his daughter to Louis XV. He lived eight years at Chambord
and filled up the moats of the castle. In 1748 it found an illustrious
tenant in the person of Maurice de Saxe, the victor of Fontenoy, who,
however, two years after he had taken possession of it, terminated a
life which would have been longer had he been less determined to make it
agreeable. The Revolution, of course, was not kind to Chambord. It
despoiled it in so far as possible of every vestige of its royal origin,
and swept like a whirlwind through apartments to which upwards of two
centuries had contributed a treasure of decoration and furniture. In
that wild blast these precious things were destroyed or for ever
scattered. In 1791 an odd proposal was made to the French Government by
a company of English Quakers, who had conceived the bold idea of
establishing in the palace a manufacture of some peaceful commodity not
to-day recorded. Napoleon allotted Chambord, as a "dotation," to one of
his marshals, Berthier, for whose benefit it was converted, in
Napoleonic fashion, into the so-called principality of Wagram. By the
Princess of Wagram, the marshal's widow, it was, after the Restoration,
sold to the trustees of a national subscription which had been
established for the purpose of presenting it to the infant Duke of
Bordeaux, then prospective King of France. The presentation was duly
made; but the Comte de Chambord, who had changed his title in
recognition of the gift, was despoiled of his property by the government
of Louis Philippe. He appealed for redress to the tribunals of his
country; and the consequence of his appeal was an interminable
litigation, by which, however, finally, after the lapse of twenty-five
years, he was established in his rights. In 1871 he paid his first visit
to the domain which had been offered him half a century before, a term
of which he had spent forty years in exile. It was from Chambord that
he dated his famous letter of the 5th of July of that year--the letter,
directed to his so-called subjects, in which he waves aloft the white
flag of the Bourbons. This rare miscalculation--virtually an invitation
to the French people to repudiate, as their national ensign, that
immortal tricolour, the flag of the Revolution and the Empire, under
which they have won the glory which of all glories has hitherto been
dearest to them and which is associated with the most romantic, the most
heroic, the epic, the consolatory, period of their history--this
luckless manifesto, I say, appears to give the measure of the political
wisdom of the excellent Henry V. The proposal should have had less
simplicity or the people less irony.

On the whole Chambord makes a great impression; and the hour I was
there, while the yellow afternoon light slanted upon the September
woods, there was a dignity in its desolation. It spoke, with a muffled
but audible voice, of the vanished monarchy, which had been so strong,
so splendid, but to-day had become a vision almost as fantastic as the
cupolas and chimneys that rose before me. I thought, while I lingered
there, of all the fine things it takes to make up such a monarchy; and
how one of them is a superfluity of mouldering, empty palaces. Chambord
is touching--that is the best word for it; and if the hopes of another
restoration are in the follies of the Republic, a little reflection on
that eloquence of ruin ought to put the Republic on its guard. A
sentimental tourist may venture to remark that in presence of all the
haunted houses that appeal in this mystical manner to the retrospective
imagination it cannot afford to be foolish. I thought of all this as I
drove back to Blois by the way of the Château de Cheverny. The road took
us out of the park of Chambord, but through a region of flat woodland,
where the trees were not mighty, and again into the prosy plain of the
Sologne--a thankless soil to sow, I believe, but lately much amended by
the magic of cheerful French industry and thrift. The light had already
begun to fade, and my drive reminded me of a passage in some rural novel
of Madame Sand. I passed a couple of timber and plaster churches, which
looked very old, black and crooked, and had lumpish wooden porches and
galleries encircling the base. By the time I reached Cheverny the clear
twilight had approached. It was late to ask to be allowed to visit an
inhabited house; but it was the hour at which I like best to visit
almost anything. My coachman drew up before a gateway, in a high wall,
which opened upon a short avenue, along which I took my way on foot; the
coachmen in those parts being, for reasons best known to themselves,
mortally averse to driving up to a house. I answered the challenge of a
very tidy little portress who sat, in company with a couple of children,
enjoying the evening air in front of her lodge, and who told me to walk
a little farther and turn to the right. I obeyed her to the letter, and
my turn brought me into sight of a house as charming as an old manor in
a fairy tale. I had but a rapid and partial view of Cheverny; but that
view was a glimpse of perfection. A light, sweet mansion stood looking
over a wide green lawn, over banks of flowers and groups of trees. It
had a striking character of elegance, produced partly by a series of
Renaissance busts let into circular niches in the façade. The place
looked so private, so reserved, that it seemed an act of violence to
ring, a stranger and foreigner, at the graceful door. But if I had not
rung I should be unable to express--as it is such a pleasure to do--my
sense of the exceeding courtesy with which this admirable house is
shown. It was near the dinner-hour--the most sacred hour of the day; but
I was freely conducted into the inhabited apartments. They are extremely
beautiful. What I chiefly remember is the charming staircase of white
embroidered stone, and the great _salle des gardes_ and _chambre à
coucher du roi_ on the second floor. Cheverny, built in 1634, is of a
much later date than the other royal residences of this part of France;
it belongs to the end of the Renaissance and has a touch of the rococo.
The guard-room is a superb apartment; and as it contains little save its
magnificent ceiling and fireplace and certain dim tapestries on its
walls, you the more easily take the measure of its noble proportions.
The servant opened the shutters of a single window, and the last rays of
the twilight slanted into the rich brown gloom. It was in the same
picturesque fashion that I saw the bedroom (adjoining) of Henry IV.,
where a legendary-looking bed, draped in folds long unaltered, defined
itself in the haunted dusk. Cheverny remains to me a very charming, a
partly mysterious vision. I drove back to Blois in the dark, some nine
miles, through the forest of Russy, which belongs to the State and
which, though consisting apparently of small timber, looked under the
stars sufficiently vast and primeval. There was a damp autumnal smell
and the occasional sound of a stirring thing; and as I moved through the
evening air I thought of Francis I. and Henry IV.

[Illustration]




Chapter vi

[Amboise]


You may go to Amboise either from Blois or from Tours; it is about
half-way between these towns. The great point is to go, especially if
you have put it off repeatedly; and to go, if possible, on a day when
the great view of the Loire, which you enjoy from the battlements and
terraces, presents itself under a friendly sky. Three persons, of whom
the author of these lines was one, spent the greater part of a perfect
Sunday morning in looking at it. It was astonishing, in the course of
the rainiest season in the memory of the oldest Tourangeau, how many
perfect days we found to our hand. The town of Amboise lies, like Tours,
on the left bank of the river--a little white-faced town staring across
an admirable bridge and leaning, behind, as it were, against the
pedestal of rock on which the dark castle masses itself. The town is so
small, the pedestal so big and the castle so high and striking, that
the clustered houses at the base of the rock are like the crumbs that
have fallen from a well-laden table. You pass among them, however, to
ascend by a circuit to the château, which you attack, obliquely, from
behind. It is the property of the Comte de Paris, another pretender to
the French throne; having come to him remotely, by inheritance, from his
ancestor, the Duc de Penthièvre, who toward the close of the last
century bought it from the Crown, which had recovered it after a lapse.
Like the castle of Blois, it has been injured and defaced by base uses,
but, unlike the castle of Blois, it has not been completely restored.
"It is very, very dirty, but very curious"--it is in these terms that I
heard it described by an English lady who was generally to be found
engaged upon a tattered Tauchnitz in the little _salon de lecture_ of
the hotel at Tours. The description is not inaccurate; but it should be
said that if part of the dirtiness of Amboise is the result of its
having served for years as a barrack and as a prison, part of it comes
from the presence of restoring stonemasons, who have woven over a
considerable portion of it a mask of scaffolding. There is a good deal
of neatness as well, and the restoration of some of the parts seems
finished. This process, at Amboise, consists for the most part simply of
removing the vulgar excrescences of the last two centuries.

The interior is virtually a blank, the old apartments having been
chopped up into small modern rooms; it will have to be completely
reconstructed. A worthy woman with a military profile and that sharp,
positive manner which the goodwives who show you through the châteaux of
Touraine are rather apt to have, and in whose high respectability, to
say nothing of the frill of

[Illustration: AMBOISE--THE CHÂTEAU]

her cap and the cut of her thick brown dress, my companions and I
thought we discovered the particular note, or _nuance_, of Orleanism--a
competent, appreciative, peremptory person, I say--attended us through
the particularly delightful hour we spent upon the ramparts of Amboise.
Denuded and disfeatured within and bristling without with bricklayers'
ladders, the place was yet extraordinarily impressive and interesting. I
should mention that we spent a great deal of time in looking at the
view. Sweet was the view, and magnificent; we preferred it so much to
certain portions of the interior, and to occasional effusions of
historical information, that the old lady with the profile sometimes
lost patience with us. We laid ourselves open to the charge of
preferring it even to the little chapel of Saint Hubert, which stands on
the edge of the great terrace and has, over the portal, a wonderful
sculpture of the miraculous hunt of that holy man. In the way of plastic
art this elaborate scene is the gem of Amboise. It seemed to us that we
had never been in a place where there are so many points of vantage to
look down from. In the matter of position Amboise is certainly supreme
in the list of perched places; and I say this with a proper recollection
of the claims of Chaumont and of Loches--which latter, by the way (the
afterthought is due), is not on the Loire. The platforms, the bastions,
the terraces, the high-niched windows and balconies, the hanging gardens
and dizzy crenellations, of this complicated structure, keep you in
perpetual intercourse with an immense horizon. The great feature of the
place is the obligatory round tower which occupies the northern end of
it, and which has now been completely restored. It is of astounding
size, a fortress in itself, and contains, instead of a staircase, a
wonderful inclined plane, so wide and gradual that a coach and four may
be driven to the top. This colossal cylinder has to-day no visible use;
but it corresponds, happily enough, with the great circle of the
prospect. The gardens of Amboise, lifted high aloft, covering the
irregular remnants of the platform on which the castle stands and making
up in picturesqueness what they lack in extent, constitute of course but
a scanty domain. But bathed, as we found them, in the autumn sunshine
and doubly private from their aerial site, they offered irresistible
opportunities for a stroll interrupted, as one leaned against their low
parapets, by long contemplative pauses. I remember in particular a
certain terrace planted with clipped limes upon which we looked down
from the summit of the big tower. It seemed from that point to be
absolutely necessary to one's happiness to go down and spend the rest of
the morning there; it was an ideal place to walk to and fro and talk.
Our venerable conductress, to whom our relation had gradually become
more filial, permitted us to gratify this innocent wish--to the extent,
that is, of taking a turn or two under the mossy _tilleuls_. At the end
of this terrace is the low door, in a wall, against the top of which, in
1498, Charles VIII., according to an accepted tradition, knocked his
head to such good purpose that he died. It was within the walls of
Amboise that his widow, Anne of Brittany, already in mourning for three
children, two of whom we have seen commemorated in sepulchral marble at
Tours, spent the first violence of that grief which was presently
dispelled by a union with her husband's cousin and successor, Louis XII.
Amboise was a frequent resort of the French Court during the sixteenth
century; it was here that the young Mary Stuart spent sundry hours of
her first marriage. The wars of religion have left here the ineffaceable
stain which they left wherever they passed. An imaginative visitor at
Amboise to-day may fancy that the traces of blood are mixed with the red
rust on the crossed iron bars of the grim-looking balcony to which the
heads of the Huguenots executed on the discovery of the conspiracy of La
Renaudie are rumoured to have been suspended. There was room on the
stout balustrade--an admirable piece of work--for a ghastly array. The
same rumour represents Catherine de'Medici and the young queen as
watching from this balcony the _noyades_ of the captured Huguenots in
the Loire. The facts of history are bad enough; the fictions are, if
possible, worse; but there is little doubt that the future Queen of
Scots learnt the first lessons of life at a horrible school. If in
subsequent years she was a prodigy of innocence and virtue, it was not
the fault of her whilom mother-in-law, of her uncles of the house of
Guise, or of the examples presented to her either at the windows of the
castle of Amboise or in its more private recesses. It was difficult to
believe in these dark deeds, however, as we looked through the golden
morning at the placidity of the far-shining Loire. The ultimate
consequence of this spectacle was a desire to follow the river as far as
the castle of Chaumont. It is true that the cruelties practised of old
at Amboise might have seemed less phantasmal to persons destined to
suffer from a modern form of inhumanity. The mistress of the little inn
at the base of the castle-rock--it stands very pleasantly beside the
river, and we had breakfasted there--declared to us that the Château de
Chaumont, which is often during the autumn closed to visitors, was at
that particular moment standing so wide open to receive us that it was
our duty to hire one of her carriages and drive thither with speed. This
assurance was so satisfactory that we presently found ourselves seated
in this wily woman's most commodious vehicle and rolling, neither too
fast nor too slow, along the margin of the Loire. The drive of about an
hour, beneath constant clumps of chestnuts, was charming enough to have
been taken for itself; and indeed when we reached Chaumont we saw that
our reward was to be simply the usual reward of virtue, the
consciousness of having attempted the right. The Château de Chaumont was
inexorably closed; so we learned from a talkative lodge-keeper, who gave
what grace she could to her refusal. This good woman's dilemma was
almost touching; she wished to reconcile two impossibles. The castle was
not to be visited, for the family of its master was staying there; and
yet she was loath to turn away a party of which she was good enough to
say that it had a _grand genre_; for, as she also remarked, she had her
living to earn. She tried to arrange a compromise, one of the elements
of which was that we should descend from our carriage and trudge up a
hill which would bring us to a designated point where, over the paling
of the garden, we might obtain an oblique and surreptitious view of a
small portion of the castle walls. This suggestion led us to inquire (of
each other) to what degree of baseness it is lawful for an enlightened
lover of the picturesque to resort in order not to have a blank page in
his collection. One of our trio decided characteristically against any
form of derogation; so she sat in the carriage and sketched some object
that was public property while her two companions, who were not so
proud, trudged up a muddy ascent which formed a kind of back-stairs. It
is perhaps no more than they deserved that they were disappointed.
Chaumont is feudal, if you please; but the modern spirit is in
possession. It forms a vast clean-scraped mass, with big round towers,
ungarnished with a leaf of ivy or a patch of moss, surrounded by gardens
of moderate extent (save where the muddy lane of which I speak passes
near it), and looking rather like an enormously magnified villa. The
great merit of Chaumont is its position, which almost exactly resembles
that of Amboise; it sweeps the river up and down and seems to look over
half the province. This, however, was better appreciated as, after
coming down the hill and re-entering the carriage, we drove across the
long suspension-bridge which crosses the Loire just beyond the village
and over which we made our way to the small station of Onzain, at the
farther end, to take the train back to Tours. Look back from the middle
of this bridge; the whole picture composes, as the painters say. The
towers, the pinnacles, the fair front of the château, perched above its
fringe of garden and the rusty roofs of the village and facing the
afternoon sky, which is reflected also in the great stream that sweeps
below, all this makes a contribution to your happiest memories of
Touraine.

[Illustration]




Chapter vii

[Chenonceaux]


We never went to Chinon; it was a fatality. We planned it a dozen times;
but the weather interfered, or the trains didn't suit, or one of the
party was fatigued with the adventures of the day before. This excursion
was so much postponed that it was finally postponed to everything.
Besides, we had to go to Chenonceaux, to Azay-le-Rideau, to Langeais, to
Loches. So I have not the memory of Chinon; I have only the regret. But
regret, as well as memory, has its visions; especially when, like
memory, it is assisted by photographs. The castle of Chinon in this form
appears to me as an enormous ruin, a mediæval fortress of the extent
almost of a city. It covers a hill above the Vienne, and after being
impregnable in its time is indestructible to-day. (I risk this phrase in
the face of the prosaic truth. Chinon, in the days when it was a prize,
more than once suffered capture, and at present it is crumbling inch by
inch. It is apparent, however, I believe, that these inches encroach
little upon acres of masonry.) It was in the castle that Jeanne Dare had
her first interview with Charles VII., and it is in the town that
François Rabelais is supposed to have been born. To the castle,
moreover, the lover of the picturesque is earnestly recommended to
direct his steps. But one always misses something, and I would rather
have missed Chinon than Chenonceaux. Fortunate exceedingly were the few
hours we passed on the spot on which we missed nothing.

"In 1747," says Jean-Jacques Rousseau in his "Confessions," "we went to
spend the autumn in Touraine, at the Château of Chenonceaux, a royal
residence upon the Cher, built by Henry II. for Diana of Poitiers, whose
initials are still to be seen there, and now in possession of M. Dupin,
the farmer-general. We amused ourselves greatly at this fine place; the
living was of the best, and I became as fat as a monk. We made a great
deal of music and acted comedies."

This is the only description that Rousseau gives of one of the most
romantic houses in France and of an episode that must have counted as
one of the most agreeable in his uncomfortable career. The eighteenth
century contented itself with general epithets; and when Jean-Jacques
has said that Chenonceaux was a "beau lieu," he thinks himself absolved
from further characterisation. We later sons of time have, both for our
pleasure and our pain, invented the fashion of special terms, and I am
afraid that even common decency obliges me to pay some larger tribute
than this to the architectural gem of Touraine. Fortunately I can
discharge my debt with gratitude. In going from Tours you leave the
valley of the Loire and enter that of the Cher, and at the end of about
an hour you see the turrets of the castle on your right, among the
trees, down in the meadows, beside the quiet little river. The station
and the village are about ten minutes' walk from the château, and the
village contains a very tidy inn, where, if you are not in too great a
hurry to commune with the shades of the royal favourite and the jealous
queen, you will perhaps stop and order a dinner to be ready for you in
the evening. A straight, tall avenue leads to the grounds of the castle;
what I owe to exactitude compels me to add that it is crossed by the
railway-line. The place is so arranged, however, that the château need
know nothing of passing trains--which pass, indeed, though the grounds
are not large, at a very sufficient distance. I may add that the trains
throughout this part of France have a noiseless, desultory, dawdling,
almost stationary quality, which makes them less of an offence than
usual. It was a Sunday afternoon and the light was yellow save under the
trees of the avenue, where, in spite of the waning of September, it was
duskily green. Three or four peasants, in festal attire, were strolling
about. On a bench at the beginning of the avenue sat a man with two
women. As I advanced with my companions he rose, after a sudden stare,
and approached me with a smile in which (to be Johnsonian for a moment)
certitude was mitigated by modesty and eagerness was embellished with
respect. He came toward me with a salutation that I had seen before, and
I am happy to say that after an instant I ceased to be guilty of the
brutality of not knowing where. There was only one place in the world
where people smile like that, only one place where the art of salutation
has that perfect grace. This excellent creature used to crook his arm,

[Illustration: CHENONCEAUX]

in Venice, when I stepped into my gondola; and I now laid my hand on
that member with the familiarity of glad recognition; for it was only
surprise that had kept me even for a moment from accepting the genial
Francesco as an ornament of the landscape of Touraine. What on
earth--the phrase is the right one--was a Venetian gondolier doing at
Chenonceaux? He had been brought from Venice, gondola and all, by the
mistress of the charming house, to paddle about on the Cher. Our meeting
was affectionate, though there was a kind of violence in seeing him so
far from home. He was too well dressed, too well fed; he had grown
stout, and his nose had the tinge of good claret. He remarked that the
life of the household to which he had the honour to belong was that of a
_casa regia_; which must have been a great change for poor Checco, whose
habits in Venice were not regal. However, he was the sympathetic Checco
still; and for five minutes after I left him I thought less about the
little pleasure-house by the Cher than about the palaces of the
Adriatic.

But attention was not long in coming round to the charming structure
that presently rose before us. The pale yellow front of the château, the
small scale of which is at first a surprise, rises beyond a considerable
court, at the entrance of which a massive and detached round tower, with
a turret on its brow (a relic of the building that preceded the actual
villa), appears to keep guard. This court is not enclosed--or is
enclosed at least only by the gardens, portions of which are at present
in process of radical readjustment. Therefore, though Chenonceaux has no
great height, its delicate façade stands up boldly enough. This façade,
one of the most finished things in Touraine, consists of two storeys,
surmounted by an attic which, as so often in the buildings of the
French Renaissance, is the richest part of the house. The high-pitched
roof contains three windows of beautiful design, covered with
embroidered caps and flowering into crocketed spires. The window above
the door is deeply niched; it opens upon a balcony made in the form of a
double pulpit--one of the most charming features of the front.
Chenonceaux is not large, as I say, but into its delicate compass is
packed a great deal of history--history which differs from that of
Amboise and Blois in being of the private and sentimental kind. The
echoes of the place, faint and far as they are to-day, are not
political, but personal. Chenonceaux dates, as a residence, from the
year 1515, when the shrewd Thomas Bohier, a public functionary who had
grown rich in handling the finances of Normandy and had acquired the
estate from a family which, after giving it many feudal lords, had
fallen into poverty, erected the present structure on the foundations of
an old mill. The design is attributed, with I know not what justice, to
Pierre Nepveu, _alias_ Trinqueau, the audacious architect of Chambord.
On the death of Bohier the house passed to his son, who, however, was
forced, under cruel pressure, to surrender it to the Crown in
compensation for a so-called deficit in the official accounts of this
rash parent and predecessor. Francis I. held the place till his death;
but Henry II., on ascending the throne, presented it out of hand to that
mature charmer, the admired of two generations, Diana of Poitiers. Diana
enjoyed it till the death of her protector; but when this event occurred
the widow of the monarch, who had been obliged to submit in silence, for
years, to the ascendency of a rival, took the most pardonable of all the
revenges with which the name of Catherine de'Medici is associated and
turned her out of doors. Diana was not in want of refuges, Catherine
went through the form of giving her Chaumont in exchange; but there was
only one Chenonceaux. Catherine devoted herself to making the place more
completely unique. The feature that renders it sole of its kind is not
appreciated till you wander round to either side of the house. If a
certain springing lightness is the characteristic of Chenonceaux, if it
bears in every line the aspect of a place of recreation--a place
intended for delicate, chosen pleasures--nothing can confirm this
expression better than the strange, unexpected movement with which, from
behind, it carries itself across the river. The earlier building stands
in the water; it had inherited the foundations of the mill destroyed by
Thomas Bohier. The first step therefore had been taken upon solid piles
of masonry; and the ingenious Catherine--she was a _raffinée_--simply
proceeded to take the others. She continued the piles to the opposite
bank of the Cher, and over them she threw a long, straight gallery of
two tiers. This part of the château, which mainly resembles a house
built upon a bridge and occupying its entire length, is of course the
great curiosity of Chenonceaux. It forms on each floor a charming
corridor, which, within, is illuminated from either side by the
flickering river-light. The architecture of these galleries, seen from
without, is less elegant than that of the main building, but the aspect
of the whole thing is delightful. I have spoken of Chenonceaux as a
"villa," using the word advisedly, for the place is neither a castle nor
a palace. It is a very exceptional villa, but it has the
villa-quality--the look of being intended for life in common. This look
is not at all contradicted by the wing across the Cher, which only
suggests indoor perspectives and intimate pleasures--walks in pairs on
rainy days; games and dances on autumn nights; together with as much as
may be of moonlighted dialogue (or silence) in the course of evenings
more genial still, in the well-marked recesses of windows.

It is safe to say that such things took place there in the last century,
during the kindly reign of Monsieur and Madame Dupin. This period
presents itself as the happiest in the annals of Chenonceaux. I know not
what festive train the great Diana may have led, and my imagination, I
am afraid, is only feebly kindled by the records of the luxurious
pastimes organised on the banks of the Cher by that terrible daughter of
the Medici whose appreciation of the good things of life was perfectly
consistent with a failure to perceive why others should live to enjoy
them. The best society that ever assembled there was collected at
Chenonceaux during the middle of the eighteenth century. This was
surely, in France at least, the age of good society, the period when the
"right people" made every haste to be born in time. Such people must of
course have belonged to the fortunate few--not to the miserable many;
for if a society be large enough to be good, it must also be small
enough. The sixty years that preceded the Revolution were the golden age
of fireside talk and of those amenities that proceed from the presence
of women in whom the social art is both instinctive and acquired. The
women of that period were, above all, good company; the fact is attested
in a thousand documents. Chenonceaux offered a perfect setting to free
conversation; and infinite joyous discourse must have mingled with the
liquid murmur of the Cher. Claude Dupin was not only a great man of
business, but a man of honour and a patron of knowledge; and his wife
was gracious, clever, and wise. They had acquired this famous property
by purchase (from one of the Bourbons, as Chenonceaux, for two centuries
after the death of Catherine de'Medici, remained constantly in princely
hands), and it was transmitted to their son, Dupin de Francueil,
grandfather of Madame George Sand. This lady, in her Correspondence,
lately published, describes a visit that she paid more than thirty years
ago to those members of her family who were still in possession. The
owner of Chenonceaux to-day[a] is the daughter of an Englishman
naturalised in France. But I have wandered far from my story, which is
simply a sketch of the surface of the place. Seen obliquely, from either
side, in combination with its bridge and gallery, the structure is
singular and fantastic, a striking example of a wilful and capricious
conception. Unfortunately all caprices are not so graceful and
successful, and I grudge the honour of this one to the false and
blood-polluted Catherine. (To be exact, I believe the arches of the
bridge were laid by the elderly Diana. It was Catherine, however, who
completed the monument.) Within, the house has been, as usual, restored.
The staircases and ceilings, in all the old royal residences of this
part of France, are the parts that have suffered least; many of them
have still much of the life of the old time about them. Some of the
chambers of Chenonceaux, however, encumbered as they are with modern
detail, derive a sufficiently haunted and suggestive look from the deep
setting of their beautiful windows, which thickens the shadows and makes
dark corners. There is a charming little Gothic chapel, with its apse
hanging over the water, fastened to the left flank of the house. Some of
the upper balconies, which look along the outer face of the gallery and
either up or down the river, are delightful protected nooks. We walked
through the lower gallery to the other bank of the Cher; this fine
apartment appeared to be for the moment a purgatory of ancient
furniture. It terminates rather abruptly; it simply stops, with a blank
wall. There ought, of course, to have been a pavilion here, though I
prefer very much the old defect to any modern remedy. The wall is not so
blank, however, but that it contains a door which opens on a rusty
drawbridge. This drawbridge traverses the small gap which divides the
end of the gallery from the bank of the stream. The house, therefore,
does not literally rest on opposite edges of the Cher, but rests on one
and just fails to rest on the other. The pavilion would have made that
up; but after a moment we ceased to miss this imaginary feature. We
passed the little drawbridge, and wandered awhile beside the river. From
this opposite bank the mass of the château looked more charming than
ever; and the little peaceful, lazy Cher, where two or three men were
fishing in the eventide, flowed under the clear arches and between the
solid pedestals of the part that spanned it, with the softest, vaguest
light on its bosom. This was the right perspective; we were looking
across the river of time. The whole scene was deliciously mild. The moon
came up; we passed back through the gallery and strolled about a little
longer in the gardens. It was very still. I met my old gondolier in the
twilight. He showed me his gondola, but I hated, somehow, to see it
there. I don't like, as the French say, to _mêler les genres_. A gondola
in a little flat French river? The image was not less irritating, if
less injurious, than the spectacle of a steamer in the Grand Canal,
which had driven me away from Venice a year and a half before. We took
our way back to the Bon Laboureur, and waited in the little inn-parlour
for a late train to Tours. We were not impatient, for we had an
excellent dinner to occupy us; and even after we had dined we were still
content to sit awhile and exchange remarks upon the superior
civilisation of France. Where else, at a village inn, should we have
fared so well? Where else should we have sat down to our refreshment
without condescension? There were a couple of countries in which it
would not have been happy for us to arrive hungry, on a Sunday evening,
at so modest an hostelry. At the little inn at Chenonceaux the _cuisine_
was not only excellent, but the service was graceful. We were waited on
by mademoiselle and her mamma; it was so that mademoiselle alluded to
the elder lady as she uncorked for us a bottle of Vouvray mousseux. We
were very comfortable, very genial; we even went so far as to say to
each other that Vouvray mousseux was a delightful wine. From this
opinion indeed one of our trio differed; but this member of the party
had already exposed herself to the charge of being too fastidious by
declining to descend from the carriage at Chaumont and take that
back-stairs view of the castle.

[a] 1884.

[Illustration]




Chapter viii

[Azay-le-Rideau]


Without fastidiousness it was fair to declare on the other hand that the
little inn at Azay-le-Rideau was very bad. It was terribly dirty and it
was in charge of a fat _mégère_ whom the appearance of four trustful
travellers--we were four, with an illustrious fourth, on that
occasion--roused apparently to fury. I attached great importance to this
incongruous hostess, for she uttered the only uncivil words I heard
spoken (in connection with any business of my own) during a tour of some
six weeks in France. Breakfast not at Azay-le-Rideau therefore, too
trustful traveller; or if you do so, be either very meek or very bold.
Breakfast not, save under stress of circumstance; but let no
circumstance whatever prevent your going to see the great house of the
place, which is a fair rival to Chenonceaux. The village lies close to
the gates, though after you pass these gates you leave it well behind. A
little avenue, as at Chenonceaux, leads to the castle,

[Illustration: AZAY-LE-RIDEAU]

making a pretty vista as you approach the sculptured doorway. Azay is a
most perfect and beautiful thing; I should place it third in any list of
the great houses of this part of France in which these houses should be
ranked according to charm. For beauty of detail it comes after Blois and
Chenonceaux, but it comes before Amboise and Chambord. On the other
hand, of course it is inferior in majesty to either of these vast
structures. Like Chenonceaux, it is a watery place, though it is more
meagrely moated than the small château on the Cher. It consists of a
large square _corps de logis_, with a round tower at each angle, rising
out of a somewhat too slumberous pond. The water--the water of the
Indre--surrounds it, but it is only on one side that it bathes its feet
in the moat. On one of the others stretches a little terrace, treated as
a garden, and in front prevails a wide court formed by a wing which, on
the right, comes forward. This front, covered with sculptures, is of the
richest, stateliest effect. The court is approached by a bridge over the
pond, and the house would reflect itself in this wealth of water if the
water were a trifle less opaque. But there is a certain stagnation--it
affects more, senses than one--about the picturesque pools of Azay. On
the hither side of the bridge is a garden overshadowed by fine old
sycamores--a garden shut in by greenhouses and by a fine last-century
gateway flanked with twin lodges. Beyond the château and the standing
waters behind it is a so-called _parc_, which, however, it must be
confessed, has little of park-like beauty. The old houses--a large
number--remain in France; but the old timber does not remain, and the
denuded aspect of the few acres that surround the châteaux of Touraine
is pitiful to the traveller who has learned to take the measure of such
things from the country of "stately homes." The garden-ground of the
lordly Chaumont is that of an English suburban villa; and in that and in
other places there is little suggestion, in the untended aspect of walk
and lawns, of the gardener the British Islands know. The manor as we see
it dates from the early part of the sixteenth century; and the
industrious Abbé Chevalier, in his very entertaining though slightly
rose-coloured book on Touraine,[b] speaks of it as "perhaps the purest
expression of the _belle Renaissance françoise_." "Its height," he goes
on "is divided between two storeys, terminating under the roof in a
projecting entablature which imitates a row of machicolations. Carven
chimneys and tall dormer windows, covered with imagery, rise from the
roofs; turrets on brackets, of elegant shape, hang with the greatest
lightness from the angles of the building. The soberness of the main
lines, the harmony of the empty spaces and those that are filled out,
the prominence of the crowning parts, the delicacy of all the details,
constitute an enchanting whole." And then the Abbé speaks of the
admirable staircase which adorns the north front and which, with its
extension inside, constitutes the principal treasure of Azay. The
staircase passes beneath one of the richest of porticos--a portico over
which a monumental salamander indulges in the most decorative
contortions. The sculptured vaults of stone which cover the windings of
the staircase within, the fruits, flowers, ciphers, heraldic signs, are
of the noblest effect. The interior of the château is rich, comfortable,
extremely modern; but it makes no picture that compares with its
external face, about which, with its charming proportions, its profuse
yet not extravagant sculpture, there is something very tranquil and
pure.

[b] "Promenades pittoresques en Touraine." Tours: 1869.

I took a particular fancy to the roof, high, steep, old, with its slope
of bluish slate, and the way the weather-worn chimneys seemed to grow
out of it--living things in a deep soil. The single defect of the house
is the blankness and bareness of its walls, which have none of that
delicate parasitic deposit that agrees so well--to the eye--with the
surface of old dwellings. It is true that this bareness results in a
kind of silvery whiteness of complexion which carries out the tone of
the quiet pools and even that of the scanty and shadeless park.

[Illustration]




Chapter ix

[Langeais]


I hardly know what to say about the tone of Langeais, which, though I
have left it to the end of my sketch, formed the objective point of the
first excursion I made from Tours. Langeais is rather dark and grey; it
is perhaps the simplest and most severe of all the castles of the Loire.
I don't know why I should have gone to see it before any other, unless
it be because I remembered that Duchesse de Langeais who figures in
several of Balzac's novels, and found this association very potent. The
Duchesse de Langeais is a somewhat transparent fiction; but the castle
from which Balzac borrowed the title of his heroine is an extremely
solid fact. My doubt just above as to whether I should pronounce it
exceptionally grey came from my having seen it under a sky which made
most things look dark. I have, however, a very kindly memory of that
moist and melancholy afternoon, which was much more autumnal than many
of the days that followed it. Langeais lies down the Loire, near the
river, on the opposite side from Tours, and to go to it you will spend
half an hour in the train. You pass on the way the Château de Luynes,
which, with its round towers catching the afternoon light, looks
uncommonly well on a hill at a distance; you pass also the ruins of the
castle of Cinq-Mars, the ancestral dwelling of the young favourite of
Louis XIII., the victim of Richelieu, the hero of Alfred de Vigny's
novel, which is usually recommended to young ladies engaged in the study
of French. Langeais is very imposing and decidedly sombre; it marks the
transition from the architecture of defence to that of elegance. It
rises, massive and perpendicular, out of the centre of the village to
which it gives its name and which it entirely dominates; so that as you
stand before it in the crooked and empty street there is no resource for
you but to stare up at its heavy overhanging cornice and at the huge
towers surmounted with extinguishers of slate. If you follow this street
to the end, however, you encounter in abundance the usual embellishments
of a French village: little ponds or tanks, with women on their knees on
the brink, pounding and thumping a lump of saturated linen; brown old
crones, the tone of whose facial hide makes their nightcaps (worn by
day) look dazzling; little alleys perforating the thickness of a row of
cottages and showing you behind, as a glimpse, the vividness of a green
garden. In the rear of the castle rises a hill which must formerly have
been occupied by some of its appurtenances and which indeed is still
partly enclosed within its court. You may walk round this eminence,
which, with the small houses of the village at its base, shuts in the
castle from behind. The enclosure is not defiantly guarded, however; for
a small, rough path, which you presently reach, leads up to an open
gate. This gate admits you to a vague and rather limited _parc_, which
covers the crest of the hill and through which you may walk into the
gardens of the castle. These gardens, of small extent, confront the dark
walls with their brilliant parterres and, covering the gradual slope of
the hill, form, as it were, the fourth side of the court. This is the
stateliest view of the structure, which looks to you sufficiently grim
and grey as, after asking leave of a neat young woman who sallies out to
learn your errand, you sit there on a garden bench and take the measure
of the three tall towers attached to this inner front and forming
severally the cage of a staircase. The huge bracketed cornice (one of
the features of Langeais), which is merely ornamental, as it is not
machicolated, though it looks so, is continued on the inner face as
well. The whole thing has a fine feudal air, though it was erected on
the ruins of feudalism.

The main event in the history of the castle is the marriage of Anne of
Brittany to her first husband, Charles VIII., which took place in its
great hall in 1491. Into this great hall we were introduced by the neat
young woman--into this great hall and into sundry other halls, winding
staircases, galleries, chambers. The cicerone of Langeais is in too
great a hurry; the fact is pointed out in the excellent Guide-Joanne.
This ill-dissimulated vice, however, is to be observed, in the country
of the Loire, in every one who carries a key. It is true that at
Langeais there is no great occasion to indulge in the tourist's weakness
of dawdling; for the apartments, though they contain many curious odds
and ends of antiquity, are not of first-rate interest. They are cold and
musty indeed, with that touching smell of old furniture, as all
apartments should be through which the insatiate American wanders in
the rear of a bored domestic, pausing to stare at a faded tapestry or to
read the name on the frame of some simpering portrait.

To return to Tours my companion and I had counted on a train which (as
is not uncommon in France) existed only in the "Indicateur des Chemins
de Fer;" and instead of waiting for another we engaged a vehicle to take
us home. A sorry _carriole_ or _patache_ it proved to be, with the
accessories of a lumbering white mare and a little wizened, ancient
peasant, who had put on, in honour of the occasion, a new blouse of
extraordinary stiffness and blueness. We hired the trap of an energetic
woman, who put it "to" with her own hands; women in Touraine and the
Blésois appearing to have the best of it in the business of letting
vehicles, as well as in many other industries. There is, in fact, no
branch of human activity in which one is not liable, in France, to find
a woman engaged. Women, indeed, are not priests; but priests are, more
or less, women. They are not in the army, it may be said but then they
_are_ the army. They are very formidable. In France one must count with
the women. The drive back from Langeais to Tours was long, slow, cold;
we had an occasional spatter of rain. But the road passes most of the
way close to the Loire, and there was something in our jog-trot through
the darkening land, beside the flowing river, which it was very possible
to enjoy.

[Illustration]




Chapter x

[Loches]


The consequence of my leaving to the last my little mention of Loches is
that space and opportunity fail me; and yet a brief and hurried account
of that extraordinary spot would after all be in best agreement with my
visit. We snatched a fearful joy, my companion and I, the afternoon we
took the train for Loches. The weather this time had been terribly
against us: again and again a day that promised fair became hopelessly
foul after lunch. At last we determined that if we could not make this
excursion in the sunshine we would make it with the aid of our
umbrellas. We grasped them firmly and started for the station, where we
were detained an unconscionable time by the evolutions, outside, of
certain trains laden with liberated (and exhilarated) conscripts, who,
their term of service ended, were about to be restored to civil life.
The trains in Touraine are provoking; they

[Illustration: LOCHES]

serve as little as possible for excursions. If they convey you one way
at the right hour, it is on the condition of bringing you back at the
wrong; they either allow you far too little time to examine the castle
or the ruin, or they leave you planted in front of it for periods that
outlast curiosity. They are perverse, capricious, exasperating. It was a
question of our having but an hour or two at Loches, and we could ill
afford to sacrifice to accidents. One of the accidents, however, was
that the rain stopped before we got there, leaving behind it a moist
mildness of temperature and a cool and lowering sky which were in
perfect agreement with the grey old city. Loches is certainly one of the
greatest impressions of the traveller in central France--the largest
cluster of curious things that presents itself to his sight. It rises
above the valley of the Indre, the charming stream set in meadows and
sedges, which wanders through the province of Berry and through many of
the novels of Madame George Sand; lifting from the summit of a hill,
which it covers to the base, a confusion of terraces, ramparts, towers,
and spires. Having but little time, as I say, we scaled the hill amain
and wandered briskly through this labyrinth of antiquities. The rain had
decidedly stopped and, save that we had our train on our minds, we saw
Loches to the best advantage. We enjoyed that sensation with which the
conscientious tourist is--or ought to be--well acquainted and for which,
at any rate, he has a formula in his rough-and-ready language. We
"experienced," as they say (most irregular of verbs), an "agreeable
disappointment." We were surprised and delighted; we had for some reason
suspected that Loches was scarce good.

I hardly know what is best there: the strange and impressive little
collegial church, with its romanesque atrium or narthex, its doorways
covered with primitive sculpture of the richest kind, its treasure of a
so-called pagan altar embossed with fighting warriors, its three
pyramidal domes, so unexpected, so sinister, which I have not met
elsewhere in church architecture; or the huge square keep of the
eleventh century--the most cliff-like tower I remember, whose
immeasurable thickness I did not penetrate; or the subterranean
mysteries of two other less striking but not less historic dungeons,
into which a terribly imperative little cicerone introduced us, with the
aid of downward ladders, ropes, torches, warnings, extended hands, and
many fearful anecdotes--all in impervious darkness. These horrible
prisons of Loches, at an incredible distance below daylight, enlivened
the consciousness of Louis XI. and were for the most part, I believe,
constructed by him. One of the towers of the castle is garnished with
the hooks or supports of the celebrated iron cage in which he confined
the Cardinal La Balue, who survived so much longer than might have been
expected this extraordinary mixture of seclusion and exposure. All these
things form part of the castle of Loches, whose enormous _enceinte_
covers the whole of the top of the hill and abounds in dismantled
gateways, in crooked passages, in winding lanes that lead to postern
doors, in long façades that look upon terraces interdicted to the
visitor, who perceives with irritation that they command magnificent
views. These views are the property of the sub-prefect of the
department, who resides at the Château de Loches and who has also the
enjoyment of a garden--a garden compressed and curtailed, as those of
old castles that perch on hill-tops are apt to be--containing a
horse-chestnut tree of fabulous size,

[Illustration: LOCHES--THE CHURCH]

a tree of a circumference so vast and so perfect that the whole
population of Loches might sit in concentric rows beneath its boughs.
The gem of the place, however, is neither the big _marronier_, nor the
collegial church, nor the mighty dungeon, nor the hideous prisons of
Louis XI.; it is simply the tomb of Agnes Sorel, _la belle des belles_,
so many years the mistress of Charles VII. She was buried in 1450, in
the collegial church, whence, in the beginning of the present century,
her remains, with the monument that marks them, were transferred to one
of the towers of the castle. She has always, I know not with what
justice, enjoyed a fairer fame than most ladies who have occupied her
position, and this fairness is expressed in the delicate statue that
surmounts her tomb. It represents her lying there in lovely demureness,
her hands folded with the best modesty, a little kneeling angel at
either side of her head, and her feet, hidden in the folds of her decent
robe, resting upon a pair of couchant lambs, innocent reminders of her
name. Agnes, however, was not lamb-like, inasmuch as, according to
popular tradition at least, she exerted herself sharply in favour of the
expulsion of the English from France. It is one of the suggestions of
Loches that the young Charles VII., hard put to it as he was for a
treasury and a capital--"le roi de Bourges," he was called at Paris--was
yet a rather privileged mortal, to stand up as he does before posterity
between the noble Joan and the _gentille Agnes_; deriving, however, much
more honour from one of these companions than from the other. Almost as
delicate a relic of antiquity as this fascinating tomb is the exquisite
oratory of Anne of Brittany, among the apartments of the castle the only
chamber worthy of note. This small room, hardly larger than a closet,
and forming part of the addition made to the edifice by Charles VIII.,
is embroidered over with the curious and remarkably decorative device of
the ermine and festooned cord. The objects in themselves are not
especially graceful, but the constant repetition of the figure on the
walls and ceiling produces an effect of richness in spite of the modern
whitewash with which, if I remember rightly, they have been endued. The
little streets of Loches wander crookedly down the hill and are full of
charming pictorial "bits:" an old town-gate, passing under a medieval
tower, which is ornamented by Gothic windows and the empty niches of
statues; a meagre but delicate _hotel de ville_ of the Renaissance
nestling close beside it; a curious _chancellerie_ of the middle of the
sixteenth century, with mythological figures and a Latin inscription on
the front--both of these latter buildings being rather unexpected
features of the huddled and precipitous little town. Loches has a suburb
on the other side of the Indre, which we had contented ourselves with
looking down at from the heights while we wondered whether, even if it
had not been getting late and our train were more accommodating, we
should care to take our way across the bridge and look up that bust in
terra-cotta of Francis I. which is the principal ornament of the Château
de Sansac and the faubourg of Beaulieu. I think we decided that we
should not, that we had already often measured the longest nose in
history.

[Illustration]




Chapter xi

[Bourges]


I know not whether the exact limits of an excursion as distinguished
from a journey have ever been fixed; at any rate, it seemed none of my
business at Tours to settle the question. Therefore, though the making
of excursions had been the purpose of my stay, I thought it vain, while
I started for Bourges, to determine to which category that little
expedition might belong. It was not till the third day that I returned
to Tours; and the distance, traversed for the most part after dark, was
even greater than I had supposed. That, however, was partly the fault of
a tiresome wait at Vierzon, where I had more than enough time to dine,
very badly, at the _buffet_ and to observe the proceedings of a family
who had entered my railway carriage at Tours and had conversed
unreservedly, for my benefit, all the way from that station--a family
whom it entertained me to assign to the class of _petite noblesse de
province_. Their noble origin was confirmed by the way they all "made
_maigre_" in the refreshment-room (it happened to be a Friday), as if it
had been possible to do anything else. They ate two or three omelets
apiece and ever so many little cakes, while the positive, talkative
mother watched her children as the waiter handed about the roast fowl. I
was destined to share the secrets of this family to the end; for while I
took my place in the empty train that was in waiting to convey us to
Bourges the same vigilant woman pushed them all on top of me into my
compartment, though the carriages on either side contained no travellers
at all. It was better, I found, to have dined (even on omelets and
little cakes) at the station at Vierzon than at the hotel at Bourges,
which, when I reached it at nine o'clock at night, did not strike me as
the prince of hotels. The inns in the smaller provincial towns in France
are all, as the term is, commercial, and the _commis-voyageur_ is in
triumphant possession. I saw a great deal of him for several weeks after
this; for he was apparently the only traveller in the southern
provinces, and it was my daily fate to sit opposite to him at tables
d'hôte and in railway trains. He may be known by two infallible
signs--his hands are fat and he tucks his napkin into his shirt-collar.
In spite of these idiosyncrasies, he seemed to me a reserved and
inoffensive person, with singularly little of the demonstrative
good-humour that he has been described as possessing. I saw no one who
reminded me of Balzac's "illustre Gaudissart;" and indeed in the course
of a month's journey through a large part of France I heard so little
desultory conversation that I wondered whether a change had not come
over the spirit of the people. They seemed to me as silent as Americans
when Americans have not been "introduced," and infinitely less addicted
to exchanging remarks in railway trains and at tables d'hôte than the
colloquial and cursory English; a fact perhaps not worth mentioning were
it not at variance with that reputation which the French have long
enjoyed of being a pre-eminently sociable nation. The common report of
the character of a people is, however, an indefinable product, and is
apt to strike the traveller who observes for himself as very wide of the
mark. The English, who have for ages been described (mainly by the
French) as the dumb stiff, unapproachable race, present to-day a
remarkable appearance of good-humour and garrulity and are distinguished
by their facility of intercourse. On the other hand, any one who has
seen half-a-dozen Frenchmen pass a whole day together in a
railway-carriage without breaking silence is forced to believe that the
traditional reputation of these gentlemen is simply the survival of some
primitive formula. It was true, doubtless, before the Revolution; but
there have been great changes since then. The question of which is the
better taste, to talk to strangers or to hold your tongue, is a matter
apart; I incline to believe that the French reserve is the result of a
more definite conception of social behaviour. I allude to it only
because it is at variance with the national fame and at the same time
compatible with a very easy view of life in certain other directions. On
some of these latter points the Boule d'Or at Bourges was full of
instruction; boasting as it did of a hall of reception in which, amid
old boots that had been brought to be cleaned, old linen that was being
sorted for the wash, and lamps of evil odour that were awaiting
replenishment, a strange, familiar, promiscuous household life went
forward. Small scullions in white caps and aprons slept upon greasy
benches; the Boots sat staring at you while you fumbled, helpless, in a
row of pigeon-holes, for your candlestick or your key; and, amid the
coming and going of the _commis-voyageurs_, a little sempstress bent
over the under-garments of the hostess--the latter being a heavy, stern,
silent woman, who looked at people very hard.

[Bourges: the Cathedral]

It was not to be looked at in that manner that one had come all the way
from Tours; so that within ten minutes after my arrival I sallied out
into the darkness to form somehow and somewhere a happier relation.
However late in the evening I may arrive at a place, I never go to bed
without my impression. The natural place at Bourges to look for it
seemed to be the cathedral; which, moreover, was the only thing that
could account for my presence _dans cette galère_. I turned out of a
small square in front of the hotel and walked up a narrow, sloping
street paved with big, rough stones and guiltless of a footway. It was a
splendid starlight night; the stillness of a sleeping _ville de
province_ was over everything; I had the whole place to myself. I turned
to my right, at the top of the street, where presently a short, vague
lane brought me into sight of the cathedral. I approached it obliquely,
from behind; it loomed up in the darkness above me enormous and sublime.
It stands on the top of the large but not lofty eminence over which
Bourges is scattered--a very good position as French cathedrals go, for
they are not all so nobly situated as Chartres and Laon. On the side on
which I approached it (the south) it is tolerably well exposed, though
the precinct is shabby; in front, it is rather too much shut in. These
defects, however, it makes up for on the north side and behind, where it
presents itself in the most admirable manner to the garden of the
Archevêché, which has been arranged as a public walk, with the usual
formal alleys of the _jardin français_. I must add that I appreciated
these points only on the following day. As I stood there in the light of
the stars, many of which had an autumnal sharpness, while others were
shooting over the heavens, the huge, rugged vessel of the church
overhung me in very much the same way as the black hull of a ship at sea
would overhang a solitary swimmer. It seemed colossal, stupendous, a
dark leviathan.

The next morning, which was lovely, I lost no time in going back to it,
and found with satisfaction that the daylight did it no injury. The
cathedral of Bourges is indeed magnificently huge, and if it is a good
deal wanting in lightness and grace, it is perhaps only the more
imposing. I read in the excellent handbook of M. Joanne that it was
projected "_dès_ 1172," but commenced only in the first years of the
thirteenth century. "The nave," the writer adds, "was finished _tant
bien que mal, faute de ressources_; the façade is of the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries in its lower part, and of the fourteenth in its
upper." The allusion to the nave means the omission of the transepts.
The west front consists of two vast but imperfect towers; one of which
(the south) is immensely buttressed, so that its outline slopes forward
like that of a pyramid. This is the taller of the two. If they had
spires these towers would be prodigious; as it is, given the rest of the
church, they are wanting in elevation. There are five deeply recessed
portals, all in a row, each surmounted with a gable, the gable over the
central door being exceptionally high. Above the porches, which give the
measure of its width, the front rears itself,



piles itself, on a great scale, carried up by galleries, arches,
windows, sculptures, and supported by the extraordinarily thick
buttresses of which I have spoken and which, though they embellish it
with deep shadows thrown sidewise, do not improve its style. The
portals, especially the middle one, are extremely interesting; they are
covered with curious early sculptures. The middle one, however, I must
describe alone. It has no less than six rows of figures--the others have
four--some of which, notably the upper one, are still in their places.
The arch at the top has three tiers of elaborate imagery. The upper of
these is divided by the figure of Christ in judgment, of great size,
stiff and terrible, with outstretched arms. On either side of him are
ranged three or four angels, with the instruments of the Passion.
Beneath him in the second frieze stands the angel of justice with the
scales; and on either side of him is the vision of the last judgment.
The good prepare, with infinite titillation and complacency, to ascend
to the skies; while the bad are dragged, pushed, hurled, stuffed,
crammed, into pits and caldrons of fire. There is a charming detail in
this section. Beside the angel, on the right, where the wicked are the
prey of demons, stands a little female figure, that of a child, who,
with hands meekly folded and head gently raised, waits for the stern
angel to decide upon her fate. In this fate, however, a dreadful big
devil also takes a keen interest: he seems on the point of appropriating
the tender creature; he has a face like a goat and an enormous hooked
nose. But the angel gently lays a hand upon the shoulder of the little
girl--the movement is full of dignity--as if to say: "No; she belongs to
the other side." The frieze below represents the general resurrection,
with the good and the wicked emerging from their sepulchres. Nothing
can be more quaint and charming than the difference shown in their way
of responding to the final trump. The good get out of their tombs with a
certain modest gaiety, an alacrity tempered by respect; one of them
kneels to pray as soon as he has disinterred himself. You may know the
wicked, on the other hand, by their extreme shyness; they crawl out
slowly and fearfully; they hang back, and seem to say "Oh, dear!" These
elaborate sculptures, full of ingenuous intention and of the reality of
early faith, are in a remarkable state of preservation; they bear no
superficial signs of restoration and appear scarcely to have suffered
from the centuries. They are delightfully expressive; the artist had the
advantage of knowing exactly the effect be wished to produce.

The interior of the cathedral has a great simplicity and majesty and,
above all, a tremendous height. The nave is extraordinary in this
respect; it dwarfs everything else I know. I should add, however, that I
am in architecture always of the opinion of the last speaker. Any great
building seems to me while I look at it the ultimate expression. At any
rate, during the hour that I sat gazing along the high vista of Bourges
the interior of the great vessel corresponded to my vision of the
evening before. There is a tranquil largeness, a kind of infinitude,
about such an edifice; it soothes and purifies the spirit, it
illuminates the mind. There are two aisles, on either side, in addition
to the nave--five in all--and, as I have said, there are no transepts;
an omission which lengthens the vista, so that from my place near the
door the central jewelled window in the depths of the perpendicular
choir seemed a mile or two away. The second or outward of each pair of
aisles is too low and the first too high; without this inequality the
nave would appear to take an even more prodigious flight. The double
aisles pass all the way round the choir, the windows of which are
inordinately rich in magnificent old glass. I have seen glass as fine in
other churches, but I think I have never seen so much of it at once.

Beside the cathedral, on the north, is a curious structure of the
fourteenth or fifteenth century, which looks like an enormous flying
buttress, with its support, sustaining the north tower. It makes a
massive arch, high in the air, and produces a romantic effect as people
pass under it to the open gardens of the Archevêché, which extend to a
considerable distance in the rear of the church. The structure
supporting the arch has the girth of a largeish house, and contains
chambers with whose uses I am unacquainted, but to which the deep
pulsations of the cathedral, the vibration of its mighty bells and the
roll of its organ-tones must be transmitted even through the great arm
of stone.

The archiepiscopal palace, not walled in as at Tours, is visible as a
stately habitation of the last century, at the time of my visit under
repair after a fire. From this side and from the gardens of the palace
the nave of the cathedral is visible in all its great length and height,
with its extraordinary multitude of supports. The gardens aforesaid,
accessible through tall iron gates, are the promenade--the Tuileries--of
the town, and, very pretty in themselves, are immensely set off by the
overhanging church. It was warm and sunny; the benches were empty; I sat
there a long time in that pleasant state of mind which visits the
traveller in foreign towns, when he is not too hurried, while he
wonders where he had better go next. The straight, unbroken line of the
roof of the cathedral was very noble; but I could see from this point
how much finer the effect would have been if the towers, which had
dropped almost out of sight, might have been carried still higher. The
archiepiscopal gardens look down at one end over a sort of esplanade or
suburban avenue lying on a lower level on which they open, and where
several detachments of soldiers (Bourges is full of soldiers) had just
been drawn up. The civil population was also collecting, and I saw that
something was going to happen. I learned that a private of the Chasseurs
was to be "broken" for stealing, and every one was eager to behold the
ceremony. Sundry other detachments arrived on the ground, besides many
of the military who had come as a matter of taste. One of them described
to me the process of degradation from the ranks, and I felt for a moment
a hideous curiosity to see it, under the influence of which I lingered a
little. But only a little; the hateful nature of the spectacle hurried
me away at the same that others were hurrying forward. As I turned my
back upon it I reflected that human beings are cruel brutes, though I
could not flatter myself that the ferocity of the thing was exclusively
French. In another country the concourse would have been equally great,
and the moral of it all seemed to be that military penalties are as
terrible as military honours are gratifying.

[Illustration]




Chapter xii

[Bourges: Jacques Coeur]


The cathedral is not the only lion of Bourges; the house of Jacques
Coeur awaits you in posture scarcely less leonine. This remarkable man
had a very strange history, and he too was "broken" like the wretched
soldier whom I did not stay to see. He has been rehabilitated, however,
by an age which does not fear the imputation of paradox, and a marble
statue of him ornaments the street in front of his house. To interpret
him according to this image--a womanish figure in a long robe and a
turban, with big bare arms and a dramatic pose--would be to think of him
as a kind of truculent sultana. He wore the dress of his period, but his
spirit was very modern; he was a Vanderbilt or a Rothschild of the
fifteenth century. He supplied the ungrateful Charles VII. with money to
pay the troops who, under the heroic Maid,

[Illustration: Bourges--THE HOUSE OF JACQUES COEUR]

drove the English from French soil. His house, which to-day is used as a
Palais de Justice, appears to have been regarded at the time it was
built very much as the residence of Mr. Vanderbilt is regarded in New
York to-day. It stands on the edge of the hill on which most of the town
is planted, so that, behind, it plunges down to a lower level, and, if
you approach it on that side, as I did, to come round to the front of it
you have to ascend a longish flight of steps. The back, of old, must
have formed a portion of the city wall; at any rate it offers to view
two big towers which Joanne says were formerly part of the defence of
Bourges. From the lower level of which I speak--the square in front of
the post-office--the palace of Jacques Coeur looks very big and strong
and feudal; from the upper street, in front of it, it looks very
handsome and delicate. To this street it presents two tiers and a
considerable length of façade; and it has both within and without a
great deal of curious and beautiful detail. Above the portal, in the
stonework, are two false windows, in which two figures, a man and a
woman, apparently household servants, are represented, in sculpture, as
looking down into the street. The effect is homely, yet grotesque, and
the figures are sufficiently living to make one commiserate them for
having been condemned, in so dull a town, to spend several centuries at
the window. They appear to be watching for the return of their master,
who left his beautiful house one morning and never came back.

The history of Jacques Coeur, which has been written by M. Pierre
Clément in a volume crowned by the French Academy, is very wonderful and
interesting, but I have no space to go into it here. There is no more
curious example, and few more tragical, of a great fortune crumbling
from one day to the other, or of the antique superstition that the gods
grow jealous of human success. Merchant, millionaire, banker,
ship-owner, royal favourite and minister of finance, explorer of the
East and monopolist of the glittering trade between that quarter of the
globe and his own, great capitalist who had anticipated the brilliant
operations of the present time, he expiated his prosperity by poverty,
imprisonment, and torture. The obscure points in his career have been
elucidated by M. Clément, who has drawn, moreover, a very vivid picture
of the corrupt and exhausted state of France during the middle of the
fifteenth century. He has shown that the spoliation of the great
merchant was a deliberately calculated act, and that the king sacrificed
him without scruple or shame to the avidity of a singularly villanous
set of courtiers. The whole story is an extraordinary picture of
high-handed rapacity--the crudest possible assertion of the right of the
stronger. The victim was stripped of his property, but escaped with his
life, made his way out of France and, betaking himself to Italy, offered
his services to the Pope. It is proof of the consideration that he
enjoyed in Europe, and of the variety of his accomplishments, that
Calixtus III. should have appointed him to take command of a fleet which
his Holiness was fitting out against the Turks. Jacques Coeur, however,
was not destined to lead it to victory. He died shortly after the
expedition had started, in the island of Chios, in 1456. The house at
Bourges, his native place, testifies in some degree to his wealth and
splendour, though it has in parts that want of space which is striking
in many of the buildings of the Middle Ages. The court indeed is on a
large scale, ornamented with turrets and arcades, with several beautiful
windows and with sculptures inserted in the walls, representing the
various sources of the great fortune of the owner. M. Pierre Clément
describes this part of the house as having been of an "incomparable
richesse"--an estimate of its charms which seems slightly exaggerated
to-day. There is, however, something delicate and familiar in the
bas-reliefs of which I have spoken, little scenes of agriculture and
industry which show that the proprietor was not ashamed of calling
attention to his harvests and enterprises. To-day we should question the
taste of such allusions, even in plastic form, in the house of a
"merchant prince" however self-made. Why should it be, accordingly, that
these quaint little panels at Bourges do not displease us? It is perhaps
because things very ancient never, for some mysterious reason, appear
vulgar. This fifteenth-century millionaire, with his palace, his
"swagger" sculptures, may have produced that impression on some critical
spirits of his own day.

The portress who showed me into the building was a dear little old
woman, with the gentlest, sweetest, saddest face--a little white, aged
face, with dark, pretty eyes--and the most considerate manner. She took
me up into an upper hall, where there were a couple of curious
chimney-pieces and a fine old oaken roof, the latter representing the
hollow of a long boat. There is a certain oddity in a native of
Bourges--an inland town if ever there was one, without even a river (to
call a river) to encourage nautical ambitions--having found his end as
admiral of a fleet; but this boat-shaped roof, which is extremely
graceful and is repeated in another apartment, would suggest that the
imagination of Jacques Coeur was fond of riding the waves. Indeed, as he
trafficked in Oriental products and owned many galleons, it is probable
that he was personally as much at home in certain Mediterranean ports
as in the capital of the pastoral Berry. If, when he looked at the
ceilings of his mansion, he saw his boats upside down, this was only a
suggestion of the shortest way of emptying them of their treasures. He
is presented in person above one of the great stone chimney-pieces, in
company with his wife, Macée de Léodepart--I like to write such an
extraordinary name. Carved in white stone, the two sit playing at chess
at an open window, through which they appear to give their attention
much more to the passers-by than to the game. They are also exhibited in
other attitudes; though I do not recognise them in the composition on
top of one of the fireplaces which represents the battlements of a
castle, with the defenders (little figures between the crenellations)
hurling down missiles with a great deal of fury and expression. It would
have been hard to believe that the man who surrounded himself with these
friendly and humorous devices had been guilty of such wrong-doing as to
call down the heavy hand of justice.

It is a curious fact, however, that Bourges contains legal associations
of a purer kind than the prosecution of Jacques Coeur, which, in spite
of the rehabilitations of history, can hardly be said yet to have
terminated, inasmuch as the law-courts of the city are installed in his
quondam residence. At a short distance from it stands the Hôtel Cujas,
one of the curiosities of Bourges and the habitation for many years of
the great jurisconsult who revived in the sixteenth century the study of
the Roman law and professed it during the close of his life in the
university of the capital of Berry. The learned Cujas had, in spite of
his sedentary pursuits, led a very wandering life; he died at Bourges in
the year 1590. Sedentary pursuits are perhaps not exactly

[Illustration: BOURGES--THE HOUSE OF JACQUES COEUR]

what I should call them, having read in the "Biographie Universelle"
(sole source of my knowledge of the renowned Cujacius) that his usual
manner of study was to spread himself on his belly on the floor. He did
not sit down, he lay down; and the "Biographie Universelle" has (for so
grave a work) an amusing picture of the short, fat, untidy scholar
dragging himself _à plat ventre_, across his room, from one pile of
books to the other. The house in which these singular gymnastics took
place, and which is now the headquarters of the gendarmerie, is one of
the most picturesque at Bourges. Dilapidated and discoloured, it has a
charming Renaissance front. A high wall separates it from the street,
and on this wall, which is divided by a large open gateway, are perched
two overhanging turrets. The open gateway admits you to the court,
beyond which the melancholy mansion erects itself, decorated also with
turrets, with fine old windows and with a beautiful tone of faded red
brick and rusty stone. It is a charming encounter for a provincial
by-street; one of those accidents in the hope of which the traveller
with a propensity for sketching (whether on a little paper block or on
the tablets of his brain) decides to turn a corner at a venture. A
brawny gendarme in his shirtsleeves was polishing his boots in the
court; an ancient, knotted vine, forlorn of its clusters, hung itself
over a doorway and dropped its shadow on the rough grain of the wall.
The place was very sketchable. I am sorry to say, however, that it was
almost the only "bit." Various other curious old houses are supposed to
exist at Bourges, and I wandered vaguely about in search of them. But I
had little success, and I ended by becoming sceptical. Bourges is a
_ville de province_ in the full force of the term, especially as
applied invidiously. The streets, narrow, tortuous, and dirty, have
very wide cobble-stones; the houses for the most part are shabby,
without local colour. The look of things is neither modern nor
antique--a kind of mediocrity of middle age. There is an enormous number
of blank walls--walls of gardens, of courts, of private houses--that
avert themselves from the street as if in natural chagrin at there being
so little to see. Round about is a dull, flat, featureless country, on
which the magnificent cathedral looks down. There is a peculiar dulness
and ugliness in a French town of this type, which, I must immediately
add, is not the most frequent one. In Italy everything has a charm, a
colour, a grace; even desolation and ennui. In England a cathedral city
may be sleepy, but it is pretty sure to be mellow. In the course of six
weeks spent _en province_, however, I saw few places that had not more
expression than Bourges.

I went back to the cathedral; that, after all, was a feature. Then I
returned to my hotel, where it was time to dine, and sat down, as usual,
with the _commis-voyageurs_, who cut their bread on their thumb and
partook of every course; and after this repast I repaired for a while to
the café, which occupied a part of the basement of the inn and opened
into its court. This café was a friendly, homely, sociable spot, where
it seemed the habit of the master of the establishment to _tutoyer_ his
customers and the practice of the customers to _tutoyer_ the waiter.
Under these circumstances the waiter of course felt justified in sitting
down at the same table with a gentleman who had come in and asked him
for writing materials. He served this gentleman with a horrible little
portfolio covered with shiny black cloth and accompanied with two sheets
of

[Illustration: BOURGES: THE CATHEDRAL (WEST FRONT)]

thin paper, three wafers, and one of those instruments of torture which
pass in France for pens--these being the utensils invariably evoked by
such a request; and then, finding himself at leisure, he placed himself
opposite and began to write a letter of his own. This trifling incident
reminded me afresh that France is a democratic country. I think I
received an admonition to the same effect from the free, familiar way in
which the game of whist was going on just behind me. It was attended
with a great deal of noisy pleasantry, flavoured every now and then with
a dash of irritation. There was a young man of whom I made a note; he
was such a beautiful specimen of his class. Sometimes he was very
facetious, chattering, joking, punning, showing off; then, as the game
went on and he lost and had to pay the _consommation_, he dropped his
amiability, slanged his partner, declared he wouldn't play any more, and
went away in a fury. Nothing could be more perfect or more amusing than
the contrast. The manner of the whole affair was such as, I apprehend,
one would not have seen among our English-speaking people; both the
jauntiness of the first phase and the petulance of the second. To hold
the balance straight, however, I may remark that if the men were all
fearful "cads," they were, with their cigarettes and their
inconsistency, less heavy, less brutal, than our dear English-speaking
cad; just as the bright little café where a robust materfamilias, doling
out sugar and darning a stocking, sat in her place under the mirror
behind the _comptoir_, was a much more civilised spot than a British
public-house or a "commercial room," with pipes and whisky, or even than
an American saloon.

[Illustration]




Chapter xiii

[Le Mans]


It is very certain that when I left Tours for Le Mans it was a journey
and not an excursion; for I had no intention of coming back. The
question indeed was to get away, no easy matter in France in the early
days of October, when the whole _jeunesse_ of the country is returning
to school. It is accompanied, apparently, with parents and grandparents,
and it fills the trains with little pale-faced _lycéens_, who gaze out
of the windows with a longing, lingering air not unnatural on the part
of small members of a race in which life is intense, who are about to be
restored to those big educative barracks that do such violence to our
American appreciation of the opportunities of boyhood. The train stopped
every five minutes; but fortunately the country was charming--hilly and
bosky, eminently good-humoured, and dotted here and there with a smart
little château. The old capital of the province of the Maine, which has
given its name to a great American State, is a fairly interesting town,
but I confess that I found in it less than I expected to admire. My
expectations had doubtless been my own fault; there is no particular
reason why Le Mans should fascinate. It stands upon a hill, indeed--a
much better hill than the gentle swell of Bourges. This hill, however,
is not steep in all directions; from the railway, as I arrived, it was
not even perceptible. Since I am making comparisons, I may remark that,
on the other hand, the Boule d'Or at Le Mans is an appreciably better
inn than the Boule d'Or at Bourges. It looks out upon a small
market-place which has a certain amount of character and seems to be
slipping down the slope on which it lies, though it has in the middle an
ugly _halle_, or circular market-house, to keep it in position. At Le
Mans, as at Bourges, my first business was with the cathedral, to which
I lost no time in directing my steps. It suffered by juxtaposition to
the great church I had seen a few days before; yet it has some noble
features. It stands on the edge of the eminence of the town, which falls
straight away on two sides of it, and makes a striking mass, bristling
behind, as you see it from below, with rather small but singularly
numerous flying buttresses. On my way to it I happened to walk through
the one street which contains a few ancient and curious houses, a very
crooked and untidy lane, of really mediæval aspect, honoured with the
denomination of the Grand Rue. Here is the house of Queen Berengaria--an
absurd name, as the building is of a date some three hundred years later
than the wife of Richard Coeur de Lion, who has a sepulchral monument in
the south aisle of the cathedral. The structure in question--very
sketchable, if the sketcher could get far enough away from it--is an
elaborate little dusky façade, overhanging the street, ornamented with
panels of stone, which are covered with delicate Renaissance sculpture.
A fat old woman standing in the door of a small grocer's shop next to
it--a most gracious old woman, with a bristling moustache and a charming
manner--told me what the house was, and also indicated to me a
rotten-looking brown wooden mansion in the same street, nearer the
cathedral, as the Maison Scarron. The author of the "Roman Comique" and
of a thousand facetious verses enjoyed for some years, in the early part
of his life, a benefice in the cathedral of Le Mans, which gave him a
right to reside in one of the canonical houses. He was rather an odd
canon, but his history is a combination of oddities. He wooed the comic
muse from the arm-chair of a cripple, and in the same position--he was
unable even to go down on his knees--prosecuted that other suit which
made him the first husband of a lady of whom Louis XIV. was to be the
second. There was little of comedy in the future Madame de Maintenon;
though, after all, there was doubtless as much as there need have been
in the wife of a poor man who was moved to compose for his tomb such an
epitaph as this, which I quote from the "Biographie Universelle":

    "Celui qui cy maintenant dort,
     Fit plus de pitié que d'envie,
     Et souffrit mille fois la mort,
     Avant que de perdre la vie.
     Passant, ne fais icy de bruit,
     Et garde bien qu'il ne s'éveille.
     Car voicy la première nuit,
     Que le pauvre Scarron sommeille."

There is rather a quiet, satisfactory _place_ in front of the cathedral,
with some good "bits" in it; notably a turret at the angle of one of the
towers and a very fine steep-roofed dwelling, behind low walls, which
it overlooks, with a tall iron gate. This house has two or three little
pointed towers, a big black, precipitous roof, and a general air of
having had a history. There are houses which are scenes, and there are
houses which are only houses. The trouble with the domestic architecture
of the United States is that it is not scenic, thank goodness, and the
characteristic of an old structure like the turreted mansion on the
hillside of Le Mans is that it is not simply a house. It is a person, as
it were, as well. It would be well, indeed, if it might have
communicated a little of its personality to the front of the cathedral,
which has none of its own. Shabby, rusty, unfinished, this front has a
romanesque portal, but nothing in the way of a tower. One sees from
without, at a glance, the peculiarity of the church--the disparity
between the romanesque nave, which is small and of the twelfth century,
and the immense and splendid transepts and choir, of a period a hundred
years later. Outside, this end of the church rises far above the nave,
which looks merely like a long porch leading to it, with a small and
curious romanesque porch in its own south flank. The transepts, shallow
but very lofty, display to the spectators in the _place_ the reach of
their two clere-storey windows, which occupy, above, the whole expanse
of the wall. The south transept terminates in a sort of tower, which is
the only one of which the cathedral can boast. Within, the effect of the
choir is superb; it is a church in itself, with the nave simply for a
point of view. As I stood there I read in my Murray that it has the
stamp of the date of the perfection of pointed Gothic, and I found
nothing to object to the remark. It suffers little by confrontation with
Bourges and, taken in itself, seems to me quite as fine. A passage of
double aisles surrounds it, with the arches that divide them supported
on very thick round columns, not clustered. There are twelve chapels in
this passage, and a charming little lady-chapel filled with gorgeous old
glass. The sustained height of this almost detached choir is very noble;
its lightness and grace, its soaring symmetry, carry the eye up to
places in the air from which it is slow to descend. Like Tours, like
Chartres, like Bourges (apparently like all the French cathedrals, and
unlike several English ones), Le Mans is rich in splendid glass. The
beautiful upper windows of the choir make, far aloft, a brave gallery of
pictures, blooming with vivid colour. It is the south transept that
contains the formless image--a clumsy stone woman lying on her
back--which purports to represent Queen Berengaria aforesaid.

The view of the cathedral from the rear is, as usual, very fine. A small
garden behind it masks its base; but you descend the hill to a large
_place de foire_, adjacent to a fine old public promenade which is known
as Les Jacobins, a sort of miniature Tuileries, where I strolled for a
while in rectangular alleys destitute of herbage and received a deeper
impression of vanished things. The cathedral, on the pedestal of its
hill, looks considerably farther than the fair-ground and the Jacobins,
between the rather bare poles of whose straightly planted trees you may
admire it at a convenient distance. I admired it till I thought I should
remember it (better than the event has proved), and then I wandered away
and looked at another curious old church, Notre-Dame-de-la-Couture. This
sacred edifice made a picture for ten minutes, but the picture has faded
now. I reconstruct a yellowish-brown façade and a portal fretted with
early sculptures; but the

[Illustration: LE MANS--THE CATHEDRAL]

details have gone the way of all incomplete sensations. After you have
stood awhile, in the choir of the cathedral there is no sensation at Le
Mans that goes very far. For some reason not now to be traced I had
looked for more than this. I think the reason was to some extent simply
in the name of the place; for names, on the whole, whether they be good
reasons or not, are very active ones. Le Mans, if I am not mistaken, has
a sturdy, feudal sound; suggests something dark and square, a vision of
old ramparts and gates. Perhaps I had been unduly impressed by the fact,
accidentally revealed to me, that Henry II., first of the English
Plantagenets, was born there. Of course it is easy to assure one's self
in advance, but does it not often happen that one had rather not be
assured? There is a pleasure sometimes in running the risk of
disappointment. I took mine, such as it was, quietly enough, while I sat
before dinner at the door of one of the cafés in the market-place with a
_bitter-et-curaçao_ (invaluable pretext at such an hour!) to keep me
company. I remember that in this situation there came over me an
impression which both included and excluded all possible
disappointments. The afternoon was warm and still; the air was admirably
soft. The good Manceaux, in little groups and pairs, were seated near
me; my ear was soothed by the fine shades of French enunciation, by the
detached syllables of that perfect tongue. There was nothing in
particular in the prospect to charm; it was an average French view. Yet
I felt a charm, a kind of sympathy, a sense of the completeness of
French life and of the lightness and brightness of the social air,
together with a desire to arrive at friendly judgments, to express a
positive interest. I know not why this transcendental mood should have
descended upon me then and there; but that idle half-hour in front of
the café, in the mild October afternoon suffused with human sounds, is
perhaps the most abiding thing I brought away from Le Mans.

[Illustration]




Chapter xiv

[Angers]


I am shocked at finding, just after this noble declaration of
principles, that in a little note-book which at that time I carried
about with me the celebrated city of Angers is denominated a "sell." I
reproduce this vulgar word with the greatest hesitation, and only
because it brings me more quickly to my point. This point is that Angers
belongs to the disagreeable class of old towns that have been, as the
English say, "done up." Not the oldness, but the newness, of the place
is what strikes the sentimental tourist to-day, as he wanders with
irritation along second-rate boulevards, looking vaguely about him for
absent gables. "Black Angers," in short, is a victim of modern
improvements and quite unworthy of its admirable name--a name which,
like that of Le Mans, had always had, to my eyes, a highly picturesque
value. It looks particularly well on the Shakespearean page (in "King
John"), where we imagine it uttered (though such would not have been the
utterance of the period) with a fine grinding insular accent. Angers
figures with importance in early English history: it was the capital
city of the Plantagenet race, home of that Geoffrey of Anjou who
married, as second husband, the Empress Maud, daughter of Henry I. and
competitor of Stephen, and became father of Henry II., first of the
Plantagenet kings, born, as we have seen, at Le Mans. These facts create
a natural presumption that Angers will look historic; I turned them over
in my mind as I travelled in the train from Le Mans, through a country
that was really pretty and looked more like the usual English than like
the usual French scenery, with its fields cut up by hedges and a
considerable rotundity in its trees. On my way from the station to the
hotel, however, it became plain that I should lack a good pretext for
passing that night at the Cheval Blanc; I foresaw that I should have
contented myself before the end of the day. I remained at the White
Horse only long enough to discover that it was an exceptionally good
provincial inn, one of the best that I encountered during six weeks
spent in these establishments.

"Stupidly and vulgarly modernised"--that is another flower from my
note-book, and note-books are not obliged to be reasonable. "There are
some narrow and tortuous streets, with a few curious old houses," I
continue to quote; "there is a castle, of which the exterior is most
extraordinary, and there is a cathedral of moderate interest." It is
fair to say that the Château d'Angers is by itself worth a pilgrimage;
the only drawback is that you have seen it in a quarter of an hour. You
cannot do more than look at it, and one good look does your business. It
has no beauty, no grace, no detail, nothing that charms or detains you;
it is simply very old and very big--so big and so old that this simple
impression is enough, and it takes its place in your recollections as a
perfect specimen of a superannuated stronghold. It stands at one end of
the town, surrounded by a huge, deep moat, which originally contained
the waters of the Maine, now divided from it by a quay. The water-front
of Angers is poor--wanting in colour and in movement; and there is
always an effect of perversity in a town lying near a great river and
yet not upon it. The Loire is a few miles off; but Angers contents
itself with a meagre affluent of that stream. The effect was naturally
much better when the vast dark bulk of the castle, with its seventeen
prodigious towers, rose out of the protecting flood. These towers are of
tremendous girth and solidity; they are encircled with great bands, or
hoops, of white stone, and are much enlarged at the base. Between them
hang high curtains of infinitely old-looking masonry, apparently a dense
conglomeration of slate, the material of which the town was originally
built (thanks to rich quarries in the neighbourhood), and to which it
owed its appellation of the Black. There are no windows, no apertures,
and to-day no battlements nor roofs. These accessories were removed by
Henry III., so that, in spite of its grimness and blackness, the place
has not even the interest of looking like a prison; it being, as I
suppose, the essence of a prison not to be open to the sky. The only
features of the enormous structure are the blank, sombre stretches and
protrusions of wall, the effect of which, on so large a scale, is
strange and striking. Begun by Philip Augustus and terminated by St.
Louis, the Château d'Angers has of course a great deal of history. The
luckless Fouquet, the extravagant minister of finance of Louis XIV.,
whose fall from the heights of grandeur was so sudden and complete, was
confined here in 1661, just after his arrest, which had taken place at
Nantes. Here also Huguenots and Vendeans suffered effective captivity.

I walked round the parapet which protects the outer edge of the moat (it
is all up-hill, and the moat deepens and deepens), till I came to the
entrance which faces the town, and which is as bare and strong as the
rest. The concierge took me into the court; but there was nothing to
see. The place is used as a magazine of ammunition, and the yard
contains a multitude of ugly buildings. The only thing to do is to walk
round the bastions for the view; but at the moment of my visit the
weather was thick, and the bastions began and ended with themselves. So
I came out and took another look at the big, black exterior, buttressed
with white-ribbed towers, and perceived that a desperate sketcher might
extract a picture from it, especially if he were to bring in, as they
say, the little black bronze statue of the good King René (a weak
production of

[Illustration: ANGERS--OLD TIMBERED HOUSES]

David d'Angers), which, standing within sight, ornaments the melancholy
faubourg. He would do much better, however, with the very striking old
timbered house (I suppose of the fifteenth century) which is called the
Maison d'Adam and is easily the first specimen at Angers of the domestic
architecture of the past. This admirable house, in the centre of the
town, gabled, elaborately timbered, and much restored, is a really
imposing monument. The basement is occupied by a linen-draper, who
flourishes under the auspicious sign of the Mère de Famille; and above
his shop the tall front rises in five overhanging storeys. As the house
occupies the angle of a little _place_, this front is double, and the
black beams and wooden supports, displayed over a large surface and
carved and interlaced, have a high picturesqueness. The Maison d'Adam is
quite in the grand style, and I am sorry to say I failed to learn what
history attaches to its name. If I spoke just above of the cathedral as
"moderate," I suppose I should beg its pardon; for this serious charge
was probably prompted by the fact that it consists only of a nave,
without side aisles. A little reflection now convinces me that such a
form is a distinction; and indeed I find it mentioned, rather
inconsistently, in my note-book, a little further on, as "extremely
simple and grand." The nave is spoken of in the same volume as "big,
serious, and Gothic," though the choir and transepts are noted as very
shallow. But it is not denied that the air of the whole thing is
original and striking; and it would therefore appear, after all, that
the cathedral of Angers, built during the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, is a sufficiently honourable church; the more that its high
west front, adorned with a very primitive Gothic portal, supports two
elegant tapering spires, between which, unfortunately, an ugly modern
pavilion has been inserted.

I remember nothing else at Angers but the curious old Café Serin, where,
after I had had my dinner at the inn, I went and waited for the train
which, at nine o'clock in the evening, was to convey me, in a couple of
hours, to Nantes--an establishment remarkable for its great size and its
air of tarnished splendour, its brown gilding and smoky frescoes, as
also for the fact that it was hidden away on the second floor of an
unassuming house in an unilluminated street. It hardly seemed a place
where you would drop in; but when once you had found it, it presented
itself, with the cathedral, the castle, and the Maison d'Adam, as one of
the historical monuments of Angers.

[Illustration]




Chapter xv

[Nantes]


If I spent two nights at Nantes, it was for reasons of convenience
rather than of sentiment; though indeed I spent them in a big circular
room which had a stately, lofty, last-century look--a look that consoled
me a little for the whole place being dirty. The high, old-fashioned inn
(it had a huge windy _porte-cochère_, and you climbed a vast black stone
staircase to get to your room) looked out on a dull square, surrounded
with other tall houses and occupied on one side by the theatre, a
pompous building decorated with columns and statues of the muses. Nantes
belongs to the class of towns which are always spoken of as "fine," and
its position near the mouth of the Loire gives it, I believe, much
commercial movement. It is a spacious, rather regular city, looking, in
the parts that I traversed, neither very fresh nor very venerable. It
derives its principal character from the handsome quays on the Loire,
which are overhung with tall eighteenth-century houses (very numerous
too in the other streets)--houses with big _entresols_ marked by arched
windows, classic pediments, balcony-rails of fine old iron-work. These
features exist in still better form at Bordeaux; but, putting Bordeaux
aside, Nantes is quite architectural. The view up and down the quays has
the cool, neutral tone of colour that one finds so often in French
water-side places--the bright greyness which is the tone of French
landscape art. The whole city has rather a grand, or at least an
eminently well-established, air. During a day passed in it of course I
had time to go to the Musée; the more so that I have a weakness for
provincial museums--a sentiment that depends but little on the quality
of the collection. The pictures may be bad, but the place is often
curious; and indeed from bad pictures, in certain moods of the mind,
there is a degree of entertainment to be derived. If they are tolerably
old they are often touching; but they must have a relative antiquity,
for I confess I can do nothing with works of art of which the badness is
of recent origin. The cool, still, empty chambers in which indifferent
collections are apt to be preserved, the red brick tiles, the diffused
light, the musty odour, the mementos around you of dead fashions, the
snuffy custodian in a black skull-cap, who pulls aside a faded curtain
to show you the lustreless gem of the museum--these things have a mild
historical quality, and the sallow canvases after all illustrate
something. Many of those in the museum of Nantes illustrate the taste of
a successful warrior, having been bequeathed to the city by Napoleon's
marshal Clarke (created Duc de Feltre). In addition to these there is
the usual number of specimens of the contemporary French school, culled
from the annual Salons and presented to the museum by the State.
Wherever the traveller goes, in France, he is reminded of this very
honourable practice--the purchase by the Government of a certain number
of "pictures of the year," which are presently distributed in the
provinces. Governments succeed each other and bid for success by
different devices; but the "patronage of art" is a plank, as we should
say here, in every platform. The works of art are often
ill-selected--there is an official taste which you immediately
recognise--but the custom is essentially liberal, and a Government which
should neglect it would be felt to be painfully common. The only thing
in this particular Musée that I remember is a fine portrait of a woman
by Ingres--very flat and Chinese, but with an interest of line and a
great deal of style.

There is a castle at Nantes which resembles in some degree that of
Angers, but has, without, much less of the impressiveness of great size,
and, within, much more interest of detail. The court contains the
remains of a very fine piece of late Gothic--a tall elegant building of
the sixteenth century. The château is naturally not wanting in history.
It was the residence of the old Dukes of Brittany, and was brought, with
the rest of the province, by the Duchess Anne, the last representative
of that race, as her dowry, to Charles VIII. I read in the excellent
handbook of M. Joanne that it has been visited by almost every one of
the kings of France, from Louis XI. downward; and also that it has
served as a place of sojourn less voluntary on the part of various other
distinguished persons, from the horrible Maréchal de Retz, who in the
fifteenth century was executed at Nantes for the murder of a couple of
hundred young children, sacrificed in abominable rites, to the ardent
Duchess of Berry, mother of the Count of Chambord, who was confined
there for a few hours in 1832, just after her arrest in a neighbouring
house. I looked at the house in question--you may see it from the
platform in front of the château--and tried to figure to myself that
embarrassing scene. The Duchess, after having unsuccessfully raised the
standard of revolt (for the exiled Bourbons) in the legitimist Bretagne,
and being "wanted," as the phrase is, by the police of Louis Philippe,
had hidden herself in a small but loyal house at Nantes, where, at the
end of five months of seclusion, she was betrayed, for gold, to the
austere M. Guizot by one of her servants, an Alsatian Jew named Deutz.
For many hours before her capture she had been compressed into an
interstice behind a fireplace, and by the time she was drawn forth into
the light she had been ominously scorched. The man who showed me the
castle indicated also another historic spot, a house with little
_tourelles_ on the Quai de la Fosse, in which Henry IV. is said to have
signed the Edict revoked by Louis XIV. I am, however, not in a position
to answer for this pedigree.

There is another point in the history of the fine old houses which
command the Loire, of which, I suppose, one may be tolerably sure; that
is their having, placid as they stand there to-day, looked down on the
horrors of the Terror of 1793, the bloody reign of the monster Carrier
and his infamous _noyades_. The most hideous episode of the Revolution
was enacted at Nantes, where hundreds of men and women, tied together in
couples, were set afloat upon rafts and sunk to the bottom of the Loire.
The tall eighteenth-century house, full of the _air noble_, in France
always reminds me of those dreadful years--of the street-scenes of the
Revolution. Superficially, the association is incongruous, for nothing
could be more formal and decorous than the patent expression of these
eligible residences. But whenever I have a vision of prisoners bound on
tumbrels that jolt slowly to the scaffold, of heads carried on pikes, of
groups of heated _citoyennes_ shaking their fists at closed
coach-windows, I see in the background the well-ordered features of the
architecture of the period--the clear grey stone, the high pilasters,
the arching lines of the _entresol_, the classic pediment, the
slate-covered attic. There is not much architecture at Nantes except the
domestic. The cathedral, with a rough west front and stunted towers,
makes no impression as you approach it. It is true that it does its best
to recover its reputation as soon as you have passed the threshold.
Begun in 1434 and finished about the end of the fifteenth century, as I
discover in Murray, it has a magnificent nave, not of great length, but
of extraordinary height and lightness. On the other hand, it has no
choir whatever. There is much entertainment in France in seeing what a
cathedral will take upon itself to possess or to lack; for it is only
the smaller number that have the full complement of features. Some have
a very fine nave and no choir; others a very fine choir and no nave.
Some have a rich outside and nothing within; others a very blank face
and a very glowing heart. There are a hundred possibilities of poverty
and wealth, and they make the most unexpected combinations.

The great treasure of Nantes is the two noble sepulchral monuments which
occupy either transept, and one of which has (in its nobleness) the
rare distinction of being a production of our own time. On the south
side stands the tomb of Francis II., the last of the Dukes of Brittany,
and of his second wife, Margaret of Foix, erected in 1507 by their
daughter Anne, whom we have encountered already at the Château de
Nantes, where she was born; at Langeais, where she married her first
husband; at Amboise, where she lost him; at Blois, where she married her
second, the "good" Louis XII., who divorced an impeccable spouse to make
room for her, and where she herself died. Transferred to the cathedral
from a demolished convent, this monument, the masterpiece of Michel
Colomb, author of the charming tomb of the children of Charles VIII. and
the aforesaid Anne, which we admired at Saint Gatien of Tours, is one of
the most brilliant works of the French Renaissance. It has a splendid
effect and is in perfect preservation. A great table of black marble
supports the reclining figures of the duke and duchess, who lie there
peacefully and majestically, in their robes and crowns, with their heads
each on a cushion, the pair of which are supported from behind by three
charming little kneeling angels; at the foot of the quiet couple are a
lion and a greyhound, with heraldic devices. At each of the angles of
the table is a large figure in white marble of a woman elaborately
dressed, with a symbolic meaning, and these figures, with their
contemporary faces and clothes, which give them the air of realistic
portraits, are truthful and living, if not remarkably beautiful. Round
the sides of the tomb are small images of the apostles. There is a kind
of masculine completeness in the work, and a certain robustness of
taste.

In nothing were the sculptors of the Renaissance more fortunate than in
being in advance of us with their tombs: they have left us nothing to
say in regard to the great final contrast--the contrast between the
immobility of death and the trappings and honours that survive. They
expressed in every way in which it was possible to express it the
solemnity of their conviction that the marble image was a part of the
personal greatness of the defunct, and the protection, the redemption,
of his memory. A modern tomb, in comparison, is a sceptical affair; it
insists too little on the honours. I say this in the face of the fact
that one has only to step across the cathedral of Nantes to stand in the
presence of one of the purest and most touching of modern tombs.
Catholic Brittany has erected in the opposite transept a monument to one
of the most devoted of her sons, General de Lamoricière, the defender of
the Pope, the vanquished of Castelfidardo. This noble work, from the
hand of Paul Dubois, one of the most interesting of that new generation
of sculptors who have revived in France an art of which our over-dressed
century had begun to despair, has every merit but the absence of a
certain prime feeling. It is the echo of an earlier tune--an echo with a
beautiful cadence. Under a Renaissance canopy of white marble
elaborately worked with arabesques and cherubs, in a relief so low that
it gives the work a certain look of being softened and worn by time,
lies the body of the Breton soldier with a crucifix clasped to his
breast and a shroud thrown over his body. At each of the angles sits a
figure in bronze, the two best of which, representing Charity and
Military Courage, had given me extraordinary pleasure when they were
exhibited (in the clay) in the Salon of 1876. They are admirably cast
and not less admirably conceived: the one a serene, robust young mother,
beautiful in line and attitude; the other a lean and vigilant young man,
in a helmet that overshadows his serious eyes, resting an outstretched
arm, an admirable military member, upon the hilt of a sword. These
figures contain abundant assurance that M. Paul Dubois has been
attentive to Michael Angelo, whom we have all heard called a splendid
example and a bad model. The visor-shadowed face of his warrior is more
or less a reminiscence of the figure on the tomb of Lorenzo de'Medici at
Florence; but it is doubtless none the worse for that. The interest of
the work of Paul Dubois is its peculiar seriousness, a kind of moral
good faith which is not the commonest feature of French art, and which,
united as it is in this case with exceeding knowledge and a remarkable
sense of form, produces an impression of deep refinement. The whole
monument is a proof of exquisitely careful study; but I am not sure that
this impression on the part of the spectator is the happiest possible.
It explains much of the great beauty, and it also explains perhaps a
little of the slight pedantry. That word, however, is scarcely in place;
I only mean that M. Dubois has made a visible effort, which has visibly
triumphed. Simplicity is not always strength, and our complicated modern
genius contains treasures of intention. This fathomless modern element
is an immense charm on the part of M. Paul Dubois. I am lost in
admiration of the deep æsthetic experience, the enlightenment of taste,
revealed by such work. After that I only hope that, Giuseppe Garibaldi
may have somewhere or other some commemoration as distinguished.

[Illustration]




Chapter xvi

[La Rochelle]


To go from Nantes to La Rochelle you travel straight southward across
the historic _bocage_ of La Vendée, the home of royalist bush-fighting.
The country, which is exceedingly pretty, bristles with copses,
orchards, hedges, and with trees more spreading and sturdy than the
traveller is apt to find the feathery foliage of France. It is true that
as I proceeded it flattened out a good deal, so that for an hour there
was a vast featureless plain, which offered me little entertainment
beyond the general impression that I was approaching the Bay of Biscay
(from which, in reality, I was yet far distant). As we drew near La
Rochelle, however, the prospect brightened considerably, and the railway
kept its course beside a charming little canal, or canalised river,
bordered with trees and with small, neat, bright-coloured and yet
old-fashioned cottages and villas, which stood back, on the farther
side, behind small gardens, hedges, painted palings, patches of turf.
The whole effect was Dutch and delightful; and in being delightful,
though not in being Dutch, it prepared me for the charms of La Rochelle,
which from the moment I entered it I perceived to be a fascinating
little town, a quite original mixture of brightness and dulness. Part of
its brightness comes from its being extraordinarily clean--in which,
after all, it _is_ Dutch; a virtue not particularly noticeable at
Bourges, Le Mans, and Angers. Whenever I go southward, if it be only
twenty miles, I begin to look out for the south, prepared as I am to
find the careless grace of those latitudes even in things of which it
may be said that they may be south of something, but are not southern.
To go from Boston to New York (in this state of mind) is almost as soft
a sensation as descending the Italian side of the Alps; and to go from
New York to Philadelphia is to enter a zone of tropical luxuriance and
warmth. Given this absurd disposition, I could not fail to flatter
myself, on reaching La Rochelle, that I was already in the Midi, and to
perceive in everything, in the language of the country, the _caractère
méridional_. Really a great many things had a hint of it. For that
matter it seems to me that to arrive in the south at a bound--to wake up
there, as it were--would be a very imperfect pleasure. The full pleasure
is to approach by stages and gradations; to observe the successive
shades of difference by which it ceases to be the north. These shades
are exceedingly fine, but your true south-lover has an eye for them all.
If he perceives them at New York and Philadelphia--we imagine him boldly
as liberated from Boston--how could he fail to perceive them at La
Rochelle? The streets of this dear little city are lined with
arcades--good, big, straddling arcades of stone, such as befit a land
of hot summers and which recalled to me, not to go further, the dusky
porticos of Bayonne. It contains, moreover, a great wide _place d'armes_
which looked for all the world like the piazza of some dead Italian
town, empty, sunny, grass-grown, with a row of yellow houses overhanging
it, an unfrequented café with a striped awning, a tall, cold, florid,
uninteresting cathedral of the eighteenth century on one side, and on
the other a shady walk which forms part of an old rampart. I followed
this walk for some time, under the stunted trees, beside the
grass-covered bastions; it is very charming, winding and wandering,
always with trees. Beneath the rampart is a tidal river, and on the
other side, for a long distance, the mossy walls of the immense garden
of a seminary. Three hundred years ago La Rochelle was the great French
stronghold of Protestantism, but to-day it appears to be a nursery of
Papists.

The walk upon the rampart led me round to one of the gates of the town,
where I found some small modern fortifications and sundry red-legged
soldiers, and, beyond the fortifications, another shady walk--a _mail_,
as the French say, as well as a _champ de manoeuvre_--on which latter
expanse the poor little red-legs were doing their exercise. It was all
very quiet and very picturesque, rather in miniature; and at once very
tidy and a little out of repair. This, however, was but a meagre
back-view of La Rochelle, or poor side-view at best. There are other
gates than the small fortified aperture just mentioned; one of them, an
old grey arch beneath a fine clock-tower, I had passed through on my way
from the station. This substantial Tour de l'Horloge separates the town
proper from the port; for beyond the old grey arch the place presents
its bright, expressive little face to the sea. I had a charming walk
about the harbour and along the stone piers and sea-walls that shut it
in. This indeed, to take things in their order, was after I had had my
breakfast (which I took on arriving) and after I had been to the _hôtel
de ville_. The inn had a long narrow garden behind it, with some very
tall trees; and passing through this garden to a dim and secluded _salle
à manger_, buried in the heavy shade, I had, while I sat at my repast, a
feeling of seclusion which amounted almost to a sense of incarceration.
I lost this sense, however, after I had paid my bill, and went out to
look for traces of the famous siege, which is the principal title of La
Rochelle to renown. I had come thither partly because I thought it would
be interesting to stand for a few moments in so gallant a spot, and
partly because, I confess, I had a curiosity to see what had been the
starting-point of the Huguenot emigrants who founded the town of New
Rochelle in the State of New York, a place in which I had passed sundry
memorable hours. It was strange to think, as I strolled through the
peaceful little port, that these quiet waters, during the wars of
religion, had swelled with a formidable naval power. The Rochelais had
fleets and admirals, and their stout little Protestant bottoms carried
defiance up and down.

To say that I found any traces of the siege would be to misrepresent the
taste for vivid whitewash by which La Rochelle is distinguished to-day.
The only trace is the dent in the marble top of the table on which, in
the _hôtel de ville_, Jean Guiton, the mayor of the city, brought down
his dagger with an oath when in 1628 the vessels and regiments of
Richelieu closed about it on sea and land. This terrible functionary was
the soul of the resistance; he held out from February

[Illustration: LA ROCHELLE]

to October in the midst of pestilence and famine. The whole episode has
a brilliant place among the sieges of history; it has been related a
hundred times, and I may only glance at it and pass. I limit my ambition
in these light pages to speaking of those things of which I have
personally received an impression, and I have no such impression of the
defence of La Rochelle. The _hôtel de ville_ is a pretty little
building, in the style of the Renaissance of Francis I.; but it has left
much of its interest in the hands of the restorers. It has been "done
up" without mercy; its natural place would be at Rochelle the New. A
sort of battlemented curtain, flanked with turrets, divides it from the
street and contains a low door (a low door in a high wall is always
felicitous), which admits you to an inner court, where you discover the
face of the building. It has statues set into it and is raised upon a
very low and very deep arcade. The principal function of the deferential
old portress who conducts you over the place is to call your attention
to the indented table of Jean Guiton; but she shows you other objects of
interest besides. The interior is absolutely new and extremely
sumptuous, abounding in tapestries, upholstery, morocco, velvet, satin.
This is especially the case with a really beautiful _grande salle_,
where, surrounded with the most expensive upholstery, the mayor holds
his official receptions. (So at least said my worthy portress.) The
mayors of La Rochelle appear to have changed a good deal since the days
of the grim Guiton; but these evidences of municipal splendour are
interesting for the light they throw on French manners. Imagine the
mayor of an English or an American town of twenty thousand inhabitants
holding magisterial soirées in the town hall! The said _grande salle_,
which is unchanged in form and in its larger features, is, I believe,
the room in which the Rochelais debated as to whether they should shut
themselves up, and decided in the affirmative. The table and chair of
Jean Guiton have been restored, like everything else, and are very
elegant and coquettish pieces of furniture--incongruous relics of a
season of starvation and blood. I believe that Protestantism is somewhat
shrunken to-day at La Rochelle, and has taken refuge mainly in the
_haute société_ and in a single place of worship. There was nothing
particular to remind me of its supposed austerity as, after leaving the
_hôtel de ville_, I walked along the empty porticos and out of the Tour
de l'Horloge, which I have already mentioned. If I stopped and looked up
at this venerable monument, it was not to ascertain the hour, for I
foresaw that I should have more time at La Rochelle than I knew what to
do with; but because its high, grey, weather-beaten face was an obvious
subject for a sketch.

The little port, which has two basins and is accessible only to vessels
of light tonnage, had a certain gaiety and as much local colour as you
please. Fisher-folk of picturesque type were strolling about, most of
them Bretons; several of the men with handsome, simple faces, not at all
brutal, and with a splendid brownness--the golden-brown colour on cheek
and beard that you see on an old Venetian sail. It was a squally,
showery day, with sudden drizzles of sunshine; rows of rich-toned
fishing-smacks were drawn up along the quays. The harbour is effective
to the eye by reason of three battered old towers which at different
points overhang it and look infinitely weather-washed and sea-silvered.
The most striking of these, the Tour de la Lanterne, is a big grey mass

[Illustration]

of the fifteenth century, flanked with turrets and crowned with a Gothic
steeple. I found it was called by the people of the place the Tour des
Quatre Sergents, though I know not what connection it has with the
touching history of the four young sergeants of the garrison of La
Rochelle who were arrested in 1821 as conspirators against the
Government of the Bourbons, and executed, amid general indignation, in
Paris in the following year. The quaint little walk, with its label of
Rue sur les Murs, to which one ascends from beside the Grosse Horloge,
leads to this curious Tour de la Lanterne and passes under it. This walk
has the top of the old town-wall, towards the sea, for a parapet on one
side, and is bordered on the other with decent but irregular little
tenements of fishermen, where brown old women, whose caps are as white
as if they were painted, seem chiefly in possession. In this direction
there is a very pretty stretch of shore, out of the town, through the
fortifications (which are Vauban's, by the way); through, also, a
diminutive public garden or straggling shrubbery which edges the water
and carries its stunted verdure as far as a big Établissement des Bains.
It was too late in the year to bathe, and the Établissement had the
bankrupt aspect which belongs to such places out of the season; so I
turned my back upon it and gained, by a circuit in the course of which
there were sundry water-side items to observe, the other side of the
cheery little port, where there is a long breakwater and a still longer
sea-wall, on which I walked a while, to inhale the strong, salt breath
of the Bay of Biscay. La Rochelle serves, in the months of July and
August, as a _station de bains_ for a modest provincial society; and,
putting aside the question of inns, it must be charming on summer
afternoons.

[Illustration]




Chapter xvii

[Poitiers]


It is an injustice to Poitiers to approach her by night, as I did some
three hours after leaving La Rochelle; for what Poitiers has of best, as
they would say at Poitiers, is the appearance she presents to the
arriving stranger who puts his head out of the window of the train. I
gazed into the gloom from such an aperture before we got into the
station, for I remembered the impression received on another occasion;
but I saw nothing save the universal night, spotted here and there with
an ugly railway lamp. It was only as I departed, the following day, that
I assured myself that Poitiers still makes something of the figure she
ought on the summit of her considerable hill. I have a kindness for any
little group of towers, any cluster of roofs and chimneys, that lift
themselves from an eminence over which a long road ascends in zigzags;
such a picture creates for the moment a presumption that you are in
Italy, and even leads you to believe that if you mount the winding road
you will come to an old town-wall, an expanse of creviced brownness, and
pass under a gateway surmounted by the arms of a mediæval despot. Why I
should find it a pleasure in France to imagine myself in Italy, is more
than I can say; the illusion has never lasted long enough to be
analysed. From the bottom of its perch Poitiers looks large and high;
and indeed, the evening I reached it, the interminable climb of the
omnibus of the hotel I had selected, which I found at the station, gave
me the measure of its commanding position. This hotel, "magnifique
construction ornée de statues," as the Guide-Joanne, usually so
reticent, takes the trouble to announce, has an omnibus, and, I suppose,
has statues, though I didn't perceive them; but it has very little else
save immemorial accumulations of dirt. It is magnificent, if you will,
but it is not even relatively proper; and a dirty inn has always seemed
to me the dirtiest of human things--it has so many opportunities to
betray itself.

Poitiers covers a large space, and is as crooked and straggling as you
please; but these advantages are not accompanied with any very salient
features or any great wealth of architecture. Although there are few
picturesque houses, however, there are two or three curious old
churches. Notre Dame la Grande, in the market-place, a small romanesque
structure of the twelfth century, has a most interesting and venerable
exterior. Composed, like all the churches of Poitiers, of a light brown
stone with a yellowish tinge, it is covered with primitive but ingenious
sculptures, and is really an impressive monument. Within, it has lately
been daubed over with the most hideous decorative painting that was
ever inflicted upon passive pillars and indifferent vaults. This
battered yet coherent little edifice has the touching look that resides
in everything supremely old; it has arrived at the age at which such
things cease to feel the years; the waves of time have worn its edges to
a kind of patient dulness; there is something mild and smooth, like the
stillness, the deafness, of an octogenarian, even in its rudeness of
ornament, and it has become insensible to differences of a century or
two. The cathedral interested me much less than Our Lady the Great, and
I have not the spirit to go into statistics about it. It is not
statistical to say that the cathedral stands half-way down the hill of
Poitiers, in a quiet and grass-grown _place_, with an approach of
crooked lanes and blank garden-walls, and that its most striking
dimension is the width of its façade. This width is extraordinary, but
it fails, somehow, to give nobleness to the edifice, which looks within
(Murray makes the remark) like a large public hall. There are a nave and
two aisles, the latter about as high as the nave; and there are some
very fearful modern pictures, which you may see much better than you
usually see those specimens of the old masters that lurk in glowing
side-chapels, there being no fine old glass to diffuse a kindly gloom.
The sacristan of the cathedral showed me something much better than all
this bright bareness; he led me a short distance out of it to the small
Temple de Saint-Jean, which is the most curious object at Poitiers. It
is an early Christian chapel, one of the earliest in France; originally,
it would seem--that is, in the sixth or seventh century--a baptistery,
but converted into a church while the Christian era was still
comparatively young. The Temple de Saint-Jean is therefore a monument
even more venerable than Notre Dame la Grande, and that numbness of age
which I imputed to Notre Dame ought to reside in still larger measure in
its crude and colourless little walls. I call them crude, in spite of
their having been baked through by the centuries, only because, although
certain rude arches and carvings are let into them and they are
surmounted at either end with a small gable, they have (so far as I can
remember) little fascination of surface. Notre Dame is still expressive,
still pretends to be alive; but the temple has delivered its message and
is completely at rest. It retains a kind of atrium, on the level of the
street, from which you descend to the original floor, now uncovered, but
buried for years under a false bottom. A semicircular apse was,
apparently at the time of its conversion into a church, thrown out from
the east wall. In the middle is the cavity of the old baptismal font.
The walls and vaults are covered with traces of extremely archaic
frescoes, attributed, I believe, to the twelfth century. These vague,
gaunt, staring fragments of figures are, to a certain extent, a reminder
of some of the early Christian churches in Rome; they even faintly
recalled to me the great mosaics of Ravenna. The Temple de Saint-Jean
has neither the antiquity nor the completeness of those extraordinary
monuments, nearly the most impressive in Europe; but, as one may say, it
is very well for Poitiers.

Not far from it, in a lonely corner which was animated for the moment by
the vociferations of several old women who were selling tapers,
presumably for the occasion of a particular devotion, is the graceful
romanesque church erected in the twelfth century to Saint Radegonde--a
lady who found means to be a saint even in the capacity of a
Merovingian queen. It bears a general resemblance to Notre Dame la
Grande, and, as I remember it, is corrugated in somewhat the same manner
with porous-looking carvings; but I confess that what I chiefly
recollect is the row of old women sitting in front of it, each with a
tray of waxen tapers in her lap, and upbraiding me for my neglect of the
opportunity to offer such a tribute to the saint. I know not whether
this privilege is occasional or constant; within the church there was no
appearance of a festival, and I see that the name-day of Saint Radegonde
occurs in August, so that the importunate old women sit there always
perhaps and deprive of its propriety the epithet I just applied to this
provincial corner. In spite of the old women, however, I suspect that
the place is lonely; and indeed it is perhaps the old women who have
made the desolation.

The lion of Poitiers in the eyes of the natives is doubtless the Palais
de Justice, in the shadow of which the statue-guarded hotel, just
mentioned, erects itself; and the gem of the court-house, which has a
prosy modern front, with pillars and a high flight of steps, is the
curious _salle des pas perdus_, or central hall, out of which the
different tribunals open. This is a feature of every French court-house,
and seems the result of a conviction that a palace of justice--the
French deal in much finer names than we--should be in some degree
palatial. The great hall at Poitiers has a long pedigree, as its walls
date back to the twelfth century and its open wooden roof, as well as
the remarkable trio of chimney-pieces at the right end of the room as
you enter, to the fifteenth. The three tall fireplaces, side by side,
with a delicate gallery running along the top of them, constitute the
originality of this ancient chamber, and make one think of the groups
that must formerly have gathered there--of all the wet boot-soles, the
trickling doublets, the stiffened fingers, the rheumatic shanks, that
must have been presented to such an incomparable focus of heat. To-day,
I am afraid, these mighty hearths are for ever cold; justice is probably
administered with the aid of a modern _calorifère_, and the walls of the
palace are perforated with regurgitating tubes. Behind and above the
gallery that surmounts the three fireplaces are high Gothic windows, the
tracery of which masks, in some sort, the chimneys; and in each angle of
this and of the room to the right and left of the trio of chimneys is an
open-work spiral staircase, ascending to--I forget where; perhaps to the
roof of the edifice. The whole side of the _salle_ is very lordly, and
seems to express an unstinted hospitality, to extend the friendliest of
all invitations, to bid the whole world come and get warm. It was the
invention of John, Duke of Berry and Count of Poitou, about 1395. I give
this information on the authority of the Guide-Joanne, from which source
I gather much other curious learning; as, for instance, that it was in
this building, when it had surely a very different front, that Charles
VII. was proclaimed king in 1422; and that here Jeanne Darc was
subjected, in 1429, to the inquisition of sundry doctors and matrons.

The most charming thing at Poitiers is simply the Promenade de
Blossac--a small public garden at one end of the flat top of the hill.
It has a happy look of the last century (having been arranged at that
period), and a beautiful sweep of view over the surrounding country, and
especially of the course of the little river Clain, which winds about a
part of the base of the big mound of Poitiers. The limit of this dear
little garden is formed, on the side that turns away from the town, by
the rampart erected in the fourteenth century and by its big
semicircular bastions. This rampart, of great length, has a low parapet;
you look over it at the charming little vegetable-gardens with which the
base of the hill appears exclusively to be garnished. The whole prospect
is delightful, especially the details of the part just under the walls,
at the end of the walk. Here the river makes a shining twist which a
painter might have invented, and the side of the hill is terraced into
several hedges--a sort of tangle of small blooming patches and little
pavilions with peaked roofs and green shutters. It is idle to attempt to
reproduce all this in words; it should be reproduced only in
water-colours. The reader, however, will already have remarked that
disparity in these ineffectual pages, which are pervaded by the attempt
to sketch without a palette or brushes. He will doubtless also be struck
with the grovelling vision which, on such a spot as the ramparts of
Poitiers, peoples itself with carrots and cabbages rather than with
images of the Black Prince and the captive king. I am not sure that in
looking out from the Promenade de Blossac you command the old
battle-field; it is enough that it was not far off, and that the great
rout of Frenchmen poured into the walls of Poitiers, leaving on the
ground a number of the fallen equal to the little army (eight thousand)
of the invader. I did think of the battle. I wondered, rather
helplessly, where it had taken place; and I came away (as the reader
will see from the preceding sentence) without finding out. This
indifference, however, was a result rather of a general dread of
military topography than of a want of admiration of this particular
victory, which I have always supposed to be one of the most brilliant
on record. Indeed, I should be almost ashamed, and very much at a loss,
to say what light it was that this glorious day seemed to me to have
left for ever on the horizon, and why the very name of the place had
always caused my blood gently to tingle. It is carrying the feeling of
race to quite inscrutable lengths when a vague American permits himself
an emotion because more than five centuries ago, on French soil, one
rapacious Frenchman got the better of another. Edward was a Frenchman as
well as John, and French were the cries that urged each of the hosts to
the fight. French is the beautiful motto graven round the image of the
Black Prince as he lies for ever at rest in the choir of Canterbury: _à
la mort ne pensai-je mye_. Nevertheless, the victory of Poitiers
declines to lose itself in these considerations; the sense of it is a
part of our heritage, the joy of it a part of our imagination, and it
filters down through centuries and migrations till it titillates a New
Yorker who forgets in his elation that he happens at that moment to be
enjoying the hospitality of France. It was something done, I know not
how justly, for England; and what was done in the fourteenth century for
England was done also for New York.

[Illustration]




Chapter xviii

[Angoulême]


If it was really for the sake of the Black Prince that I had stopped at
Poitiers (for my prevision of Notre Dame la Grande and of the little
temple of St. John was of the dimmest), I ought to have stopped at
Angoulême for the sake of David and Eve Séchard, of Lucien de Rubempré
and of Madame de Bargeton, who when she wore a _toilette étudiée_
sported a Jewish turban ornamented with an Eastern brooch, a scarf of
gauze, a necklace of cameos, and a robe of "painted muslin," whatever
that may be; treating herself to these luxuries out of an income of
twelve thousand francs. The persons I have mentioned have not that
vagueness of identity which is the misfortune of historical characters;
they are real, supremely real, thanks to their affiliation to the great
Balzac, who had invented an artificial reality which was as much better
than the vulgar article as mock-turtle soup is than the liquid it
emulates. The first time I read "Les Illusions Perdues" I should have
refused to believe that I was capable of passing the old capital of
Anjou without alighting to visit the Houmeau. But we never know what we
are capable of till we are tested, as I reflected when I found myself
looking back at Angoulême from the window of the train just after we had
emerged from the long tunnel that passes under the town. This tunnel
perforates the hill on which, like Poitiers, Angoulême rears itself, and
which gives it an elevation still greater than that of Poitiers. You may
have a tolerable look at the cathedral without leaving the railway
carriage, for it stands just above the tunnel and is exposed, much
foreshortened, to the spectator below. There is evidently a charming
walk round the plateau of the town commanding those pretty views of
which Balzac gives an account. But the train whirled me away, and these
are my only impressions. The truth is that I had no need, just at that
moment, of putting myself into communication with Balzac, for opposite
to me in the compartment were a couple of figures almost as vivid as the
actors in the "Comédie Humaine." One of these was a very genial and
dirty old priest, and the other was a reserved and concentrated young
monk--the latter (by which I mean a monk of any kind) being a rare sight
to-day in France. This young man indeed was mitigatedly monastic. He had
a big brown frock and cowl, but he had also a shirt and a pair of shoes;
he had, instead of a hempen scourge round his waist, a stout leather
thong, and he carried with him a very profane little valise. He also
read, from beginning to end, the _Figaro_ which the old priest, who had
done the same, presented to him; and he looked altogether as if, had he
not been a monk, he would have made a distinguished officer of
engineers.

When he was not reading the _Figaro_ he was conning his breviary or
answering, with rapid precision and with a deferential but discouraging
dryness, the frequent questions of his companion, who was of quite
another type. This worthy had a bored, good-natured, unbuttoned,
expansive look; was talkative, restless, almost disreputably human. He
was surrounded by a great deal of small luggage, and had scattered over
the carriage his books, his papers, and fragments of his lunch, and the
contents of an extraordinary bag which he kept beside him--a kind of
secular reliquary--and which appeared to contain the odds and ends of a
lifetime, as he took from it successively a pair of slippers, an old
padlock (which evidently did not belong to it), an opera-glass, a
collection of almanacs, and a large sea-shell, which he very carefully
examined. I think that if he had not been afraid of the young monk, who
was so much more serious than he, he would have held the shell to his
ear like a child. Indeed, he was a very childish and delightful old
priest, and his companion evidently thought him quite frivolous. But I
liked him the better of the two. He was not a country curé, but an
ecclesiastic of some rank, who had seen a good deal both of the church
and of the world; and if I too had not been afraid of his colleague, who
read the _Figaro_ as seriously as if it had been an encyclical, I should
have entered into conversation with him.

All this while I was getting on to Bordeaux, where I permitted myself to
spend three days. I am afraid I have next to nothing to show for them,
and that there would be little profit in lingering on this episode,
which is the less to be justified as I had in former years examined
Bordeaux attentively enough. It contains a very good hotel--an hotel not
good enough, however, to keep you there for its own sake. For the rest,
Bordeaux is a big, rich, handsome, imposing commercial town, with long
rows of fine old eighteenth-century houses which overlook the yellow
Garonne. I have spoken of the quays of Nantes as fine, but those of
Bordeaux have a wider sweep and a still more architectural air. The
appearance of such a port as this makes the Anglo-Saxon tourist blush
for the sordid water-fronts of Liverpool and New York, which, with their
larger activity, have so much more reason to be stately. Bordeaux gives
a great impression of prosperous industries, and suggests delightful
ideas, images of prune-boxes and bottled claret. As the focus of
distribution of the best wine in the world, it is indeed a sacred
city--dedicated to the worship of Bacchus in the most discreet form. The
country all about it is covered with precious vineyards, sources of
fortune to their owners and of satisfaction to distant consumers: and as
you look over to the hills beyond the Garonne you see them, in the
autumn sunshine, fretted with the rusty richness of this or that
immortal _clos_. But the principal picture, within the town, is that of
the vast curving quays, bordered with houses that look like the _hôtels_
of farmers-general of the last century, and of the wide, tawny river,
crowded with shipping and spanned by the largest of bridges. Some of the
types on the water-side are of the sort that arrest a sketcher--figures
of stalwart, brown-faced Basques, such as I had seen of old in great
numbers at Biarritz, with their loose circular caps, their white
sandals, their air of walking for a wager. Never was a tougher, a harder
race. They are not mariners nor watermen, but, putting questions of
temper aside, they are the best possible dock-porters. "Il s'y fait un
commerce terrible," a _douanier_ said to me, as he looked up and down
the interminable docks; and such a place has indeed much to say of the
wealth, the capacity for production, of France--the bright, cheerful,
smokeless industry of the wonderful country which produces, above all,
the agreeable things of life, and turns even its defeats and revolutions
into gold. The whole town has an air of almost depressing opulence, an
appearance which culminates in the great _place_ which surrounds the
Grand-Théatre--an establishment of the highest style, encircled with
columns, arcades, lamps, gilded cafés. One feels it to be a monument to
the virtue of the well-selected bottle. If I had not forbidden myself to
linger, I should venture to insist on this and, at the risk of being
called fantastic, trace an analogy between good claret and the best
qualities of the French mind; pretend that there is a taste of sound
Bordeaux in all the happiest manifestations of that fine organ, and
that, correspondingly, there is a touch of French reason, French
completeness, in a glass of Pontet-Canet. The danger of such an
excursion would lie mainly in its being so open to the reader to take
the ground from under my feet by saying that good claret doesn't exist.
To this I should have no reply whatever. I should be unable to tell him
where to find it. I certainly didn't find it at Bordeaux, where I drank
a most vulgar fluid; and it is of course notorious that a large part of
mankind is occupied in vainly looking for it. There was a great pretence
of putting it forward at the Exhibition which was going on at Bordeaux
at the time of my visit, an "exposition philomathique," lodged in a
collection of big temporary buildings in the Allées d'Orléans, and
regarded by the Bordelais for the moment as the most brilliant feature
of their city. Here were pyramids of bottles, mountains

[Illustration: BORDEAUX--THE QUAY]

of bottles, to say nothing of cases and cabinets of bottles. The
contemplation of these glittering tiers was of course not very
convincing; and indeed the whole arrangement struck me as a high
impertinence. Good wine is not an optical pleasure, it is an inward
emotion; and if there was a chamber of degustation on the premises, I
failed to discover it. It was not in the search for it, indeed, that I
spent half an hour in this bewildering bazaar. Like all "expositions,"
it seemed to me to be full of ugly things, and gave one a portentous
idea of the quantity of rubbish that man carries with him on his course
through the ages. Such an amount of luggage for a journey after all so
short! There were no individual objects; there was nothing but dozens
and hundreds, all machine-made and expressionless, in spite of the
repeated grimace, the conscious smartness, of "the last new thing," that
was stamped on all of them. The fatal facility of the French _article_
becomes at last as irritating as the refrain of a popular song. The poor
"Indiens Galibis" struck me as really more interesting--a group of
stunted savages who formed one of the attractions of the place and were
confined in a pen in the open air, with a rabble of people pushing and
squeezing, hanging over the barrier, to look at them. They had no
grimace, no pretension to be new, no desire to catch your eye. They
looked at their visitors no more than they looked at each other, and
seemed ancient, indifferent, terribly bored.

[Illustration]




Chapter xix

[Toulouse]


There is much entertainment in the journey through the wide, smiling
garden of Gascony; I speak of it as I took it in going from Bordeaux to
Toulouse. It is the south, quite the south, and had for the present
narrator its full measure of the charm he is always determined to find
in countries that may even by courtesy be said to appertain to the sun.
It was, moreover, the happy and genial view of these mild latitudes,
which, goodness knows, often have a dreariness of their own; a land
teeming with corn and wine and speaking everywhere (that is everywhere
the phylloxera had not laid it waste) of wealth and plenty. The road
runs constantly near the Garonne, touching now and then its slow, brown,
rather sullen stream, a sullenness that encloses great dangers and
disasters. The traces of the horrible floods of 1875 have disappeared,
and the land smiles placidly enough while it waits for another
immersion. Toulouse, at the period I speak of, was up to its middle (and
in places above it) in water, and looks still as if it had been
thoroughly soaked--as if it had faded and shrivelled with a long
steeping. The fields and copses, of course, are more forgiving. The
railway line follows as well the charming Canal du Midi, which is as
pretty as a river, barring the straightness, and here and there occupies
the foreground, beneath a screen of dense, tall trees, while the Garonne
takes a larger and more irregular course a little way beyond it. People
who are fond of canals--and, speaking from the pictorial standpoint, I
hold the taste to be most legitimate--will delight in this admirable
specimen of the class, which has a very interesting history, not to be
narrated here. On the other side of the road (the left), all the way,
runs a long, low line of hills, or rather one continuous hill, or
perpetual cliff, with a straight top, in the shape of a ledge of rock,
which might pass for a ruined wall. I am afraid the reader will lose
patience with my habit of constantly referring to the landscape of Italy
as if that were the measure of the beauty of every other. Yet I am still
more afraid that I cannot apologise for it, and must leave it in its
culpable nakedness. It is an idle habit; but the reader will long since
have discovered that this was an idle journey and that I give my
impressions as they came to me. It came to me, then, that in all this
view there was something transalpine, with a greater smartness and
freshness and much less elegance and languor. This impression was
occasionally deepened by the appearance, on the long eminence of which I
speak, of a village, a church, a château, that seemed to look down at
the plain from over the ruined wall. The perpetual vines, the
bright-faced flat-roofed houses, covered with tiles, the softness and
sweetness of the light and air, recalled the prosier portions of the
Lombard plain. Toulouse itself has a little of this Italian expression,
but not enough to give a colour to its dark, dirty, crooked streets,
which are irregular without being eccentric, and which, if it were not
for the superb church of Saint-Sernin, would be quite destitute of
monuments.

I have already alluded to the way in which the names of certain places
impose themselves on the mind, and I must add that of Toulouse to the
list of expressive appellations. It certainly evokes a vision--suggests
something highly _méridional_. But the city, it must be confessed, is
less pictorial than the word, in spite of the Place du Capitole, in
spite of the quay of the Garonne, in spite of the curious cloister of
the old museum. What justifies the images that are latent in the word is
not the aspect, but the history, of the town. The hotel to which the
well-advised traveller will repair stands in a corner of the Place du
Capitole, which is the heart and centre of Toulouse, and which bears a
vague and inexpensive resemblance to Piazza Castello at Turin. The
Capitol, with a wide modern face, occupies one side, and, like the
palace at Turin, looks across at a high arcade, under which the hotels,
the principal shops, and the lounging citizens are gathered. The shops,
are probably better than the Turinese, but the people are not so good.
Stunted, shabby, rather vitiated looking, they have none of the personal
richness of the sturdy Piedmontese; and I will take this occasion to
remark that in the course of a journey of several weeks in the French
provinces I rarely encountered a well-dressed male. Can it be possible
that republics are unfavourable to a certain attention to one's boots
and one's beard? I risk this somewhat futile inquiry because the
proportion of neat coats and trousers seemed to be about the same in
France and in my native land. It was notably lower than in England and
in Italy, and even warranted the supposition that most good provincials
have their chin shaven and their boots blacked but once a week. I hasten
to add, lest my observation should appear to be of a sadly superficial
character, that the manners and conversation of these gentlemen bore
(whenever I had occasion to appreciate them) no relation to the state of
their chin and their boots. They were almost always marked by an extreme
amenity. At Toulouse there was the strongest temptation to speak to
people simply for the entertainment of hearing them reply with that
curious, that fascinating accent of the Languedoc, which appears to
abound in final consonants and leads the Toulousians to say _bien-g_ and
_maison-g_ like Englishmen learning French. It is as if they talked with
their teeth rather than with their tongue. I find in my note-book a
phrase in regard to Toulouse which is perhaps a little ill-natured, but
which I will transcribe as it stands: "The oddity is that the place
should be both animated and dull. A big, brown-skinned population,
clattering about in a flat, tortuous town, which produces nothing
whatever that I can discover. Except the church of Saint-Sernin and the
fine old court of the Hôtel d'Assézat, Toulouse has no architecture; the
houses are for the most part of brick, of a greyish-red colour, and have
no particular style. The brickwork of the place is in fact very
poor--inferior to that of the North Italian towns and quite wanting in
the wealth of tone which this homely material takes on in general in the
climates of dampness and greenness." And then my note-book goes on to
narrate a little visit to the Capitol, which was soon made, as the
building was in course of repair and half the rooms were closed.

[Illustration]




Chapter xx

[Toulouse: the Capitol]


The history of Toulouse is detestable, saturated with blood and perfidy;
and the ancient custom of the Floral Games, grafted upon all sorts of
internecine traditions, seems, with its false pastoralism, its mock
chivalry, its display of fine feelings, to set off rather than to
mitigate these horrors. The society was founded in the fourteenth
century, and it has held annual meetings ever since--meetings at which
poems in the fine old _langue d'oc_ are declaimed and a blushing
laureate is chosen. This business takes place in the Capitol, before the
chief magistrate of the town, who is known as the _capitoul_, and of all
the pretty women as well--a class very numerous at Toulouse. It is
unusual to present a finer person than that of the portress who
pretended to show me the apartments in which the Floral Games are held;
a big, brown, expansive woman, still in the prime of life, with a
speaking eye, an extraordinary assurance, and a pair of magenta
stockings, which were inserted into the neatest and most polished little
black sabots, and which, as she clattered up the stairs before me,
lavishly displaying them, made her look like the heroine of an
_opéra-bouffe_. Her talk was all in _n_'s, _g_'s and _d_'s, and in mute
_e_'s strongly accented, as _autré_, _théâtré_, _splendidé_--the last
being an epithet she applied to everything the Capitol contained, and
especially to a horrible picture representing the famous Clémence
Isaure, the reputed foundress of the poetical contest, presiding on one
of these occasions. I wondered whether Clémence Isaure had been anything
like this terrible Toulousaine of to-day, who would have been a capital
figure-head for a floral game. The lady in whose honour the picture I
have just mentioned was painted is a somewhat mythical personage, and
she is not to be found in the "Biographie Universelle." She is, however,
a very graceful myth; and if she never existed, her statue at least
does--a shapeless effigy transferred to the Capitol from the so-called
tomb of Clémence in the old church of La Daurade. The great hall in
which the Floral Games are held was encumbered with scaffoldings, and I
was unable to admire the long series of busts of the bards who have won
prizes and the portraits of all the capitouls of Toulouse. As a
compensation I was introduced to a big bookcase filled with the poems
that have been crowned since the days of the troubadours (a portentous
collection), and the big butcher's knife with which, according to the
legend, Henry, Duke of Montmorency, who had conspired against the great
cardinal with Gaston of Orleans and Mary de'Medici, was, in 1632,
beheaded on this spot by the order of Richelieu. With these objects the
interest of the Capitol was exhausted. The building indeed has not the
grandeur of its name, which is a sort of promise that the visitor will
find some sensible embodiment of the old Roman tradition that once
nourished in this part of France. It is inferior in impressiveness to
the other three famous Capitols of the modern world--that of Rome (if I
may call the present structure modern) and those of Washington and
Albany!

The only Roman remains at Toulouse are to be found in the museum--a very
interesting establishment, which I was condemned to see as imperfectly
as I had seen the Capitol. It was being rearranged; and the gallery of
paintings, which is the least interesting feature, was the only part
that was not upside-down. The pictures are mainly of the modern French
school, and I remember nothing but a powerful though disagreeable
specimen of Henner, who paints the human body, and paints it so well,
with a brush dipped in blackness; and, placed among the paintings, a
bronze replica of the charming young David of Mercié. These things have
been set out in the church of an old monastery, long since suppressed,
and the rest of the collection occupies the cloisters. These are two in
number--a small one, which you enter first from the street, and a very
vast and elegant one beyond it, which, with its light gothic arches and
slim columns (of the fourteenth century), its broad walk, its little
garden with old tombs and statues in the centre, is by far the most
picturesque, the most sketchable, spot in Toulouse. It must be doubly so
when the Roman busts, inscriptions, slabs, and sarcophagi are ranged
along the walls; it must indeed (to compare small things with great, and
as the judicious Murray remarks) bear a certain resemblance to the Campo
Santo at Pisa. But these things are absent now; the cloister is a
litter of confusion, and its treasures have been stowed away confusedly
in sundry inaccessible rooms. The custodian attempted to console me by
telling me that when they are exhibited again it will be on a scientific
basis and with an order and regularity of which they were formerly
innocent. But I was not consoled. I wanted simply the spectacle, the
picture, and I didn't care in the least for the classification. Old
Roman fragments exposed to light in the open air, under a southern sky,
in a quadrangle round a garden, have an immortal charm simply in their
general effect; and the charm is all the greater when the soil of the
very place has yielded them up.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxi

[Toulouse: Saint-Sernin]


My real consolation was an hour I spent in Saint-Sernin, one of the
noblest churches in southern France, and easily the first among those of
Toulouse. This great structure, a masterpiece of twelfth-century
romanesque and dedicated to Saint Saturninus--the Toulousains have
abbreviated--is, I think, alone worth a journey to Toulouse. What makes
it so is the extraordinary seriousness of its interior; no other term
occurs to me as expressing so well the character of its clear grey nave.
As a general thing, I favour little the fashion of attributing moral
qualities to buildings; I shrink from talking about tender cornices and
sincere campanili; but one feels that one can scarce get on without
imputing some sort of morality to Saint-Sernin. As it stands to-day, the
church has been completely restored by Viollet-le-Duc. The exterior is
of brick, and has little charm save that of a tower of four rows of
arches, narrowing together as they ascend. The nave is of great length
and height, the barrel-roof of stone, the effect of the round arches and
pillars in the triforium especially fine. There are two low aisles on
either side. The choir is very deep and narrow; it seems to close
together, and looks as if it were meant for intensely earnest rites. The
transepts are most noble, especially the arches of the second tier. The
whole church is narrow for its length and is singularly complete and
homogeneous. As I say all this I feel that I quite fail to give an
impression of its manly gravity, its strong proportions, or of the
lonesome look of its renovated stones as I sat there while the October
twilight gathered. It is a real work of art, a high conception. The
crypt, into which I was eventually led captive by an importunate
sacristan, is quite another affair, though indeed I suppose it may also
be spoken of as a work of art. It is a rich museum of relics, and
contains the head of Saint Thomas Aquinas wrapped up in a napkin and
exhibited in a glass case. The sacristan took a lamp and guided me
about, presenting me to one saintly remnant after another. The
impression was grotesque, but some of the objects were contained in
curious old cases of beaten silver and brass: these things at least,
which looked as if they had been transmitted from the early church, were
venerable. There was, however, a kind of wholesale sanctity about the
place which overshot the mark; it pretends to be one of the holiest
spots in the world. The effect is spoiled by the way

[Illustration: TOULOUSE SAINT-SERNIN (THE TRANSEPT)]

the sacristans hang about and offer to take you into it for ten sous--I
was accosted by two and escaped from another--and by the familiar manner
in which you pop in and out. This episode rather broke the charm of
Saint-Sernin, so that I took my departure and went in search of the
cathedral. It was scarcely worth finding, and struck me as an odd,
dislocated fragment. The front consists only of a portal beside which a
tall brick tower of a later period has been erected. The nave was
wrapped in dimness, with a few scattered lamps. I could only distinguish
an immense vault, like a high cavern, without aisles. Here and there in
the gloom was a kneeling figure; the whole place was mysterious and
lopsided. The choir was curtained off; it appeared not to correspond
with the nave--that is, not to have the same axis. The only other
ecclesiastical impression I gathered at Toulouse came to me in the
church of La Daurade, of which the front, on the quay by the Garonne,
was closed with scaffoldings; so that one entered it from behind, where
it is completely masked by houses, through a door which has at first no
traceable connection with it. It is a vast, high, modernised, heavily
decorated church, dimly lighted at all times, I should suppose, and
enriched by the shades of evening at the time I looked into it. I
perceived that it consisted mainly of a large square, beneath a dome, in
the centre of which a single person--a lady--was praying with the utmost
absorption. The manner of access to the church interposed such an
obstacle to the outer profanities that I had a sense of intruding and
presently withdrew, carrying with me a picture of the vast, still
interior, the gilded roof gleaming in the twilight, and the solitary
worshipper. What was she praying for, and was she not almost afraid to
remain there alone? For the rest, the picturesque at Toulouse consists
principally of the walk beside the Garonne, which is spanned, to the
faubourg of Saint-Cyprien, by a stout brick bridge. This hapless suburb,
the baseness of whose site is noticeable, lay for days under the water
at the time of the last inundations. The Garonne had almost mounted to
the roofs of the houses, and the place continues to present a blighted,
frightened look. Two or three persons with whom I had some conversation
spoke of that time as a memory of horror. I have not done with my
Italian comparisons; I shall never have done with them. I am therefore
free to say that in the way in which Toulouse looks out on the Garonne
there was something that reminded me vaguely of the way in which Pisa
looks out on the Arno. The red-faced houses--all of brick--along the
quay have a mixture of brightness and shabbiness, as well as the fashion
of the open _loggia_ in the top-storey. The river, with another bridge
or two, might be the Arno, and the buildings on the other side of it--a
hospital, a suppressed convent--dip their feet into it with real
southern cynicism. I have spoken of the old Hôtel d'Assézat as the best
house at Toulouse; with the exception of the cloister of the museum, it
is the only "bit" I remember. It has fallen from the state of a noble
residence of the sixteenth century to that of a warehouse and a set of
offices; but a certain dignity lingers in its melancholy court, which is
divided from the street by a gateway that is still imposing and in which
a clambering vine and a red Virginia-creeper were suspended to the rusty
walls of brick and stone.

The most interesting house at Toulouse is far from being the most
striking. At the door of No. 50 Rue des Filatiers, a featureless, solid
structure, was found

[Illustration: TOULOUSE--THE GARONNE]

hanging, one autumn evening, the body of the young Marc-Antoine Calas,
whose ill-inspired suicide was to be the first act of a tragedy so
horrible. The fanaticism aroused in the townsfolk by this incident; the
execution by torture of Jean Calas, accused as a Protestant of having
hanged his son, who had gone over to the Church of Rome; the ruin of the
family; the claustration of the daughters; the flight of the widow to
Switzerland; her introduction to Voltaire; the excited zeal of that
incomparable partisan and the passionate persistence with which, from
year to year, he pursued a reversal of judgment till at last he obtained
it and devoted the tribunal of Toulouse to execration and the name of
the victims to lasting wonder and pity--these things form part of one of
the most interesting and touching episodes of the social history of the
eighteenth century. The story has the fatal progression, the dark
rigour, of one of the tragic dramas of the Greeks. Jean Calas, advanced
in life, blameless, bewildered, protesting his innocence, had been
broken on the wheel; and the sight of his decent dwelling, which brought
home to me all that had been suffered there, spoiled for me, for half an
hour, the impression of Toulouse.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxii

[Carcassonne]


I spent but a few hours at Carcassonne; but those hours had a rounded
felicity, and I cannot do better than transcribe from my note-book the
little record made at the moment. Vitiated as it may be by crudity and
incoherency, it has at any rate the freshness of a great emotion. This
is the best quality that a reader may hope to extract from a narrative
in which "useful information" and technical lore even of the most
general sort are completely absent. For Carcassonne is moving, beyond a
doubt; and the traveller who in the course of a little tour in France
may have felt himself urged, in melancholy moments, to say that on the
whole the disappointments are as numerous as the satisfactions, must
admit that there can be nothing better than this.

The country after you leave Toulouse continues to be charming; the more
so that it merges its flatness in the distant Cévennes on one side, and
on the other, far away on your right, in the richer range of the
Pyrenees. Olives and cypresses, pergolas and vines, terraces on the
roofs of houses, soft, iridescent mountains, a warm yellow light--what
more could the difficult tourist want? He left his luggage at the
station, warily determined to look at the inn before committing himself
to it. It was so evident (even to a cursory glance) that it might easily
have been much better, that he simply took his way to the town, with the
whole of a superb afternoon before him. When I say the town, I mean the
towns; there being two at Carcassonne, perfectly distinct, and each with
excellent claims to the title. They have settled the matter between
them, however, and the elder, the shrine of pilgrimage, to which the
other is but a stepping-stone, or even, as I may say, a humble door-mat,
takes the name of the Cité. You see nothing of the Cité from the
station; it is masked by the agglomeration of the _ville-basse_, which
is relatively (but only relatively) new. A wonderful avenue of acacias
leads to it from the station--leads past it, rather, and conducts you to
a little high-backed bridge over the Aude, beyond which, detached and
erect, a distinct mediæval silhouette, the Cité presents itself. Like a
rival shop on the invidious side of a street, it has "no connection"
with the establishment across the way, although the two places are
united (if old Carcassonne may be said to be united to anything) by a
vague little rustic faubourg. Perched on its solid pedestal, the perfect
detachment of the Cité is what first strikes you. To take leave, without
delay, of the _ville-basse_, I may say that the splendid acacias I have
mentioned flung a summerish dusk over the place, in which a few
scattered remains of stout walls and big bastions looked venerable and
picturesque. A little boulevard winds round the town, planted with
trees and garnished with more benches than I ever saw provided by a
soft-hearted municipality. This precinct had a warm, lazy, dusty,
southern look, as if the people sat out-of-doors a great deal and
wandered about in the stillness of summer nights. The figure of the
elder town at these hours must be ghostly enough on its neighbouring
hill. Even by day it has the air of a vignette of Gustave Doré, a
couplet of Victor Hugo. It is almost too perfect--as if it were an
enormous model placed on a big green table at a museum. A steep, paved
way, grass-grown like all roads where vehicles never pass, stretches up
to it in the sun. It has a double enceinte, complete outer walls and
complete inner (these, elaborately fortified, are the more curious); and
this congregation of ramparts, towers, bastions, battlements, barbicans,
is as fantastic and romantic as you please. The approach I mention here
leads to the gate that looks toward Toulouse--the Porte de l'Aude. There
is a second, on the other side, called, I believe, the Porte
Narbonnaise, a magnificent gate, flanked with towers thick and tall,
defended by elaborate outworks; and these two apertures alone admit you
to the place--putting aside a small sally-port, protected by a great
bastion, on the quarter that looks toward the Pyrenees.

As a votary, always, in the first instance, of a general impression, I
walked all round the outer enceinte--a process on the very face of it
entertaining. I took to the right of the Porte de l'Aude, without
entering it, where the old moat has been filled in. The filling-in of
the moat has created a grassy level at the foot of the big grey towers,
which, rising at frequent intervals, stretch their stiff curtain of
stone from point to point: the curtain drops without a fold upon the
quiet grass, which was dotted here and there with a humble native dozing
away the golden afternoon. The natives of the elder Carcassonne are all
humble; for the core of the Cité has shrunken and decayed, and there is
little life among the ruins. A few tenacious labourers who work in the
neighbouring fields or in the _ville-basse_, and sundry octogenarians of
both sexes, who are dying where they have lived and contribute much to
the pictorial effect--these are the principal inhabitants. The process
of converting the place from an irresponsible old town into a conscious
"specimen" has of course been attended with eliminations; the population
has, as a general thing, been restored away. I should lose no time in
saying that restoration is the great mark of the Cité. M. Viollet-le-Duc
has worked his will upon it, put it into perfect order, revived the
fortifications in every detail. I do not pretend to judge the
performance, carried out on a scale and in a spirit which really impose
themselves on the imagination. Few architects have had such a chance,
and M. Viollet-le-Duc must have been the envy of the whole restoring
fraternity. The image of a more crumbling Carcassonne rises in the mind,
and there is no doubt that forty years ago the place was more affecting.
On the other hand, as we see it to-day it is a wonderful evocation; and
if there is a great deal of new in the old, there is plenty of old in
the new. The repaired crenellations, the inserted patches of the walls
of the outer circle, sufficiently express this commixture. My walk
brought me into full view of the Pyrenees, which, now that the sun had
begun to sink and the shadows to grow long, had a wonderful violet glow.
The platform at the base of the walls has a greater width on this side,
and it made the scene more complete. Two or three old crones had
crawled out of the Porte Narbonnaise to examine the advancing visitor;
and a very ancient peasant, lying there with his back against a tower,
was tending half a dozen lean sheep. A poor man in a very old blouse,
crippled and with crutches lying beside him, had been brought out and
placed on a stool, where he enjoyed the afternoon as best he might. He
looked so ill and so patient that I spoke to him; found that his legs
were paralysed and he was quite helpless. He had formerly been seven
years in the army, and had made the campaign of Mexico with Bazaine.
Born in the old Cité, he had come back there to end his days. It seemed
strange, as he sat there with those romantic walls behind him and the
great picture of the Pyrenees in front, to think that he had been across
the seas to the far-away new world, had made part of a famous
expedition, and was now a cripple at the gate of the mediæval city where
he had played as a child. All this struck me as a great deal of history
for so modest a figure--a poor little figure that could only just
unclose its palm for a small silver coin.

He was not the only acquaintance I made at Carcassonne. I had not
pursued my circuit of the walls much farther when I encountered a person
of quite another type, of whom I asked some question which had just then
presented itself, and who proved to be the very genius of the spot. He
was a sociable son of the _ville-basse_, a gentleman, and, as I
afterwards learned, an employé at the prefecture--a person, in short,
much esteemed at Carcassonne. (I may say all this, as he will never read
these pages.) He had been ill for a month, and in the company of his
little dog was taking his first airing; in his own phrase, he was
_amoureux-fou de la Cité_--he could lose no time in coming back to it.
He talked of it indeed as a lover, and, giving me for half an hour the
advantage of his company, showed me all the points of the place. (I
speak here always of the outer enceinte; you penetrate to the
inner--which is the specialty of Carcassonne and the great
curiosity--only by application at the lodge of the regular custodian, a
remarkable functionary, who, half an hour later, when I had been
introduced to him by my friend the amateur, marched me over the
fortifications with a tremendous accompaniment of dates and technical
terms.) My companion pointed out to me in particular the traces of
different periods in the structure of the walls. There is a portentous
amount of history embedded in them, beginning with Romans and Visigoths;
here and there are marks of old breaches hastily repaired. We passed
into the town--into that part of it not included in the citadel. It is
the queerest and most fragmentary little place in the world, as
everything save the fortifications is being suffered to crumble away in
order that the spirit of M. Viollet-le-Duc alone may pervade it and it
may subsist simply as a magnificent shell. As the leases of the wretched
little houses fall in, the ground is cleared of them; and a mumbling old
woman approached me in the course of my circuit, inviting me to condole
with her on the disappearance of so many of the hovels which in the last
few hundred years (since the collapse of Carcassonne as a stronghold)
had attached themselves to the base of the walls, in the space between
the two circles. These habitations, constructed of materials taken from
the ruins, nestled there snugly enough. This intermediate space had
therefore become a kind of street, which has crumbled in turn, as the
fortress has grown up again. There are other streets beside, very
diminutive and vague, where you pick your way over heaps of rubbish and
become conscious of unexpected faces looking at you out of windows as
detached as the cherubic heads. The most definite thing in the place was
the little café, where the waiters, I think, must be the ghosts of the
old Visigoths; the most definite, that is, after the little château and
the little cathedral. Everything in the Cité is little; you can walk
round the walls in twenty minutes. On the drawbridge of the château,
which, with a picturesque old face, flanking towers, and a dry moat, is
to-day simply a bare _caserne_, lounged half a dozen soldiers, unusually
small. Nothing could be more odd than to see these objects enclosed in a
receptacle which has much of the appearance of an enormous toy. The Cité
and its population vaguely reminded me of an immense Noah's ark.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxiii

[Carcassonne]


Carcassone dates from the Roman occupation of Gaul. The place commanded
one of the great roads into Spain, and in the fourth century Romans and
Franks ousted each other from such a point of vantage. In the year 436
Theodoric King of the Visigoths superseded both these parties; and it
was during his occupation that the inner enceinte was raised upon the
ruins of the Roman fortifications. Most of the Visigoth towers that are
still erect are seated upon Roman substructions which appear to have
been formed hastily, probably at the moment of the Frankish invasion.
The authors of these solid defences, though occasionally disturbed, held
Carcassonne and the neighbouring country, in which they had established
their kingdom of Septimania, till the year 713, when they were expelled
by the Moors of Spain, who ushered in an unillumined period of four
centuries, of which no traces remain. These facts I derive from a
source no more recondite than a pamphlet by M. Viollet-le-Duc--a very
luminous description of the fortifications, which you may buy from the
accomplished custodian. The writer makes a jump to the year 1209, when
Carcassonne, then forming part of the realm of the viscounts of Béziers
and infected by the Albigensian heresy, was besieged, in the name of the
Pope, by the terrible Simon de Montfort and his army of crusaders. Simon
was accustomed to success, and the town succumbed in the course of a
fortnight. Thirty-one years later, having passed into the hands of the
King of France, it was again besieged by the young Raymond de Trincavel,
the last of the viscounts of Béziers; and of this siege M.
Viollet-le-Duc gives a long and minute account, which the visitor who
has a head for such things may follow, with the brochure in hand, on the
fortifications themselves. The young Raymond de Trincavel, baffled and
repulsed, retired at the end of twenty-four days. Saint Louis and Philip
the Bold, in the thirteenth century, multiplied the defences of
Carcassonne, which was one of the bulwarks of their kingdom on the
Spanish quarter; and from this time forth, being regarded as
impregnable, the place had nothing to fear. It was not even attacked;
and when in 1355 Edward the Black Prince marched into it, the
inhabitants had opened the gates to the conqueror before whom all
Languedoc was prostrate. I am not one of those who, as I said just now,
have a head for such things, and having extracted these few facts, had
made all the use of M. Viollet-le-Duc's pamphlet of which I was capable.

I have mentioned that my obliging friend the _amoureux-fou_ handed me
over to the doorkeeper of the citadel. I should add that I was at first
committed

[Illustration: CARCASSONNE.]

to the wife of this functionary, a stout peasant-woman, who took a key
down from a nail, conducted me to a postern door, and ushered me into
the presence of her husband. Having just begun his rounds with a party
of four persons, he was not many steps in advance. I added myself
perforce to this party, which was not brilliantly composed, except that
two of its members were gendarmes in full toggery, who announced in the
course of our tour that they had been stationed for a year at
Carcassonne and had never before had the curiosity to come up to the
Cité. There was something brilliant certainly in that. The _gardien_ was
an extraordinarily typical little Frenchman, who struck me even more
forcibly than the wonders of the inner enceinte; and as I am bound to
assume, at whatever cost to my literary vanity, that there is not the
slightest danger of his reading these remarks, I may treat him as public
property. With his diminutive stature and his perpendicular spirit, his
flushed face, expressive protuberant eyes, high peremptory voice,
extreme volubility, lucidity and neatness of utterance, he reminded me
of the gentry who figure in the revolutions of his native land. If he
was not a fierce little Jacobin, he ought to have been, for I am sure
there were many men of his pattern on the Committee of Public Safety. He
knew absolutely what he was about, understood the place thoroughly, and
constantly reminded his audience of what he himself had done in the way
of excavations and reparations. He described himself as the brother of
the architect of the work actually going forward (that which has been
done since the death of M. Viollet-le-Duc, I suppose he meant), and this
fact was more illustrative than all the others. It reminded me, as one
is reminded at every turn, of the democratic conditions of French life:
a man of the people, with a wife _en bonnet_, extremely intelligent,
full of special knowledge, and yet remaining essentially of the people
and showing his intelligence with a kind of ferocity, of defiance. Such
a personage helps one to understand the red radicalism of France, the
revolutions, the barricades, the sinister passion for theories. (I do
not, of course, take upon myself to say that the individual I
describe--who can know nothing of the liberties I am taking with him--is
actually devoted to these ideals; I only mean that many such devotees
must have his qualities.) In just the _nuance_ that I have tried to
indicate here it is a terrible pattern of man. Permeated in a high
degree by civilisation, it is yet untouched by the desire which one
finds in the Englishman, in proportion as he rises in the world, to
approximate to the figure of the gentleman. On the other hand, a
_netteté_, a faculty of exposition, such as the English gentleman is
rarely either blessed or cursed with.

This brilliant, this suggestive warden of Carcassonne marched us about
for an hour, haranguing, explaining, illustrating as he went; it was a
complete little lecture, such as might have been delivered at the Lowell
Institute, on the manner in which a first-rate _place forte_ used to be
attacked and defended. Our peregrinations made it very clear that
Carcassonne was impregnable; it is impossible to imagine without having
seen them such refinements of immurement, such ingenuities of
resistance. We passed along the battlements and _chemins de ronde_,
ascended and descended towers, crawled under arches, peered out of
loopholes, lowered ourselves into dungeons, halted in all sorts of tight
places while the purpose of something or other was

[Illustration: CARCASSONNE]

described to us. It was very curious, very interesting; above all it was
very pictorial, and involved perpetual peeps into the little crooked,
crumbling, sunny, grassy, empty Cité. In places, as you stand upon it,
the great towered and embattled enceinte produces an illusion; it looks
as if it were still equipped and defended. One vivid challenge, at any
rate, it flings down before you; it calls upon you to make up your mind
on the matter of restoration. For myself I have no hesitation; I prefer
in every case the ruined, however ruined, to the reconstructed, however
splendid. What is left is more precious than what is added; the one is
history, the other is fiction; and I like the former the better of the
two--it is so much more romantic. One is positive, so far as it goes;
the other fills up the void with things more dead than the void itself,
inasmuch as they have never had life. After that I am free to say that
the restoration of Carcassonne is a splendid achievement. The little
custodian dismissed us at last, after having, as usual, inducted us into
the inevitable repository of photographs. These photographs are a great
nuisance all over the Midi. They are exceedingly bad for the most part;
and the worst--those in the form of the hideous little
_album-panorama_--are thrust upon you at every turn. They are a kind of
tax that you must pay; the best way is to pay to be let off. It was not
to be denied that there was a relief in separating from our accomplished
guide, whose manner of imparting information reminded me of the
energetic process by which I had seen mineral waters bottled. All this
while the afternoon had grown more lovely; the sunset had deepened, the
horizon of hills grown purple; the mass of the Canigou became more
delicate, yet more distinct. The day had so far faded that the interior
of the little cathedral was wrapped in twilight, into which the glowing
windows projected something of their colour. This church has high beauty
and value, but I will spare the reader a presentation of details which I
myself had no opportunity to master. It consists of a romanesque nave,
of the end of the eleventh century, and a Gothic choir and transepts of
the beginning of the fourteenth; and, shut up in its citadel like a
precious casket in a cabinet, it seems--or seemed at that hour--to have
a sort of double sanctity. After leaving it and passing out of the two
circles of walls, I treated myself, in the most infatuated manner, to
another walk round the Cité. It is certainly this general impression
that is most striking--the impression from outside, where the whole
place detaches itself at once from the landscape. In the warm southern
dusk it looked more than ever like a city in a fairy tale. To make the
thing perfect, a white young moon, in its first quarter, came out and
hung just over the dark silhouette. It was hard to come away--to
incommode one's self for anything so vulgar as a railway train; I would
gladly have spent the evening in revolving round the walls of
Carcassonne. But I had in a measure engaged to proceed to Narbonne, and
there was a certain magic in that name which gave me strength--Narbonne,
the richest city in Roman Gaul.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxiv

[Narbonne]

At Narbonne I took up my abode at the house of a _serrurier mécanicien_,
and was very thankful for the accommodation. It was my misfortune to
arrive at this ancient city late at night, on the eve of market-day; and
market-day at Narbonne is a very serious affair. The inns, on this
occasion, are stuffed with wine-dealers; for the country round about,
dedicated almost exclusively to Bacchus, has hitherto escaped the
phylloxera. This deadly enemy of the grape is encamped over the Midi in
a hundred places; blighted vineyards and ruined proprietors being quite
the order of the day. The signs of distress are more frequent as you
advance into Provence, many of the vines being laid under water in the
hope of washing the plague away. There are healthy regions still,
however, and the vintners find plenty to do at Narbonne. The traffic in
wine appeared to be the sole thought of the Narbonnais; every one I
spoke to had something to say about the harvest of gold that bloomed
under its influence. "C'est inoui, monsieur, l'argent qu'il y a dans ce
pays. Des gens à qui la vente de leur vin rapporte jusqu'à 500,000
francs par an." That little speech addressed to me by a gentleman at the
inn gives the note of these revelations. It must be said that there was
little in the appearance either of the town or of its population to
suggest the possession of such treasures. Narbonne is a _sale petite
ville_ in all the force of the term, and my first impression on arriving
there was an extreme regret that I had not remained for the night at the
lovely Carcassonne. My journey from that delectable spot lasted a couple
of hours and was performed in darkness--a darkness not so dense,
however, but that I was able to make out, as we passed it, the great
figure of Béziers, whose ancient roofs and towers, clustered on a goodly
hill-top, looked as fantastic as you please. I know not what appearance
Béziers may present by day, but by night it has quite the grand air. On
issuing from the station at Narbonne I found that the only vehicle in
waiting was a kind of bastard tramcar, a thing shaped as if it had been
meant to go upon rails; that is, equipped with small wheels, placed
beneath it, and with a platform at either end, but destined to rattle
over the stones like the most vulgar of omnibuses. To complete the
oddity of this conveyance, it was under the supervision, not of a
conductor, but of a conductress. A fair young woman with a pouch
suspended from her girdle had command of the platform; and as soon as
the car was full she jolted us into the town through clouds of the
thickest dust I ever have swallowed. I have had occasion to speak of
the activity of women in France--of the way they are always in the
ascendant; and here was a signal example of their general utility. The
young lady I have mentioned conveyed her whole company to the wretched
little Hôtel de France, where it is to be hoped that some of them found
a lodging. For myself, I was informed that the place was crowded from
cellar to attic, and that its inmates were sleeping three or four in a
room. At Carcassonne I should have had a bad bed, but at Narbonne,
apparently, I was to have no bed at all. I passed an hour or two of flat
suspense while fate settled the question of whether I should go on to
Perpignan, return to Béziers, or still discover a modest couch at
Narbonne. I shall not have suffered in vain, however, if my example
serves to deter other travellers from alighting unannounced at that city
on a Wednesday evening. The retreat to Béziers, not attempted in time,
proved impossible, and I was assured that at Perpignan, which I should
not reach till midnight, the affluence of wine-dealers was not less than
at Narbonne. I interviewed every hostess in the town, and got no
satisfaction but distracted shrugs. Finally, at an advanced hour, one of
the servants of the Hôtel de France, where I had attempted to dine, came
to me in triumph to proclaim that he had secured for me a charming
apartment in a _maison bourgeoise_. I took possession of it gratefully,
in spite of its having an entrance like a stable and being pervaded by
an odour compared with which that of a stable would have been delicious.
As I have mentioned, my landlord was a locksmith, and he had strange
machines which rumbled and whirred in the rooms below my own.
Nevertheless I slept, and I dreamed of Carcassonne. It was better to do
that than to dream of the Hôtel de France. I was obliged to cultivate
relations with the cuisine of this establishment. Nothing could have
been more _méridional_; indeed, both the dirty little inn and Narbonne
at large seemed to me to have the infirmities of the south without its
usual graces. Narrow, noisy, shabby, belittered and encumbered, filled
with clatter and chatter, the Hôtel de France would have been described
in perfection by Alphonse Daudet. For what struck me above all in it was
the note of the Midi as he has represented it--the sound of universal
talk. The landlord sat at supper with sundry friends in a kind of glass
cage, with a genial indifference to arriving guests; the waiters tumbled
over the loose luggage in the hall; the travellers who had been turned
away leaned gloomily against door-posts; and the landlady, surrounded by
confusion, unconscious of responsibility, and animated only by the
spirit of conversation, bandied high-voiced compliments with the
_voyageurs de commerce_. At ten o'clock in the morning there was a table
d'hôte for breakfast--a wonderful repast, which overflowed into every
room and pervaded the whole establishment. I sat down with a hundred
hungry marketers, fat, brown, greasy men, with a good deal of the rich
soil of Languedoc adhering to their hands and their boots. I mention the
latter articles because they almost put them on the table. It was very
hot, and there were swarms of flies; the viands had the strongest odour;
there was in particular a horrible mixture known as _gras-double_, a
light grey, glutinous, nauseating mess, which my companions devoured in
large quantities. A man opposite to me had the dirtiest fingers I ever
saw; a collection of fingers which in England would have excluded him
from a farmers' ordinary. The conversation was mainly bucolic; though a
part of it, I

[Illustration: NARBONNE--THE WASHING PLACE]

remember, at the table at which I sat, consisted of a discussion as to
whether or no the maid-servant were _sage_--a discussion which went on
under the nose of this young lady, as she carried about the dreadful
_gras-double_, and to which she contributed the most convincing blushes.
It was thoroughly _méridional_.

In going to Narbonne I had of course counted upon Roman remains; but
when I went forth in search of them I perceived that I had hoped too
fondly. There is really nothing in the place to speak of; that is, on
the day of my visit there was nothing but the market, which was in
complete possession. "This intricate, curious, but lifeless town,"
Murray calls it; yet to me it appeared overflowing with life. Its
streets are mere crooked, dirty lanes, bordered with perfectly
insignificant houses; but they were filled with the same clatter and
chatter that I had found at the hotel. The market was held partly in the
little square of the hôtel de ville, a structure which a flattering
woodcut in the Guide-Joanne had given me a desire to behold. The reality
was not impressive, the old colour of the front having been completely
restored away. Such interest as it superficially possesses it derives
from a fine mediæval tower which rises beside it with turrets at the
angles--always a picturesque thing. The rest of the market was held in
another _place_, still shabbier than the first, which lies beyond the
canal. The Canal du Midi flows through the town, and, spanned at this
point by a small suspension-bridge, presented a certain sketchability.
On the farther side were the vendors and chafferers--old women under
awnings and big umbrellas, rickety tables piled high with fruit, white
caps and brown faces, blouses, sabots, donkeys. Beneath this picture was
another--a long row of washerwomen, on their knees on the edge of the
canal, pounding and wringing the dirty linen of Narbonne--no great
quantity, to judge by the costume of the people. Innumerable rusty men,
scattered all over the place, were buying and selling wine, straddling
about in pairs, in groups, with their hands in their pockets, and packed
together at the doors of the cafés. They were mostly fat and brown and
unshaven; they ground their teeth as they talked; they were very
_méridionaux_.

The only two lions at Narbonne are the cathedral and the museum, the
latter of which is quartered in the hôtel de ville. The cathedral,
closely shut in by houses and with the west front undergoing repairs, is
singular in two respects. It consists exclusively of a choir, which is
of the end of the thirteenth century and the beginning of the next, and
of great magnificence. There is absolutely nothing else. This choir, of
extraordinary elevation, forms the whole church. I sat there a good
while; there was no other visitor. I had taken a great dislike to poor
little Narbonne, which struck me as sordid and overheated, and this
place seemed to extend to me, as in the Middle Ages, the privilege of
sanctuary. It is a very solemn corner. The other peculiarity of the
cathedral is that, externally, it bristles with battlements, having
anciently formed part of the defences of the _archevêché_, which is
beside it and which connects it with the hôtel de ville. This
combination of the church and the fortress is very curious, and during
the Middle Ages was not without its value. The palace of the former
archbishops of Narbonne (the hôtel de ville of to-day forms part of it)
was both an asylum and an arsenal during the hideous wars by which all
Languedoc was ravaged in the thirteenth century. The whole mass of
buildings

[Illustration: NARBONNE--THE CATHEDRAL AND HÔTEL DE VILLE.]

is jammed together in a manner that from certain points of view makes it
far from apparent which feature is which. The museum occupies several
chambers at the top of the hôtel de ville, and is not an imposing
collection. It was closed, but I induced the portress to let me in--a
silent, cadaverous person, in a black coif, like a _béguine_, who sat
knitting in one of the windows while I went the rounds. The number of
Roman fragments is small, and their quality is not the finest; I must
add that this impression was hastily gathered. There is, indeed, a work
of art in one of the rooms which creates a presumption in favour of the
place--the portrait (rather a good one) of a citizen of Narbonne, whose
name I forget, who is described as having devoted all his time and his
intelligence to collecting the objects by which the visitor is
surrounded. This excellent man was a connoisseur, and the visitor is
doubtless often an ignoramus.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxv

    "Cette, with its glistening houses white,
      Curves with the curving beach away
     To where the lighthouse beacons bright,
        Far in the bay."

[Montpellier]


That stanza of Matthew Arnold's, which I happened to remember, gave a
certain importance to the half-hour I spent in the buffet of the station
at Cette while I waited for the train to Montpellier. I had left
Narbonne in the afternoon, and by the time I reached Cette the darkness
had descended. I therefore missed the sight of the glistening houses,
and had to console myself with that of the beacon in the bay, as well as
with a _bouillon_ of which I partook at the buffet aforesaid; for, since
the morning, I had not ventured to return to the table d'hôte at
Narbonne. The Hôtel Nevet at Montpellier, which I reached an hour later,
has an ancient renown all over the south of France--advertises itself, I
believe, as _le plus vastedu midi_. It seemed to me the model of a good
provincial inn; a big rambling, creaking establishment, with brown,
labyrinthine corridors, a queer old open-air vestibule, into which the
diligence, in the _bon temps_, used to penetrate, and an hospitality
more expressive than that of the new caravansaries. It dates from the
days when Montpellier was still accounted a fine winter residence for
people with weak lungs; and this rather melancholy tradition, together
with the former celebrity of the school of medicine still existing
there, but from which the glory has departed, helps to account for its
combination of high antiquity and vast proportions. The old hotels were
usually more concentrated; but the school of medicine passed for one of
the attractions of Montpellier. Long before Mentone was discovered or
Colorado invented, British invalids travelled down through France in the
post-chaise or the public coach, to spend their winters in the wonderful
place which boasted both a climate and a faculty. The air is mild, no
doubt, but there are refinements of mildness which were not then
suspected, and which in a more analytic age have carried the annual wave
far beyond Montpellier. The place is charming, all the same; and it
served the purpose of John Locke, who made a long stay there, between
1675 and 1679, and became acquainted with a noble fellow-visitor, Lord
Pembroke, to whom he dedicated the famous Essay. There are places that
please without your being able to say wherefore, and Montpellier is one
of the number. It has some charming views, from the great promenade of
the Peyrou; but its position is not strikingly fine. Beyond this it
contains a good museum and the long façades of its school, but these are
its only definite treasures. Its cathedral struck me as quite the
weakest I had seen, and I remember no other monument that made up for
it. The place has neither the gaiety of a modern nor the solemnity of an
ancient town, and it is agreeable as certain women are agreeable who are
neither beautiful nor clever. An Italian would remark that it is
sympathetic; a German would admit that it is _gemüthlich_. I spent two
days there, mostly in the rain, and even under these circumstances I
carried away a kindly impression. I think the Hôtel Nevet had something
to do with it, and the sentiment of relief with which, in a quiet, even
a luxurious, room that looked out on a garden, I reflected that I had
washed my hands of Narbonne. The phylloxera has destroyed the vines in
the country that surrounds Montpellier, and at that moment I was capable
of rejoicing in the thought that I should not breakfast with vintners.

The gem of the place is the Musée Fabre, one of the best collections of
paintings in a provincial city. François Fabre, a native of Montpellier,
died there in 1837, after having spent a considerable part of his life
in Italy, where he had collected a good many valuable pictures and some
very poor ones, the latter class including several from his own hand. He
was the hero of a remarkable episode, having succeeded no less a person
than Vittorio Alfieri in the affections of no less a person than Louise
de Stolberg, Countess of Albany, widow of no less a person than Charles
Edward Stuart, the second pretender to the British crown. Surely no
woman ever was associated sentimentally with three figures more
diverse--a disqualified sovereign, an Italian dramatist, and a bad
French painter. The productions of M. Fabre, who followed in the steps
of David, bear the stamp of a cold mediocrity; there is not much to be
said even for the portrait of the genial countess (her life has been
written by M. Saint-Réné-Taillandier, who depicts her as delightful),
which hangs in Florence, in the gallery of the Uffizzi, and makes a
pendant to a likeness of Alfieri by the same author. Stendhal, in his
"Mémoires d'un Touriste," says that this work of art represents her as a
cook who has pretty hands. I am delighted to having an opportunity of
quoting Stendhal, whose two volumes of the "Mémoires d'un Touriste"
every traveller in France should carry in his portmanteau. I have had
this opportunity more than once, for I have met him at Tours, at Nantes,
at Bourges; and everywhere he is suggestive. But he has the defect that
he is never pictorial, that he never by any chance makes an image, and
that his style is perversely colourless for a man so fond of
contemplation. His taste is often singularly false; it is the taste of
the early years of the present century, the period that produced clocks
surmounted with sentimental "subjects." Stendhal does not admire these
clocks, but he almost does. He admires Domenichino and Guercino, he
prizes the Bolognese school of painters because they "spoke to the
soul." He is a votary of the new classic, is fond of tall, square,
regular buildings, and thinks Nantes, for instance, full of the "air
noble." It was a pleasure to me to reflect that five-and-forty years ago
he had alighted in that city, at the very inn in which I spent a night
and which looks down on the Place Graslin and the theatre. The hotel
that was the best in 1837 appears to be the best to-day. On the subject
of Touraine Stendhal is extremely refreshing; he finds the scenery
meagre and much overrated, and proclaims his opinion with perfect
frankness. He does, however, scant justice to the banks of the Loire;
his want of appreciation of the picturesque--want of the sketcher's
sense--causes him to miss half the charm of a landscape which is nothing
if not "quiet," as a painter would say, and of which the felicities
reveal themselves only to waiting eyes. He even despises the Indre, the
river of Madame Sand. The "Mémoires d'un Touriste" are written in the
character of a commercial traveller, and the author has nothing to say
about Chenonceaux or Chambord, or indeed about any of the châteaux of
that part of France; his system being to talk only of the large towns,
where he may be supposed to find a market for his goods. It was his
ambition to pass for an ironmonger. But in the large towns he is usually
excellent company, though as discursive as Sterne and strangely
indifferent, for a man of imagination, to those superficial aspects of
things which the poor pages now before the reader are mainly an attempt
to render. It is his conviction that Alfieri, at Florence, bored the
Countess of Albany terribly; and he adds that the famous Gallophobe died
of jealousy of the little painter from Montpellier. The Countess of
Albany left her property to Fabre; and I suppose some of the pieces in
the museum of his native town used to hang in the sunny saloons of that
fine old palace on the Arno which is still pointed out to the stranger
in Florence as the residence of Alfieri.

The institution has had other benefactors, notably a certain M. Bruyas,
who has enriched it with an extraordinary number of portraits of
himself. As these, however, are by different hands, some of them
distinguished, we may suppose that it was less the model than the
artists to whom M. Bruyas wished to give publicity. Easily first are two
large specimens of David Teniers, which are incomparable for brilliancy
and a glowing perfection of execution. I have a weakness for this
singular genius, who combined the delicate with the grovelling, and I
have rarely seen richer examples. Scarcely less valuable is a Gerard Dow
which hangs near them, though it must rank lower, as having kept less of
its freshness. This Gerard Dow did me good, for a master is a master,
whatever he may paint. It represents a woman paring carrots, while a boy
before her exhibits a mouse-trap in which he has caught a frightened
victim. The goodwife has spread a cloth on the top of a big barrel which
serves her as a table, and on this brown, greasy napkin, of which the
texture is wonderfully rendered, lie the raw vegetables she is preparing
for domestic consumption. Beside the barrel is a large caldron lined
with copper, with a rim of brass. The way these things are painted
brings tears to the eyes; but they give the measure, of the Musée Fabre,
where two specimens of Teniers and a Gerard Dow are the jewels. The
Italian pictures are of small value; but there is a work by Sir Joshua
Reynolds, said to be the only one in France--an infant Samuel in prayer,
apparently a repetition of the picture in England which inspired the
little plaster image, disseminated in Protestant lands, that we used to
admire in our childhood. Sir Joshua, somehow, was an eminently
Protestant painter; no one can forget that, who in the National Gallery
in London has looked at the picture in which he represents several young
ladies as nymphs, voluminously draped, hanging garlands over a statue--a
picture suffused indefinably with the Anglican spirit and exasperating
to a member of one of the Latin races. It is an odd chance therefore
that has led him into that part of France where Protestants have been
least _bien vus_. This is the country of the dragonnades of Louis XIV.
and of the pastors of the desert. From the garden of the Peyrou, at
Montpellier, you may see the hills of the Cévennes, to which they of the
religion fled for safety and out of which they were hunted and harried.

I have only to add, in regard to the Musée Fabre, that it contains the
portrait of its founder--a little, pursy, fat-faced, elderly man, whose
countenance contains few indications of the power that makes
distinguished victims. He is, however, just such a personage as the
mind's eye sees walking on the terrace of the Peyrou of an October
afternoon in the early years of the century; a plump figure in a
chocolate-coloured coat and a _culotte_ that exhibits a good leg--a
culotte provided with a watch-fob from which a heavy seal is suspended.
This Peyrou (to come to it at last) is a wonderful place, especially to
be found in a little provincial city. France is certainly the country of
towns that aim at completeness; more than in other lands they contain
stately features as a matter of course. We should never have ceased to
hear about the Peyrou if fortune had placed it at a Shrewsbury or a
Buffalo. It is true that the place enjoys a certain celebrity at home,
which it amply deserves, moreover; for nothing could be more impressive
and monumental. It consists of an "elevated platform," as Murray
says--an immense terrace laid out, in the highest part of the town, as a
garden, and commanding in all directions a view which in clear weather
must be of the finest. I strolled there in the intervals of showers, and
saw only the nearer beauties--a great pompous arch of triumph in honour
of Louis XIV. (which is not, properly speaking, in the garden, but faces
it, straddling across the _place_ by which you approach it from the
town), an equestrian statue of that monarch set aloft in the middle of
the terrace, and a very exalted and complicated fountain, which forms a
background to the picture. This fountain gushes from a kind of hydraulic
temple, or _château d'eau_, to which you ascend by broad flights of
steps, and which is fed by a splendid aqueduct, stretched in the most
ornamental and unexpected manner across the neighbouring valley. All
this work dates from the middle of the last century. The combination of
features--the triumphal arch, or gate; the wide fair terrace, with its
beautiful view; the statue of the grand monarch; the big architectural
fountain, which would not surprise one at Rome, but does surprise one at
Montpellier; and to complete the effect, the extraordinary aqueduct,
charmingly fore-shortened--all this is worthy of a capital, of a little
court-city. The whole place, with its repeated steps, its balustrades,
its massive and plentiful stonework, is full of the air of the last
century--_sent bien son dix-huitième siècle_; none the less so, I am
afraid, that, as I read in my faithful Murray, after the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes the block, the stake, the wheel had been erected
here for the benefit of the desperate Camisards.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxvi

[The Pont du Gard]


It was a pleasure to feel one's self in Provence again--the land where
the silver-grey earth is impregnated with the light of the sky. To
celebrate the event, as soon as I arrived at Nîmes I engaged a calèche
to convey me to the Pont du Gard. The day was yet young and was
exceptionally fair; it appeared well, for a longish drive, to take
advantage, without delay, of such security. After I had left the town I
became more intimate with that Provençal charm which I had already
enjoyed from the window of the train, and which glowed in the sweet
sunshine and the white rocks and lurked in the smoke puffs of the little
olives. The olive-trees in Provence are half the landscape. They are
neither so tall, so stout, nor so richly contorted as you have seen them
beyond the Alps; but this mild colourless bloom seems the very texture
of the country. The road from Nîmes, for a distance of fifteen miles, is
superb; broad enough for an army and as white and firm as a
dinner-table. It stretches away over undulations which have a kind of
rhythmic value, and in the curves it makes through the wide, free
country, where there is never a hedge or a wall and the detail is always
exquisite, there is something majestic, almost processional. Some twenty
minutes before I reached the little inn that marks the termination of
the drive my vehicle met with an accident which just missed being
serious, and which engaged the attention of a gentleman who, followed by
his groom and mounted on a strikingly handsome horse, happened to ride
up at the moment. This young man, who, with his good looks and charming
manner, might have stepped out of a novel of Octave Feuillet, gave me
some very intelligent advice in reference to one of my horses that had
been injured, and was so good as to accompany me to the inn, with the
resources of which he was acquainted, to see that his recommendations
were carried out. The result of our interview was that he invited me to
come and look at a small but ancient château in the neighbourhood, which
he had the happiness--not the greatest in the world, he intimated--to
inhabit, and at which I engaged to present myself after I should have
spent an hour at the Pont du Gard. For the moment, when we separated, I
gave all my attention to that great structure. You are very near it
before you see it; the ravine it spans suddenly opens and exhibits the
picture. The scene at this point grows extremely beautiful. The ravine
is the valley of the Garden, which the road from Nîmes has followed some
time without taking account of it, but which, exactly at the right
distance from the aqueduct, deepens and expands and puts on those
characteristics which are best suited to give it effect.

The gorge becomes romantic, still and solitary, and, with its white
rocks and wild shrubbery, hangs over the clear-coloured river, in whose
slow course there is, here and there, a deeper pool. Over the valley,
from side to side and ever so high in the air, stretch the three tiers
of the tremendous bridge. They are unspeakably imposing, and nothing
could well be more Roman. The hugeness, the solidity, the
unexpectedness, the monumental rectitude of the whole thing leave you
nothing to say--at the time--and make you stand gazing. You simply feel
that it is noble and perfect, that it has the quality of greatness. A
road, branching from the highway, descends to the level of the river and
passes under one of the arches. This road has a wide margin of grass and
loose stones, which slopes upward into the bank of the ravine. You may
sit here as long as you please, staring up at the light, strong piers;
the spot is sufficiently "wild," though two or three stone benches have
been erected on it. I remained there an hour and got a complete
impression; the place was perfectly soundless and, for the time at
least, lonely; the splendid afternoon had begun to fade, and there was a
fascination in the object I had come to see. It came to pass that at the
same time I discovered in it a certain stupidity, a vague brutality.
That element is rarely absent from great Roman work, which is wanting in
the nice adaptation of the means to the end. The means are always
exaggerated; the end is so much more than attained. The Roman rigour was
apt to overshoot the mark, and I suppose a race which could do nothing
small is as defective as a race that can do nothing great. Of this Roman
rigour the Pont du Gard is an admirable example. It would be a great
injustice, however, not to insist upon its

[Illustration: THE PONT DU GARD.]

beauty--a kind of manly beauty, that of an object constructed not to
please but to serve, and impressive simply from the scale on which it
carries out this intention. The number of arches in each tier is
different; they are smaller and more numerous as they ascend. The
preservation of the thing is extraordinary; nothing has crumbled or
collapsed; every feature remains, and the huge blocks of stone, of a
brownish-yellow (as if they had been baked by the Provençal sun for
eighteen centuries), pile themselves, without mortar or cement, as
evenly as the day they were laid together. All this to carry the water
of a couple of springs to a little provincial city! The conduit on the
top has retained its shape and traces of the cement with which it was
lined. When the vague twilight began to gather, the lonely valley seemed
to fill itself with the shadow of the Roman name, as if the mighty
empire were still as erect as the supports of the aqueduct; and it was
open to a solitary tourist, sitting there sentimental, to believe that
no people has ever been, or will ever be, as great as that, measured, as
we measure the greatness of an individual, by the push they gave to what
they undertook. The Pont du Gard is one of the three or four deepest
impressions they have left; it speaks of them in a manner with which
they might have been satisfied.

I feel as if it were scarcely discreet to indicate the whereabouts of
the château of the obliging young man I had met on the way from Nîmes; I
must content myself with saying that it nestled in an enchanting
valley--_dans le fond_, as they say in France--and that I took my course
thither on foot after leaving the Pont du Gard. I find it noted in my
journal as "an adorable little corner." The principal feature of the
place is a couple of very ancient towers, brownish-yellow in hue, and
mantled in scarlet Virginia-creeper. One of these towers, reputed to be
of Saracenic origin, is isolated, and is only the more effective; the
other is incorporated in the house, which is delightfully fragmentary
and irregular. It had got to be late by this time, and the lonely
_castel_ looked crepuscular and mysterious. An old housekeeper was sent
for, who showed me the rambling interior; and then the young man took me
into a dim old drawing-room, which had no less than four chimney-pieces,
all unlighted, and gave me a refection of fruit and sweet wine. When I
praised the wine and asked him what it was, he said simply "C'est du vin
de ma mère!" Throughout my little journey I had never yet felt myself so
far from Paris; and this was a sensation I enjoyed more than my host,
who was an involuntary exile, consoling himself with laying out a
_manège_ which he showed me as I walked away. His civility was great,
and I was greatly touched by it. On my way back to the little inn where
I had left my vehicle I passed the Pont du Gard and took another look at
it. Its great arches made windows for the evening sky, and the rocky
ravine, with its dusky cedars and shining river, was lonelier than
before. At the inn I swallowed, or tried to swallow, a glass of horrible
wine with my coachman; after which, with my reconstructed team, I drove
back to Nîmes in the moonlight. It only added a more solitary whiteness
to the constant sheen of the Provençal landscape.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxvii

[Aigues-Mortes]


The weather the next day was equally fair, so that it seemed an
imprudence not to make sure of Aigues-Mortes. Nîmes itself could wait;
at a pinch I could attend to Nîmes in the rain. It was my belief that
Aigues-Mortes was a little gem, and it is natural to desire that gems
should have an opportunity to sparkle. This is an excursion of but a few
hours, and there is a little friendly, familiar, dawdling train that
will convey you, in time for a noonday breakfast, to the small dead town
where the blessed Saint Louis twice embarked for the Crusades. You may
get back to Nîmes for dinner; the run--or rather the walk, for the train
doesn't run--is of about an hour. I found the little journey charming
and looked out of the carriage window, on my right, at the distant
Cévennes, covered with tones of amber and blue, and, all around, at
vineyards red with the touch of October. The grapes were gone, but the
plants had a colour of their own.

Within a certain distance of Aigues-Mortes they give place to wide
salt-marshes, traversed by two canals; and over this expanse the train
rumbles slowly upon a narrow causeway, failing for some time, though you
know you are near the object of your curiosity, to bring you to sight of
anything but the horizon. Suddenly it appears, the towered and embattled
mass, lying so low that the crest of its defences seems to rise straight
out of the ground; and it is not till the train stops close before them
that you are able to take the full measure of its walls.

Aigues-Mortes stands on the edge of a wide _étang_, or shallow inlet of
the sea, the farther side of which is divided by a narrow band of coast
from the Gulf of Lyons. Next after Carcassonne, to which it forms an
admirable _pendant_, it is the most perfect thing of the kind in France.
It has a rival in the person of Avignon, but the ramparts of Avignon are
much less effective. Like Carcassonne, it is completely surrounded with
its old fortifications; and if they are far simpler in character (there
is but one circle), they are quite as well preserved. The moat has been
filled up, and the site of the town might be figured by a billiard-table
without pockets. On this absolute level, covered with coarse grass,
Aigues-Mortes presents quite the appearance of the walled town that a
school-boy draws upon his slate or that we see in the background of
early Flemish pictures--a simple parallelogram, of a contour almost
absurdly bare, broken at intervals by angular towers and square holes.
Such, literally speaking, is this delightful little city, which needs to
be seen to tell its full story. It is extraordinarily pictorial, and if
it is a very small sister of Carcassonne, it has at least the essential
features of the family. Indeed, it is even more like an image and less
like a reality than Carcassonne; for by position and prospect it seems
even more detached from the life of the present day. It is true that
Aigues-Mortes does a little business; it sees certain bags of salt piled
into barges which stand in a canal beside it, and which carry their
cargo into actual places. But nothing could well be more drowsy and
desultory than this industry as I saw it practised, with the aid of two
or three brown peasants and under the eye of a solitary douanier, who
strolled on the little quay beneath the western wall. "C'est bien
plaisant, c'est bien paisible," said this worthy man, with whom I had
some conversation; and pleasant and peaceful is the place indeed, though
the former of these epithets may suggest an element of gaiety in which
Aigues-Mortes is deficient. The sand, the salt, the dull sea-view,
surround it with a bright, quiet melancholy. There are fifteen towers
and nine gates, five of which are on the southern side, overlooking the
water. I walked all round the place three times (it doesn't take long),
but lingered most under the southern wall, where the afternoon light
slept in the dreamiest, sweetest way. I sat down on an old stone and
looked away to the desolate salt-marshes and the still, shining surface
of the _étang_; and, as I did so, reflected that this was a queer little
out-of-the-world corner to have been chosen, in the great dominions of
either monarch, for that pompous interview which took place, in 1538,
between Francis I. and Charles V. It was also not easy to perceive how
Louis IX., when in 1248 and 1270 he started for the Holy Land, set his
army afloat in such very undeveloped channels. An hour later I purchased
in the town a little pamphlet by M. Marius Topin, who undertakes to
explain this latter anomaly and to show that there is water enough in
the port, as we may call it by courtesy, to have sustained a fleet of
crusaders. I was unable to trace the channel that he points out, but was
glad to believe that, as he contends, the sea has not retreated from the
town since the thirteenth century. It was comfortable to think that
things are not so changed as that. M. Topin indicates that the other
French ports of the Mediterranean were not then _disponibles_, and that
Aigues-Mortes was the most eligible spot for an embarkation.

Behind the straight walls and the quiet gates the little town has not
crumbled like the Cité of Carcassonne. It can hardly be said to be
alive; but if it is dead it has been very neatly embalmed. The hand of
the restorer rests on it constantly; but this artist has not, as at
Carcassonne, had miracles to accomplish. The interior is very still and
empty, with small stony, whitewashed streets tenanted by a stray dog, a
stray cat, a stray old woman. In the middle is a little _place_, with
two or three cafés decorated by wide awnings--a little _place_ of which
the principal feature is a very bad bronze statue of Saint Louis by
Pradier. It is almost as bad as the breakfast I had at the inn that
bears the name of that pious monarch. You may walk round the enceinte of
Aigues-Mortes both outside and in; but you may not, as at Carcassonne,
make a portion of this circuit on the _chemin de ronde_, the little
projecting footway attached to the inner face of the battlements. This
footway, wide enough only for a single pedestrian, is in the best order,
and near each of the gates a flight of steps leads up to it; but a
locked gate at the top of the steps makes access impossible, or at least
unlawful. Aigues-Mortes, however, has its citadel, an immense tower,
larger than any of the others, a little detached

[Illustration: AIGUES-MORTES]

and standing at the north-west angle of the town. I called upon the
_casernier_--the custodian of the walls--and in his absence I was
conducted through this big Tour de Constance by his wife, a very mild,
meek woman, yellow with the traces of fever and ague--a scourge which,
as might be expected in a town whose name denotes "dead waters," enters
freely at the nine gates. The Tour de Constance is of extraordinary
girth and solidity, divided into three superposed circular chambers,
with very fine vaults, which are lighted by embrasures of prodigious
depth, converging to windows little larger than loopholes. The place
served for years as a prison to many of the Protestants of the south
whom the revocation of the Edict of Nantes had exposed to atrocious
penalties, and the annals of these dreadful chambers in the first half
of the last century were written in tears and blood. Some of the
recorded cases of long confinement there make one marvel afresh at what
man has inflicted and endured. In a country in which a policy of
extermination was to be put into practice this horrible tower was an
obvious resource. From the battlements at the top, which is surmounted
by an old disused lighthouse, you see the little compact rectangular
town, which looks hardly bigger than a garden-patch, mapped out beneath
you, and follow the plain configuration of its defences. You take
possession of it, and you feel that you will remember it always.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxviii

[Nîmes]


After this I was free to look about me at Nîmes, and I did so with such
attention as the place appeared to require. At the risk of seeming too
easily and too frequently disappointed, I will say that it required
rather less than I had been prepared to give. It is a town of three or
four fine features rather than a town with, as I may say, a general
figure. In general Nîmes is poor; its only treasures are its Roman
remains, which are of the first order. The new French fashions prevail
in many of its streets; the old houses are paltry, and the good houses
are new; while beside my hotel rose a big spick-and-span church, which
had the oddest air of having been intended for Brooklyn or Cleveland. It
is true that this church looked out on a square completely French--a
square of a fine modern disposition, flanked on one side by a classical
_palais de justice_ embellished with trees and parapets and occupied in
the centre with a group of allegorical statues such as one encounters
only in the cities of France, the chief of these being a colossal figure
by Pradier representing Nîmes. An English, an American town which should
have such a monument, such a square as this would be a place of great
pretensions; but, like so many little _villes de province_ in the
country of which I write, Nîmes is easily ornamental. What nobler
element can there be than the Roman baths at the foot of Mont Cavalier
and the delightful old garden that surrounds them? All that quarter of
Nîmes has every reason to be proud of itself; it has been revealed to
the world at large by copious photography. A clear, abundant stream
gushes from the foot of a high hill (covered with trees and laid out in
paths), and is distributed into basins which sufficiently refer
themselves to the period that gave them birth--the period that has left
its stamp on that pompous Peyrou which we admired at Montpellier. Here
are the same terraces and steps and balustrades, and a system of
waterworks less impressive perhaps, but very ingenious and charming. The
whole place is a mixture of old Rome and of the French eighteenth
century; for the remains of the antique baths are in a measure
incorporated in the modern fountains. In a corner of this umbrageous
precinct stands a small Roman ruin, which is known as a temple of Diana,
but was more apparently a _nymphæum_, and appears to have had a graceful
connection with the adjacent baths. I learn from Murray that this little
temple, of the period of Augustus, "was reduced to its present state of
ruin in 1577;" the moment at which the townspeople, threatened with a
siege by the troops of the Crown, partly demolished it lest it should
serve as a cover to the enemy. The remains are very fragmentary, but
they serve to show that the place was lovely. I spent half an hour in
it on a perfect Sunday morning (it is enclosed by a high _grille_,
carefully tended, and has a warden of its own), and with the help of my
imagination tried to reconstruct a little the aspect of things in the
Gallo-Roman days. I do wrong perhaps to say that I _tried_; from a
flight so deliberate I should have shrunk. But there was a certain
contagion of antiquity in the air; and among the ruins of baths and
temples, in the very spot where the aqueduct that crosses the Gardon in
the wondrous manner I had seen discharged itself, the picture of a
splendid paganism seemed vaguely to glow. Roman baths--Roman baths;
those words alone were a scene. Everything was changed: I was strolling
in a _jardin français_; the bosky slope of the Mont Cavalier (a very
modest mountain), hanging over the place, is crowned with a shapeless
tower, which is as likely to be of mediæval as of antique origin; and
yet, as I leaned on the parapet of one of the fountains, where a flight
of curved steps (a hemicycle, as the French say) descended into a basin
full of dark, cool recesses, where the slabs of the Roman foundations
gleam through the clear green water--as in this attitude I surrendered
myself to contemplation and reverie, it seemed to me that I touched for
a moment the ancient world. Such moments are illuminating, and the light
of this one mingles, in my memory, with the dusky greenness of the
Jardin de la Fontaine.

The fountain proper--the source of all these distributed waters--is the
prettiest thing in the world, a reduced copy of Vaucluse. It gushes up
at the foot of the Mont Cavalier, at a point where that eminence rises
with a certain cliff-like effect, and, like other springs in the same
circumstances, appears to issue

[Illustration: NÎMES--THE CATHEDRAL]

from the rock with a sort of quivering stillness. I trudged up the Mont
Cavalier--it is a matter of five minutes--and having committed this
cockneyism, enhanced it presently by another. I ascended the stupid Tour
Magne, the mysterious structure I mentioned a moment ago. The only
feature of this dateless tube, except the inevitable collection of
photographs to which you are introduced by the doorkeeper, is the view
you enjoy from its summit. This view is of course remarkably fine, but I
am ashamed to say I have not the smallest recollection of it; for while
I looked into the brilliant spaces of the air I seemed still to see only
what I saw in the depths of the Roman baths--the image, disastrously
confused and vague, of a vanished world. This world, however, has left
at Nîmes a far more considerable memento than a few old stones covered
with water-moss. The Roman arena is the rival of those of Verona and of
Arles; at a respectful distance it emulates the Colosseum. It is a small
Colosseum, if I may be allowed the expression, and is in much better
preservation than the great circus at Rome. This is especially true of
the external walls, with their arches, pillars, cornices. I must add
that one should not speak of preservation, in regard to the arena at
Nîmes, without speaking also of repair. After the great ruin ceased to
be despoiled it began to be protected, and most of its wounds have been
dressed with new material. These matters concern the archæologist; and I
felt here, as I felt afterwards at Arles, that one of the profane, in
the presence of such a monument, can only admire and hold his tongue.
The great impression, on the whole, is an impression of wonder that so
much should have survived. What remains at Nîmes, after all dilapidation
is estimated, is astounding. I spent an hour in the Arènes on that same
sweet Sunday morning, as I came back from the Roman baths, and saw that
the corridors, the vaults, the staircases, the external casing, are
still virtually there. Many of these parts are wanting in the Colosseum,
whose sublimity of size, however, can afford to dispense with detail.
The seats at Nîmes, like those at Verona, have been largely renewed; not
that this mattered much, as I lounged on the cool surface of one of them
and admired the mighty concavity of the place and the elliptical
sky-line, broken by uneven blocks and forming the rim of the monstrous
cup--a cup that had been filled with horrors. And yet I made my
reflections: I said to myself that though a Roman arena is one of the
most impressive of the works of man, it has a touch of that same
stupidity which I ventured to discover in the Pont du Gard. It is
brutal; it is monotonous; it is not at all exquisite. The Arènes at
Nîmes were arranged for a bull-fight--a form of recreation that, as I
was informed, is much _dans les habitudes Nîmoises_, and very common
throughout Provence, where (still according to my information) it is the
usual pastime of a Sunday afternoon. At Arles and Nîmes it has a
characteristic setting, but in the villages the patrons of the game make
a circle of carts and barrels, on which the spectators perch themselves.
I was surprised at the prevalence in mild Provence of the Iberian vice,
and hardly know whether it makes the custom more respectable that at
Nîmes and Arles the thing is shabbily and imperfectly done. The bulls
are rarely killed, and indeed often are bulls only in the Irish sense of
the term--being domestic and motherly cows. Such an entertainment of
course does not supply to the arena that element of the exquisite which
I

[Illustration: NÎMES--THE AMPHITHEATRE]

spoke of as wanting. The exquisite at Nîmes is mainly represented by the
famous Maison Carrée. The first impression you receive from this
delicate little building, as you stand before it, is that you have
already seen it many times. Photographs, engravings, models, medals,
have placed it definitely in your eye, so that from the sentiment with
which you regard it curiosity and surprise are almost completely, and
perhaps deplorably, absent. Admiration remains, however--admiration of a
familiar and even slightly patronising kind. The Maison Carrée does not
overwhelm you; you can conceive it. It is not one of the great
sensations of antique art; but it is perfectly felicitous, and, in spite
of having been put to all sorts of incongruous uses, marvellously
preserved. Its slender columns, its delicate proportions, its charming
compactness, seem to bring one nearer to the century that built it than
the great superpositions of arenas and bridges, and give it the interest
that vibrates from one age to another when the note of taste is struck.
If anything were needed to make this little toy-temple a happy
production, the service would be rendered by the second-rate boulevard
that conducts to it, adorned with inferior cafés and tobacco-shops.
Here, in a respectable recess, surrounded by vulgar habitations and with
the theatre, of a classic pretension, opposite, stands the small "square
house," so called because it is much longer than it is broad. I saw it
first in the evening, in the vague moonlight, which made it look as if
it were cast in bronze. Stendhal says, justly, that it has the shape of
a playing-card, and he expresses his admiration for it by the singular
wish that an "exact copy" of it should be erected in Paris. He even goes
so far as to say that in the year 1880 this tribute will have been
rendered to its charms; nothing would be more simple, to his mind, than
to "have" in that city "le Panthéon de Rome, quelques temples de Grèce."
Stendhal found it amusing to write in the character of a
_commis-voyageur_, and sometimes it occurs to his reader that he really
was one.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxix

[Tarascon]


On my way from Nîmes to Arles I spent three hours at Tarascon; chiefly
for the love of Alphonse Daudet, who has written nothing more genial
than "Les Aventures Prodigieuses de Tartarin," and the story of the
"siege" of the bright, dead little town (a mythic siege by the
Prussians) in the "Contes du Lundi." In the introduction which, for the
new edition of his works, he has lately supplied to "Tartarin," the
author of this extravagant but kindly satire gives some account of the
displeasure with which he has been visited by the ticklish Tarasconnais.
Daudet relates that in his attempt to shed a humorous light upon some of
the more vivid phases of the Provençal character he selected Tarascon at
a venture; not because the temperament of its natives is more
vainglorious than that of their neighbours, or their rebellion against
the "despotism of fact" more marked, but simply because he had to name a
particular Provençal city. Tartarin is a hunter of lions and charmer of
women, a true "_produit du midi_," as Daudet says, a character of the
most extravagant, genial comedy. He is a minimised Don Quixote, with
much less dignity but with equal good faith; and the story of his
exploits is a little masterpiece of the free fantastic. The
Tarasconnais, however, declined to take the joke, and opened the vials
of their wrath upon the mocking child of Nîmes, who would have been
better employed, they doubtless thought, in showing up the infirmities
of his own family. I am bound to add that when I passed through Tarascon
they did not appear to be in the least out of humour. Nothing could have
been brighter, easier, more suggestive of amiable indifference, than the
picture it presented to my mind. It lies quietly beside the Rhone,
looking across at Beaucaire, which seems very distant and independent,
and tacitly consenting to let the castle of the good King René of Anjou,
which projects very boldly into the river, pass for its most interesting
feature. The other features are, primarily, a sort of vivid sleepiness
in the aspect of the place, as if the September noon (it had lingered on
into October) lasted longer there than elsewhere; certain low arcades
which make the streets look grey and exhibit empty vistas; and a very
curious and beautiful walk beside the Rhone, denominated the Chaussée--a
long and narrow causeway, densely shaded by two rows of magnificent old
trees planted in its embankment and rendered doubly effective at the
moment I passed over it by a little train of collegians who had been
taken out for mild exercise by a pair of young priests. Lastly one may
say that a striking element of Tarascon, as of any town that lies on the
Rhone, is simply the Rhone itself; the big brown flood, of uncertain
temper, which has never taken time to forget that it is a child of the
mountain and the glacier, and that such an origin carries with it great
privileges. Later, at Avignon, I observed it in the exercise of these
privileges, chief among which was that of frightening the good people of
the old papal city half out of their wits.

The château of King René serves to-day as the prison of a district, and
the traveller who wishes to look into it must obtain his permission at
the Mairie of Tarascon. If he have had a certain experience of French
manners, his application will be accompanied with the forms of a
considerable obsequiosity, and in this case his request will be granted
as civilly as it has been made. The castle has more of the air of a
severely feudal fortress than I should suppose the period of its
construction (the first half of the fifteenth century) would have
warranted; being tremendously bare and perpendicular, and constructed
for comfort only in the sense that it was arranged for defence. It is a
square and simple mass, composed of small yellow stones and perched on a
pedestal of rock which easily commands the river. The building has the
usual circular towers at the corners and a heavy cornice at the top, and
immense stretches of sun-scorched wall relieved at wide intervals by
small windows, heavily cross-barred. It has, above all, an extreme
steepness of aspect; I cannot express it otherwise. The walls are as
sheer and inhospitable as precipices. The castle has kept its large
moat, which is now a hollow filled with wild plants. To this tall
fortress the good René retired in the middle of the fifteenth century,
finding it apparently the most substantial thing left him in a dominion
which had included Naples and Sicily, Lorraine and Anjou. He had been a
much-tried monarch and the sport of a various fortune, fighting half
his life for thrones he didn't care for, and exalted only to be quickly
cast down. Provence was the country of his affection, and the memory of
his troubles did not prevent him from holding a joyous court at Tarascon
and at Aix. He finished the castle at Tarascon, which had been begun
earlier in the century--finished it, I suppose, for consistency's sake,
in the manner in which it had originally been designed rather than in
accordance with the artistic tastes that formed the consolation of his
old age. He was a painter, a writer, a dramatist, a modern dilettante,
addicted to private theatricals. There is something very attractive in
the image that he has imprinted on the page of history. He was both
clever and kind, and many reverses and much suffering had not embittered
him nor quenched his faculty of enjoyment. He was fond of his sweet
Provence, and his sweet Provence has been grateful; it has woven a light
tissue of legend around the memory of the good King René.

I strolled over his dusky habitation--it must have taken all his good
humour to light it up--at the heels of the custodian, who showed me the
usual number of castle-properties: a deep, well-like court; a collection
of winding staircases and vaulted chambers, the embrasures of whose
windows and the recesses of whose doorways reveal a tremendous thickness
of wall. These things constitute the general identity of old castles;
and when one has wandered through a good many, with due discretion of
step and protrusion of head, one ceases very much to distinguish and
remember, and contents one's self with consigning them to the honourable
limbo of the romantic. I must add that this reflection did not in the
least deter me from crossing the bridge which connects Tarascon with
Beaucaire, in

[Illustration: TARASCON--THE CASTLE]

order to examine the old fortress whose ruins adorn the latter city. It
stands on a foundation of rock much higher than that of Tarascon, and
looks over with a melancholy expression at its better-conditioned
brother. Its position is magnificent and its outline very gallant. I was
well rewarded for my pilgrimage; for if the castle of Beaucaire is only
a fragment, the whole place, with its position and its views, is an
ineffaceable picture. It was the stronghold of the Montmorencys, and its
last tenant was that rash Duke François whom Richelieu, seizing every
occasion to trample on a great noble, caused to be beheaded at Toulouse,
where we saw, in the Capitol, the butcher's knife with which the
cardinal pruned the crown of France of its thorns. The castle, after the
death of this victim, was virtually demolished. Its site, which nature
to-day has taken again to herself, has an extraordinary charm. The mass
of rock that it formerly covered rises high above the town and is as
precipitous as the side of the Rhone. A tall, rusty iron gate admits you
from a quiet corner of Beaucaire to a wild tangled garden covering the
side of the hill--for the whole place forms the public promenade of the
townsfolk--a garden without flowers, with little steep, rough paths that
wind under a plantation of small, scrubby stone-pines. Above this is the
grassy platform of the castle, enclosed on one side only (toward the
river) by a large fragment of wall and a very massive dungeon. There are
benches placed in the lee of the wall, and others on the edge of the
platform, where one may enjoy a view, beyond the river, of certain
peeled and scorched undulations. A sweet desolation, an everlasting
peace, seemed to hang in the air. A very old man (a fragment, like the
castle itself) emerged from some crumbling corner to do me the
honours--a very gentle, obsequious, tottering, toothless, grateful old
man. He beguiled me into an ascent of the solitary tower, from which you
may look down on the big sallow river and glance at diminished Tarascon
and the barefaced, bald-headed hills behind it. It may appear that I
insist too much upon the nudity of the Provençal horizon--too much
considering that I have spoken of the prospect from the heights of
Beaucaire as lovely. But it is an exquisite bareness; it seems to exist
for the purpose of allowing one to follow the delicate lines of the
hills and touch with the eyes, as it were, the smallest inflections of
the landscape. It makes the whole thing wonderfully bright and pure.

Beaucaire used to be the scene of a famous fair, the great fair of the
south of France. It has gone the way of most fairs, even in France,
where these delightful exhibitions hold their own much better than might
be supposed. It is still held in the month of July; but the bourgeoises
of Tarascon send to the Magasin du Louvre for their smart dresses, and
the principal glory of the scene is its long tradition. Even now,
however, it ought to be the prettiest of all fairs, for it takes place
in, a charming wood which lies just beneath the castle, beside the
Rhone. The booths, the barracks, the platforms of the mountebanks, the
bright-coloured crowd, diffused through this midsummer shade and spotted
here and there with the rich Provençal sunshine, must be of the most
pictorial effect. It is highly probable too that it offers a large
collection of pretty faces; for even in the few hours that I spent at
Tarascon I discovered symptoms of the purity of feature for which the
women of the _pays d'Arles_ are renowned. The Arlesian head-dress was
visible in the streets; and this delightful coiffure is so associated
with a charming facial oval, a dark mild eye, a straight Greek nose,
and a mouth worthy of all the rest, that it conveys a presumption of
beauty which gives the wearer time either to escape or to please you. I
have read somewhere, however, that Tarascon is supposed to produce
handsome men, as Arles is known to deal in handsome women. It may be
that I should have found the Tarasconnais very fine fellows if I had
encountered enough specimens to justify an induction. But there are very
few males in the streets, and the place presented no appearance of
activity. Here and there the black coif of an old woman or of a young
girl was framed by a low doorway; but for the rest, as I have said,
Tarascon was mostly involved in a siesta. There was not a creature in
the little church of Saint Martha, which I made a point of visiting
before I returned to the station, and which, with its fine romanesque
side-portal and its pointed and crocketed gothic spire, is as curious as
it need be in view of its tradition. It stands in a quiet corner where
the grass grows between the small cobble-stones, and you pass beneath a
deep archway to reach it. The tradition relates that Saint Martha tamed
with her own hands and attached to her girdle a dreadful dragon who was
known as the Tarasque and is reported to have given his name to the city
on whose site (amid the rocks which form the base of the château) he had
his cavern. The dragon perhaps is the symbol of a ravening paganism
dispelled by the eloquence of a sweet evangelist. The bones of the
interesting saint, at all events, were found, in the eleventh century,
in a cave beneath the spot on which her altar now stands. I know not
what had become of the bones of the dragon.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxx

[Arles]


There are two shabby old inns at Arles which compete closely for your
custom. I mean by this that if you elect to go to the Hôtel du Forum,
the Hôtel du Nord, which is placed exactly beside it (at a right angle),
watches your arrival with ill-concealed disapproval; and if you take the
chances of its neighbour, the Hôtel du Forum seems to glare at you
invidiously from all its windows and doors. I forget which of these
establishments I selected; whichever it was, I wished very much that it
had been the other. The two stand together on the Place des Hommes, a
little public square of Arles which somehow quite misses its effect. As
a city, indeed, Arles quite misses its effect in every way; and if it is
a charming place, as I think it is, I can hardly tell the reason why.
The straight-nosed Arlésiennes account for it in some degree; and the
remainder may be charged to the ruins of the arena and the theatre.
Beyond this, I remember with affection the ill-proportioned little Place
des Hommes; not at all monumental, and given over to puddles and to
shabby cafés. I recall with tenderness the tortuous and featureless
streets, which looked liked the streets of a village and were paved with
villainous little sharp stones, making all exercise penitential.
Consecrated by association is even a tiresome walk that I took the
evening I arrived, with the purpose of obtaining a view of the Rhone. I
had been to Arles before, years ago, and it seemed to me that I
remembered finding on the banks of the stream some sort of picture. I
think that on the evening on which I speak there was a watery moon,
which it seemed to me would light up the past as well as the present.
But I found no picture, and I scarcely found the Rhone at all. I lost my
way, and there was not a creature in the streets to whom I could appeal.
Nothing could be more provincial than the situation of Arles at ten
o'clock at night. At last I arrived at a kind of embankment where I
could see the great mud-coloured stream slipping along in the soundless
darkness. It had come on to rain, I know not what had happened to the
moon, and the whole place was anything but gay. It was not what I had
looked for; what I had looked for was in the irrecoverable past. I
groped my way back to the inn over the infernal _cailloux_, feeling like
a discomfited Dogberry. I remember now that this hotel was the one
(whichever that may be) which has the fragment of a Gallo-Roman portico
inserted into one of its angles. I had chosen it for the sake of this
exceptional ornament. It was damp and dark, and the floors felt gritty
to the feet; it was an establishment at which the dreadful _gras-double_
might have appeared at the table d'hôte, as it had done at Narbonne.
Nevertheless I was glad to get back to it; and nevertheless too--and
this is the moral of my simple anecdote--my pointless little walk (I
don't speak of the pavement) suffuses itself, as I look back upon it,
with a romantic tone. And in relation to the inn I suppose I had better
mention that I am well aware of the inconsistency of a person who
dislikes the modern caravansary and yet grumbles when he finds a hotel
of the superannuated sort. One ought to choose, it would seem, and make
the best of either alternative. The two old taverns at Arles are quite
unimproved; such as they must have been in the infancy of the modern
world, when Stendhal passed that way and the lumbering diligence
deposited him in the Place des Hommes, such in every detail they are
to-day. _Vieilles auberges de France_, one ought to enjoy their gritty
floors and greasy window-panes. Let it be put on record therefore that I
have been, I won't say less comfortable, but at least less happy, at
better inns.

To be really historic, I should have mentioned that before going to look
for the Rhone I had spent part of the evening on the opposite side of
the little place, and that I indulged in this recreation for two
definite reasons. One of these was that I had an opportunity of
gossiping at a café with a conversable young Englishman whom I had met
in the afternoon at Tarascon and more remotely, in other years, in
London; the other was that there sat enthroned behind the counter a
splendid mature Arlésienne, whom my companion and I agreed that it was a
rare privilege to contemplate. There is no rule of good manners or
morals which makes it improper, at a café, to fix one's eyes upon the
_dame de comptoir_; the lady is, in the nature of things, a part of your
_consummation_. We were therefore free to

[Illustration: ARLES--ST. TROPHIMUS]

admire without restriction the handsomest person I had ever seen give
change for a five-franc piece. She was a large quiet woman, who would
never see forty again; of an intensely feminine type, yet wonderfully
rich and robust, and full of a certain physical nobleness. Though she
was not really old, she was antique; and she was very grave, even a
little sad. She had the dignity of a Roman empress, and she handled
coppers as if they had been stamped with the head of Cæsar. I have seen
washerwomen in the Trastevere who were perhaps as handsome as she; but
even the head-dress of the Roman contadina contributes less to the
dignity of the person born to wear it than the sweet and stately
Arlesian cap, which sits at once aloft and on the back of the head;
which is accompanied with a wide black bow covering a considerable part
of the crown; and which, finally, accommodates itself indescribably well
to the manner in which the tresses of the front are pushed behind the
ears.

This admirable dispenser of lumps of sugar has distracted me a little,
for I am still not sufficiently historical. Before going to the café I
had dined, and before dining I had found time to go and look at the
arena. Then it was that I discovered that Arles has no general
physiognomy and, except the delightful little church of Saint Trophimus,
no architecture, and that the rugosities of its dirty lanes affect the
feet like knife-blades. It was not then, on the other hand, that I saw
the arena best. The second day of my stay at Arles I devoted to a
pilgrimage to the strange old hill town of Les Baux, the mediæval
Pompeii, of which I shall give myself the pleasure of speaking. The
evening of that day, however (my friend and I returned in time for a
late dinner), I wandered among the Roman remains of the place by the
light of a magnificent moon and gathered an impression which has lost
little of its silvery glow. The moon of the evening before had been
aqueous and erratic; but if on the present occasion it was guilty of any
irregularity, the worst it did was only to linger beyond its time in the
heavens in order to let us look at things comfortably. The effect was
admirable; it brought back the impression of the way, in Rome itself, on
evenings like that, the moonshine rests upon broken shafts and slabs of
antique pavement. As we sat in the theatre looking at the two lone
columns that survive--part of the decoration of the back of the
stage--and at the fragments of ruin around them, we might have been in
the Roman Forum. The arena at Arles, with its great magnitude, is less
complete than that of Nîmes; it has suffered even more the assaults of
time and the children of time, and it has been less repaired. The seats
are almost wholly wanting; but the external walls, minus the topmost
tier of arches, are massively, ruggedly complete; and the vaulted
corridors seem as solid as the day they were built. The whole thing is
superbly vast and as monumental, for a place of light amusement--what is
called in America a "variety-show"--as it entered only into the Roman
mind to make such establishments. The _podium_ is much higher than at
Nîmes, and many of the great white slabs that faced it have been
recovered and put into their places. The proconsular box has been more
or less reconstructed, and the great converging passages of approach to
it are still majestically distinct; so that, as I sat there in the
moon-charmed stillness, leaning my elbows on the battered parapet of the
ring, it was not impossible to listen to the murmurs and shudders, the
thick voice of the circus, that died away fifteen hundred years ago.

[Illustration: ARLES--RUINS OF THE ROMAN THEATRE]

The theatre has a voice as well, but it lingers on the ear of time with
a different music. The Roman theatre at Arles seemed to me one of the
most charming and touching ruins I had ever beheld; I took a particular
fancy to it. It is less than a skeleton--the arena may be called a
skeleton--for it consists only of half a dozen bones. The traces of the
row of columns which formed the scene--the permanent back-scene--remain;
two marble pillars--I just mentioned them--are upright, with a fragment
of their entablature. Before them is the vacant space which was filled
by the stage, with the line of the proscenium distinct, marked by a deep
groove impressed upon slabs of stone, which looks as if the bottom of a
high screen had been intended to fit into it. The semicircle formed by
the seats--half a cup--rises opposite; some of the rows are distinctly
marked. The floor, from the bottom of the stage, in the shape of an arc
of which the chord is formed by the line of the orchestra, is covered by
slabs of coloured marble--red, yellow and green--which, though terribly
battered and cracked to-day, give one an idea of the elegance of the
interior. Everything shows that it was on a great scale: the large sweep
of its enclosing walls, the massive corridors that passed behind the
auditorium and of which we can still perfectly take the measure. The way
in which every seat commanded the stage is a lesson to the architects of
our epochs, as also the immense size of the place is a proof of
extraordinary power of voice on the part of the Roman actors. It was
after we had spent half an hour in the moonshine at the arena that we
came on to this more ghostly and more exquisite ruin. The principal
entrance was locked, but we effected an easy _escalade_, scaled a low
parapet, and descended into the place behind the scenes. It was as light
as day, and the solitude was complete. The two slim columns, as we sat
on the broken benches, stood there like a pair of silent actors. What I
called touching just now was the thought that here the human voice, the
utterance of a great language, had been supreme. The air was full of
intonations and cadences; not of the echo of smashing blows, of riven
armour, of howling victims and roaring beasts. The spot is, in short,
one of the sweetest legacies of the ancient world; and there seems no
profanation in the fact that by day it is open to the good people of
Arles, who use it to pass, by no means in great numbers, from one part
of the town to the other; treading the old marble floor and brushing, if
need be, the empty benches. This familiarity does not kill the place
again; it makes it, on the contrary, live a little--makes the present
and the past touch each other.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxi

[Arles: the Museum]


The third lion of Arles has nothing to do with the ancient world, but
only with the old one. The church of Saint Trophimus, whose wonderful
romanesque porch is the principal ornament of the principal _place_--a
_place_ otherwise distinguished by the presence of a slim and tapering
obelisk in the middle, as well as by that of the hôtel de ville and the
museum--the interesting church of Saint Trophimus swears a little, as
the French say, with the peculiar character of Arles. It is very
remarkable, but I would rather it were in another place. Arles is
delightfully pagan, and Saint Trophimus, with its apostolic sculptures,
is rather a false note. These sculptures are equally remarkable for
their primitive vigour and for the perfect preservation in which they
have come down to us. The deep recess of a round-arched porch of the
twelfth century is covered with quaint figures which have not lost a
nose or a finger. An angular Byzantine-looking Christ sits in a
diamond-shaped frame at the summit of the arch, surrounded by little
angels, by great apostles, by winged beasts, by a hundred sacred symbols
and grotesque ornaments. It is a dense embroidery of sculpture, black
with time, but as uninjured as if it had been kept under glass. One good
mark for the French Revolution! Of the interior of the church, which has
a nave of the twelfth century and a choir three hundred years more
recent, I chiefly remember the odd feature that the romanesque aisles
are so narrow that you literally--or almost--squeeze through them. You
do so with some eagerness, for your natural purpose is to pass out to
the cloister. This cloister, as distinguished and as perfect as the
porch, has a great deal of charm. Its four sides, which are not of the
same period (the earliest and best are of the twelfth century), have an
elaborate arcade, supported on delicate pairs of columns, the capitals
of which show an extraordinary variety of device and ornament. At the
corners of the quadrangle these columns take the form of curious human
figures. The whole thing is a gem of lightness and preservation and is
often cited for its beauty; but--if it doesn't sound too profane--I
prefer, especially at Arles, the ruins of the Roman theatre. The antique
element is too precious to be mingled with anything less rare. This
truth was very present to my mind during a ramble of a couple of hours
that I took just before leaving the place; and the glowing beauty of the
morning gave the last touch to the impression. I spent half an hour at
the Museum; then I took another look at the Roman

[Illustration: ARLES--DOOR OF ST. TROPHIMUS.]

theatre; after which I walked a little out of the town to the Aliscamps,
the old Elysian Fields, the meagre remnant of the old pagan place of
sepulture, which was afterwards used by the Christians, but has been for
ages deserted and now consists only of a melancholy avenue of cypresses
lined with a succession of ancient sarcophagi, empty, mossy and
mutilated. An iron-foundry, or some horrible establishment which is
conditioned upon tall chimneys and a noise of hammering and banging, has
been established near at hand; but the cypresses shut it out well
enough, and this small patch of Elysium is a very romantic corner.

The door of the Museum stands ajar, and a vigilant custodian, with the
usual batch of photographs on his mind, peeps out at you disapprovingly
while you linger opposite, before the charming portal of Saint
Trophimus, which you may look at for nothing. When you succumb to the
silent influence of his eye and go over to visit his collection, you
find yourself in a desecrated church, in which a variety of ancient
objects disinterred in Arlesian soil have been arranged without any
pomp. The best of these, I believe, were found in the ruins of the
theatre. Some of the most curious of them are early Christian
sarcophagi, exactly on the pagan model, but covered with rude yet
vigorously wrought images of the apostles and with illustrations of
scriptural history. Beauty of the highest kind, either of conception or
of execution, is absent from most of the Roman fragments, which belong
to the taste of a late period and a provincial civilisation. But a gulf
divides them from the bristling little imagery of the Christian
sarcophagi, in which, at the same time, one detects a vague emulation of
the rich examples by which their authors were surrounded. There is a
certain element of style in all the pagan things; there is not a hint
of it in the early Christian relics, among which, according to M.
Joanne, of the Guide, are to be found more fine sarcophagi than in any
collection but that of St. John Lateran. In two or three of the Roman
fragments there is a noticeable distinction; principally in a charming
bust of a boy, quite perfect, with those salient eyes that one sees in
antique portraits, and to which the absence of vision in the marble mask
gives a look, often very touching, as of a baffled effort to see; also
in the head of a woman, found in the ruins of the theatre, who, alas!
has lost her nose and whose noble, simple contour, barring this
deficiency, recalls the great manner of the Venus of Milo. There are
various rich architectural fragments which indicate that that edifice
was a very splendid affair. This little Museum at Arles, in short, is
the most Roman thing I know of out of Rome.

[Illustration: ARLES--THE CLOISTERS]

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxii

[Les Baux]


I find that I declared one evening, in a little journal I was keeping at
that time, that I was weary of writing (I was probably very sleepy), but
that it was essential I should make some note of my visit to Les Baux. I
must have gone to sleep as soon as I had recorded this necessity, for I
search my small diary in vain for any account of that enchanting spot. I
have nothing but my memory to consult--a memory which is fairly good in
regard to a general impression, but is terribly infirm in the matter of
details and items. We knew in advance, my companion and I, that Les Baux
was a pearl of picturesqueness; for had we not read as much in the
handbook of Murray, who has the testimony of an English nobleman as to
its attractions? We also knew that it lay some miles from Arles, on the
crest of the Alpilles, the craggy little mountains which, as I stood on
the breezy platform of Beaucaire, formed to my eye a charming, if
somewhat remote, background to Tarascon; this assurance having been
given us by the landlady of the inn at Arles, of whom we hired a rather
lumbering conveyance. The weather was not promising, but it proved a
good day for the mediæval Pompeii; a grey, melancholy, moist, but
rainless, or almost rainless day, with nothing in the sky to flout, as
the poet says, the dejected and pulverised past. The drive itself was
charming, for there is an inexhaustible sweetness in the grey-green
landscape of Provence. It is never absolutely flat and yet is never
really ambitious, and is full both of entertainment and repose. It is in
constant undulation, and the bareness of the soil lends itself easily to
outline and profile. When I say the bareness I mean the absence of woods
and hedges. It blooms with heath and scented shrubs and stunted olive,
and the white rock shining through the scattered herbage has a
brightness which answers to the brightness of the sky. Of course it
needs the sunshine, for all southern countries look a little false under
the ground-glass of incipient bad weather. This was the case on the day
of my pilgrimage to Les Baux. Nevertheless I was glad to keep going, as
I was to arrive; and as I went it seemed to me that true happiness would
consist in wandering through such a land on foot, on September
afternoons, when one might stretch one's self on the warm ground in some
shady hollow and listen to the hum of bees and the whistle of melancholy
shepherds; for in Provence the shepherds whistle to their flocks. I saw
two or three of them, in the course of this drive to Les Baux,
meandering about, looking behind and calling upon the sheep in this way
to follow, which the sheep always did, very promptly, with ovine
unanimity. Nothing is more picturesque than to see a slow shepherd
threading his way down one of the winding paths on a hillside, with his
flock close behind him, necessarily expanded, yet keeping just at his
heels, bending and twisting as it goes and looking rather like the tail
of a dingy comet.

About four miles from Arles, as you drive northward towards the
Alpilles, of which Alphonse Daudet has spoken so often and, as he might
say, so intimately, stand on a hill that overlooks the road the very
considerable ruins of the abbey of Montmajour, one of the innumerable
remnants of a feudal and ecclesiastical (as well as an architectural)
past that one encounters in the south of France; remnants which, it must
be confessed, tend to introduce a certain confusion and satiety into the
passive mind of the tourist. Montmajour, however, is very impressive and
interesting; the only trouble with it is that, unless you have stopped
and returned to Arles, you see it in memory over the head of Les Baux,
which is a much more absorbing picture. A part of the mass of buildings
(the monastery) dates only from the last century; and the stiff
architecture of that period does not lend itself very gracefully to
desolation: it looks too much as if it had been burnt down the year
before. The monastery was demolished during the Revolution, and it
injures a little the effect of the very much more ancient fragments that
are connected with it. The whole place is on a great scale; it was a
rich and splendid abbey. The church, a vast basilica of the eleventh
century and of the noblest proportions, is virtually intact; I mean as
regards its essentials, for the details have completely vanished. The
huge solid shell is full of expression; it looks as if it had been
hollowed out by the sincerity of early faith, and it opens into a
cloister as impressive as itself. Wherever one goes, in France, one
meets, looking backward a little, the spectre of the great Revolution;
and one meets it always in the shape of the destruction of something
beautiful and precious. To make us forgive it at all, how much it must
also have destroyed that was more hateful than itself! Beneath the
church of Montmajour is a most extraordinary crypt, almost as big as the
edifice above it and making a complete subterranean temple, surrounded
with a circular gallery, or deambulatory, which expands at intervals
into five square chapels. There are other things, of which I have but a
confused memory: a great fortified keep; a queer little primitive chapel
hollowed out of the rock beneath these later structures and recommended
to the visitor's attention as the confessional of Saint Trophimus, who
shares with so many worthies the glory of being the first apostle of the
Gauls. Then there is a strange, small church, of the dimmest antiquity,
standing at a distance from the other buildings. I remember that after
we had let ourselves down a good many steepish places to visit crypts
and confessionals, we walked across a field to this archaic cruciform
edifice and went thence to a point farther down the road, where our
carriage was awaiting us. The chapel of the Holy Cross, as it is called,
is classed among the historic monuments of France; and I read in a
queer, rambling, ill-written book which I picked at Avignon, and in
which the author, M. Louis de Laincel, has buried a great deal of
curious information on the subject of Provence under a style inspiring
little confidence, that the "délicieuse chapelle de Sainte-Croix" is a
"véritable bijou artistique." He speaks of "a piece of lace in stone"
which runs from one end of the building to the other, but of which I am
obliged to confess that I have no recollection. I retain, however, a
sufficiently clear impression of the little superannuated temple, with
its four apses and its perceptible odour of antiquity--the odour of the
eleventh century.

The ruins of Les Baux remain quite indistinguishable even when you are
directly beneath them, at the foot of the charming little Alpilles,
which mass themselves with a kind of delicate ruggedness. Rock and ruin
have been so welded together by the confusions of time that as you
approach it from behind--that is, from the direction of Arles--the place
presents simply a general air of cragginess. Nothing can be prettier
than the crags of Provence; they are beautifully modelled, as painters
say, and they have a delightful silvery colour. The road winds round the
foot of the hills on the top of which Les Baux is planted, and passes
into another valley, from which the approach to the town is many degrees
less precipitous and may be comfortably made in a carriage. Of course
the deeply inquiring traveller will alight as promptly as possible, for
the pleasure of climbing into this queerest of cities on foot is not the
least part of the entertainment of going there. Then you appreciate its
extraordinary position, its picturesqueness, its steepness, its
desolation and decay. It hangs--that is, what remains of it--to the
slanting summit of the mountain. Nothing would be more natural than for
the whole place to roll down into the valley. A part of it has done
so--for it is not unjust to suppose that in the process of decay the
crumbled particles have sought the lower level, while the remainder
still clings to its magnificent perch.

If I called Les Baux a city, just above, it was not that I was
stretching a point in favour of the small spot which to-day contains but
a few dozen inhabitants. The history of the place is as extraordinary as
its situation. It was not only a city, but a state; not only a state,
but an empire; and on the crest of its little mountain called itself
sovereign of a territory, or at least of scattered towns and counties,
with which its present aspect is grotesquely out of relation. The lords
of Les Baux, in a word, were great feudal proprietors; and there was a
time during which the island of Sardinia, to say nothing of places
nearer home, such as Arles and Marseilles, paid them homage. The
chronicle of this old Provençal house has been written, in a style
somewhat unctuous and flowery, by M. Jules Canonge. I purchased the
little book--a modest pamphlet--at the establishment of the good
sisters, just beside the church, in one of the highest parts of Les
Baux. The sisters have a school for the hardy little Baussenques, whom I
heard piping their lessons while I waited in the cold _parloir_ for one
of the ladies to come and speak to me. Nothing could have been more
perfect than the manner of this excellent woman when she arrived; yet
her small religious house seemed a very out-of-the-way corner of the
world. It was spotlessly neat, and the rooms looked as if they had
lately been papered and painted: in this respect, at the mediæval
Pompeii, they were rather a discord. They were, at any rate, the newest,
freshest thing at Les Baux. I remember going round to the church after I
had left the good sisters, and to a little quiet terrace which stands in
front of it, ornamented with a few small trees and bordered with a wall,
breast-high, over which you look down steep hillsides, off into the air
and all about the neighbouring country. I remember saying to myself that
this little terrace was one of those felicitous nooks which the tourist
of taste keeps in his mind as a picture. The church was small and brown
and dark, with a certain rustic richness. All this, however, is no
general description of Les Baux.

I am unable to give any coherent account of the place, for the simple
reason that it is a mere confusion of ruin. It has not been preserved in
lava like Pompeii, and its streets and houses, its ramparts and castle,
have become fragmentary not through the sudden destruction, but through
the gradual withdrawal, of a population. It is not an extinguished, but
a deserted city; more deserted far than even Carcassonne and
Aigues-Mortes, where I found so much entertainment in the grass-grown
element. It is of very small extent, and even in the days of its
greatness, when its lords entitled themselves counts of Cephalonia and
Neophantis, kings of Arles and Vienne, princes of Achaia and emperors of
Constantinople--even at this flourishing period, when, as M. Jules
Canonge remarks, "they were able to depress the balance in which the
fate of peoples and kings is weighed," the plucky little city contained
at the most no more than thirty-six hundred souls. Yet its lords (who,
however, as I have said, were able to present a long list of subject
towns, most of them, though a few are renowned, unknown to fame) were
seneschals and captains-general of Piedmont and Lombardy, grand admirals
of the kingdom of Naples, and its ladies were sought in marriage by half
the first princes in Europe. A considerable part of the little narrative
of M. Canonge is taken up with the great alliances of the House of Baux,
whose fortunes, matrimonial and other, he traces from the eleventh
century down to the sixteenth. The empty shells of a considerable number
of old houses, many of which must have been superb, the lines of certain
steep little streets, the foundations of a castle, and ever so many
splendid views, are all that remains to-day of these great titles. To
such a list I may add a dozen very polite and sympathetic people who
emerged from the interstices of the desultory little town to gaze at the
two foreigners who had driven over from Arles and whose horses were
being baited at the modest inn. The resources of this establishment we
did not venture otherwise to test, in spite of the seductive fact that
the sign over the door was in the Provençal tongue. This little group
included the baker, a rather melancholy young man, in high boots and a
cloak, with whom and his companions we had a good deal of conversation.
The Baussenques of to-day struck me as a very mild and agreeable race,
with a good deal of the natural amenity which, on occasions like this
one, the traveller who is waiting for his horses to be put in or his
dinner to be prepared observes in the charming people who lend
themselves to conversation in the hill-towns of Tuscany. The spot where
our entertainers at Les Baux congregated was naturally the most
inhabited portion of the town; as I say, there were at least a dozen
human figures within sight. Presently we wandered away from them, scaled
the higher places, seated ourselves among the ruins of the castle, and
looked down from the cliff overhanging that portion of the road which I
have mentioned as approaching Les Baux from behind. I was unable to
trace the configuration of the castle as plainly as the writers who have
described it in the guide-books, and I am ashamed to say that I did not
even perceive the three great figures of stone (the three Marys, as they
are called; the two Marys of Scripture, with Martha) which constitute
one of the curiosities of the place and of which M. Jules Canonge speaks
with almost hyperbolical admiration. A brisk shower, lasting some ten
minutes, led us to take refuge in a cavity of mysterious origin, where
the melancholy baker presently discovered us, having had the _bonne
pensée_ of coming up for us with an umbrella which certainly belonged,
in former ages, to one of the Stéphanettes or Berangères commemorated by
M. Canonge. His oven, I am afraid, was cold so long as our visit lasted.
When the rain was over we wandered down to the little disencumbered
space before the inn, through a small labyrinth of obliterated things.
They took the form of narrow, precipitous streets bordered by empty
houses with gaping windows and absent doors, through which we had
glimpses of sculptured chimney-pieces and fragments of stately arch and
vault. Some of the houses are still inhabited, but most of them are open
to the air and weather. Some of them have completely collapsed; others
present to the street a front which enables one to judge of the
physiognomy of Les Baux in the days of its importance. This importance
had pretty well passed away in the early part of the sixteenth century,
when the place ceased to be an independent principality. It became--by
bequest of one of its lords, Bernardin des Baux, a great captain of his
time--part of the appanage of the kings of France, by whom it was placed
under the protection of Arles, which had formerly occupied with regard
to it a different position. I know not whether the Arlesians neglected
their trust, but the extinction of the sturdy little stronghold is too
complete not to have begun long ago. Its memories are buried under its
ponderous stones. As we drove away from it in the gloaming my friend and
I agreed that the two or three hours we had spent there were among the
happiest impressions of a pair of tourists very curious of the
picturesque. We almost forgot that we were bound to regret that the
shortened day left us no time to drive five miles farther, above a pass
in the little mountains--it had beckoned to us in the morning, when we
came in sight of it, almost irresistibly--to see the Roman arch and
mausoleum of Saint Remy. To compass this larger excursion (including the
visit to Les Baux) you must start from Arles very early in the morning;
but I can imagine no more delightful day.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxiii

[Avignon]


I had been twice at Avignon before, and yet I was not satisfied. I
probably am satisfied now; nevertheless I enjoyed my third visit. I
shall not soon forget the first, on which a particular emotion set an
indelible stamp. I was creeping northward, in 1870, after four months
spent, for the first time, in Italy. It was the middle of January, and I
had found myself unexpectedly forced to return to England for the rest
of the winter. It was an insufferable disappointment; I was wretched and
broken-hearted. Italy appeared to me at that time so much better than
anything else in the world, that to rise from table in the middle of the
feast was a prospect of being hungry for the rest of my days. I had
heard a great deal of praise of the south of France; but the south of
France was a poor consolation. In this state of mind I arrived at
Avignon, which under a bright, hard winter sun was tingling--fairly
spinning--with the _mistral_. I find in my journal of the other day a
reference to the acuteness of my reluctance in January 1870. France,
after Italy, appeared in the language of the latter country _poco
simpatica_; and I thought it necessary, for reasons now inconceivable,
to read the _Figaro_, which was filled with descriptions of the horrible
Troppmann, the murderer of the _famille_ Kink. Troppmann, Kink, _le
crime de Pantin_--the very names that figured in this episode seemed to
wave me back. Had I abandoned the sonorous south to associate with
vocables so base?

It was very cold the other day at Avignon, for though there was no
mistral, it was raining as it rains in Provence, and the dampness had a
terrible chill in it. As I sat by my fire late at night--for in genial
Avignon, in October, I had to have a fire--it came back to me that
eleven years before I had at that same hour sat by a fire in that same
room and, writing to a friend to whom I was not afraid to appear
extravagant, had made a vow that at some happier period of the future I
would avenge myself on the _ci-devant_ city of the Popes by taking it in
a contrary sense. I suppose that I redeemed my vow on the occasion of my
second visit better than on my third; for then I was on my way to Italy,
and that vengeance, of course, was complete. The only drawback was that
I was in such a hurry to get to Ventimiglia (where the Italian
custom-house was to be the sign of my triumph), that I scarcely took
time to make it clear to myself at Avignon that this was better than
reading the _Figaro_. I hurried on almost too fast to enjoy the
consciousness of moving southward. On this last occasion I was
unfortunately destitute of that happy faith. Avignon was my southernmost
limit, after which I was to turn round and proceed back to England. But
in the interval I had been a great deal in Italy, and that made all the
difference. I had plenty of time to think of this, for the rain kept me
practically housed for the first twenty-four hours. It had been raining
in these regions for a month, and people had begun to look askance at
the Rhone, though as yet the volume of the river was not exorbitant. The
only excursion possible, while the torrent descended, was a kind of
horizontal dive, accompanied with infinite splashing, to the little
_musée_ of the town, which is within a moderate walk of the hotel. I had
a memory of it from my first visit; it had appeared to me more pictorial
than its pictures. I found that recollection had flattered it a little,
and that it is neither better nor worse than most provincial museums. It
has the usual musty chill in the air, the usual grass-grown forecourt,
in which a few lumpish Roman fragments are disposed, the usual red tiles
on the floor and the usual specimens of the more livid schools on the
walls. I rang up the _gardien_, who arrived with a bunch of keys, wiping
his mouth; he unlocked doors for me, opened shutters, and while (to my
distress, as if the things had been worth lingering over) he shuffled
about after me, he announced the names of the pictures before which I
stopped in a voice that reverberated through the melancholy halls and
seemed to make the authorship shameful when it was obscure and grotesque
when it pretended to be great. Then there were intervals of silence,
while I stared absent-mindedly, at haphazard, at some indistinguishable
canvas and the only sound was the downpour of the rain on the skylights.
The museum of Avignon derives a certain dignity from its Roman
fragments. The town has no Roman monuments to show; in this respect,
beside its brilliant neighbours, Arles and Nîmes, it is a blank. But a
great many small objects have been found in its soil--pottery, glass,
bronzes, lamps, vessels and ornaments of gold and silver. The glass is
especially charming--small vessels of the most delicate shape and
substance, many of them perfectly preserved. These diminutive, intimate
things bring one near to the old Roman life; they seems like pearls
strung upon the slender thread that swings across the gulf of time. A
little glass cup that Roman lips have touched says more to us than the
great vessel of an arena. There are two small silver _casseroles_, with
chiselled handles, in the museum of Avignon, that struck me as among the
most charming survivals of antiquity.

[Avignon the Palace of the Popes]

I did wrong, just above, to speak of my attack on this establishment as
the only recreation I took that first wet day; for I remember a terribly
moist visit to the former palace of the Popes, which could have taken
place only in the same tempestuous hours. It is true that I scarcely
know why I should have gone out to see the Papal palace in the rain, for
I had been over it twice before, and even then had not found the
interest of the place so complete as it ought to be; the fact
nevertheless remains that this last occasion is much associated with an
umbrella, which was not superfluous even in some of the chambers and
corridors of the gigantic pile. It had already seemed to me the
dreariest of all historical buildings, and my final visit confirmed the
impression. The place is as intricate as it is vast, and as desolate as
it is dirty. The imagination has, for some reason or other, to make more
than the effort usual in such cases to restore and repeople it. The fact
indeed is simply that the palace has been so incalculably abused and
altered. The alterations have been so numerous that, though I have duly
conned the enumerations, supplied in guide-books, of the principal

[Illustration: AVIGNON--THE CHURCH]

perversions, I do not pretend to carry any of them in my head. The huge
bare mass, without ornament, without grace, despoiled of its battlements
and defaced with sordid modern windows, covering the Rocher des Doms and
looking down over the Rhone and the broken bridge of Saint-Bénazet
(which stops in such a sketchable manner in mid-stream), and across at
the lonely tower of Philippe le Bel and the ruined wall of Villeneuve,
makes at a distance, in spite of its poverty, a great figure, the effect
of which is carried out by the tower of the church beside it (crowned
though the latter be, in a top-heavy fashion, with an immense modern
image of the Virgin) and by the thick, dark foliage of the garden laid
out on a still higher portion of the eminence. This garden recalls
faintly and a trifle perversely the grounds of the Pincian at Rome. I
know not whether it is the shadow of the Papal name, present in both
places, combined with a vague analogy between the churches--which,
approached in each case by a flight of steps, seemed to defend the
precinct--but each time I have seen the Promenade des Doms it has
carried my thoughts to the wider and loftier terrace from which you look
away at the Tiber and Saint Peter's.

As you stand before the Papal palace, and especially as you enter it,
you are struck with its being a very dull monument. History enough was
enacted here: the great schism lasted from 1305 to 1370, during which
seven Popes, all Frenchmen, carried on the court of Avignon on
principles that have not commended themselves to the esteem of
posterity. But history has been whitewashed away, and the scandals of
that period have mingled with the dust of dilapidations and repairs. The
building has for many years been occupied as a barrack for regiments of
the line, and the main characteristics of a barrack--an extreme nudity
and a very queer smell--prevail throughout its endless compartments.
Nothing could have been more cruelly dismal than the appearance it
presented at the time of this third visit of mine. A regiment, changing
quarters, had departed the day before, and another was expected to
arrive (from Algeria) on the morrow. The place had been left in the
befouled and belittered condition which marks the passage of the
military after they have broken camp, and it would offer but a
melancholy welcome to the regiment that was about to take possession.
Enormous windows had been left carelessly open all over the building,
and the rain and wind were beating into empty rooms and passages, making
draughts which purified, perhaps, but which scarcely cheered. For an
arrival it was horrible. A handful of soldiers had remained behind. In
one of the big vaulted rooms several of them were lying on their
wretched beds, in the dim light, in the cold, in the damp, with the
bleak bare walls before them and their overcoats, spread over them,
pulled up to their noses. I pitied them immensely, though they may have
felt less wretched than they looked. I thought not of the old
profligacies and crimes, not of the funnel-shaped torture-chamber
(which, after exciting the shudder of generations, has been ascertained
now, I believe, to have been a mediæval bakehouse), not of the tower of
the _glacière_ and the horrors perpetrated here in the Revolution, but
of the military burden of young France. One wonders how young France
endures it, and one is forced to believe that the French conscript has,
in addition to his notorious good-humour, greater toughness than is
commonly supposed by those who consider only the more relaxing
influences of French civilisation. I hope he finds occasional
compensation for such moments as I saw those damp young peasants passing
on the mattresses of their hideous barrack, without anything around to
remind them that they were in the most civilised of countries. The only
traces of former splendour now visible in the Papal pile are the walls
and vaults of two small chapels, painted in fresco, so battered and
effaced as to be scarcely distinguishable, by Simone Memmi. It offers of
course a peculiarly good field for restoration, and I believe the
Government intend to take it in hand. I mention this fact without a
sigh, for they cannot well make it less interesting than it is at
present.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxiv

[Villeneuve-lès-Avignon]


Fortunately it did not rain every day (though I believe it was raining
everywhere else in the department); otherwise I should not have been
able to go to Villeneuve and to Vaucluse. The afternoon indeed was
lovely when I walked over the interminable bridge that spans the two
arms of the Rhone, divided here by a considerable island, and directed
my course, like a solitary horseman--on foot, to the lonely tower which
forms one of the outworks of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon. The picturesque,
half-deserted little town lies a couple of miles farther up the river.
The immense round towers of its old citadel and the long stretches of
ruined wall covering the slope on which it lies are the most striking
features of the nearer view, as you look from Avignon across the Rhone.
I spent a couple of hours in visiting these objects, and there was a
kind of pictorial sweetness in the episode; but I have not many details
to relate. The isolated tower I just mentioned has much in common with
the detached donjon of Montmajour, which I had looked at in going to Les
Baux and to which I paid my respects in speaking of that excursion.
Also the work of Philippe le Bel (built in 1307), it is amazingly big
and stubborn, and formed the opposite limit of the broken bridge whose
first arches (on the side of Avignon) alone remain to give a measure of
the occasional volume of the Rhone. Half an hour's walk brought me to
Villeneuve, which lies away from the river, looking like a big village
half depopulated and occupied for the most part by dogs and cats, old
women and small children; these last, in general, remarkably pretty, in
the manner of the children of Provence. You pass through the place,
which seems in a singular degree vague and unconscious, and come to the
rounded hill on which the ruined abbey lifts its yellow walls--the
Benedictine abbey of Saint-André, at once a church, a monastery, and a
fortress. A large part of the crumbling enceinte disposes itself over
the hill; but for the rest, all that has preserved any traceable
cohesion is a considerable portion of the citadel. The defence of the
place appears to have been entrusted largely to the huge round towers
that flank the old gate; one of which, the more complete, the ancient
warden (having first inducted me into his own dusky little apartment and
presented me with a great bunch of lavender) enabled me to examine in
detail. I would almost have dispensed with the privilege, for I think I
have already mentioned that an acquaintance with many feudal interiors
has wrought a sad confusion in my mind. The image of the outside always
remains distinct; I keep it apart from other images of the same sort; it
makes, a picture sufficiently ineffaceable. But the guard-rooms, winding
staircases, loopholes, prisons, repeat themselves and intermingle; they
have a wearisome family likeness. There are always black passages and
corners, and walls twenty feet thick; and there is always some high
place to climb up to for the sake of a "magnificent" view. The views,
too, are apt to run together. These dense gate-towers of Philippe le Bel
struck me, however, as peculiarly wicked and grim. Their capacity is of
the largest, and they contain ever so many devilish little dungeons,
lighted by the narrowest slit in the prodigious wall, where it comes
over one with a good deal of vividness and still more horror that
wretched human beings once lay there rotting in the dark. The dungeons
of Villeneuve made a particular impression on me--greater than any
except those of Loches, which must surely be the most gruesome in
Europe. I hasten to add that every dark hole at Villeneuve is called a
dungeon; and I believe it is well established that in this manner, in
almost all old castles and towers, the sensibilities of the modern
tourist are unscrupulously played upon. There were plenty of black holes
in the Middle Ages that were not dungeons, but household receptacles of
various kinds; and many a tear dropped in pity for the groaning captive
has really been addressed to the spirits of the larder and the
faggot-nook. For all this, there are some very bad corners in the towers
of Villeneuve, so that I was not wide of the mark when I began to think
again, as I had often thought before, of the stoutness of the human
composition in the Middle Ages and the tranquillity of nerve of people
to whom the groaning captive and the blackness of a "living tomb" were
familiar ideas which did not at all interfere with their happiness or
their sanity. Our modern nerves, our irritable sympathies, our easy
discomforts and fears, make one think (in some relations) less
respectfully of human nature. Unless indeed it be true, as I have heard
it maintained, that in the Middle Ages every one did go mad--every one
_was_ mad. The theory that this was a period of general dementia is not
altogether untenable.

Within the old walls of its immense abbey the town of Villeneuve has
built itself a rough faubourg; the fragments with which the soil was
covered having been, i suppose, a quarry of material. There are no
streets; the small, shabby houses, almost hovels, straggle at random
over the uneven ground. The only important feature is a convent of
cloistered nuns, who have a large garden (always within the walls)
behind their house, and whose doleful establishment you look down into,
or down at simply, from the battlements of the citadel. One or two of
the nuns were passing in and out of the house; they wore grey robes with
a bright red cape. I thought their situation most provincial. I came
away and wandered a little over the base of the hill, outside the walls.
Small white stones cropped through the grass, over which low olive-trees
were scattered. The afternoon had a yellow brightness. I sat down under
one of the little trees, on the grass--the delicate grey branches were
not much above my head--and rested and looked at Avignon across the
Rhone. It was very soft, very still and pleasant, though I am not sure
it was all I once should have expected of that combination of elements:
an old city wall for a background, a canopy of olives, and for a couch
the soil of Provence. When I came back to Avignon the twilight was
already thick, but I walked up to the Rocher des Doms. Here I again had
the benefit of that amiable moon which had already lighted up for me so
many romantic scenes. She was full, and she rose over the Rhone and made
it look in the distance like a silver serpent. I remember saying to
myself at this moment that it would be a beautiful evening to walk
round the walls of Avignon--the remarkable walls which challenge
comparison with those of Carcassonne and Aigues-Mortes, and which it was
my duty, as an observer of the picturesque, to examine with some
attention. Presenting themselves to that silver sheen, they could not
fail to be impressive. So, at least, I said to myself; but unfortunately
I did not believe what I said. It is a melancholy fact that the walls of
Avignon had never impressed me at all, and I had never taken the trouble
to make the circuit. They are continuous and complete, but for some
mysterious reason they fail of their effect. This is partly because they
are very low, in some places almost absurdly so, being buried in new
accumulations of soil and by the filling in of the moat up to their
middle. Then they have been too well tended; they not only look at
present very new, but look as if they had never been old. The fact that
their extent is very much greater makes them more of a curiosity than
those of Carcassonne; but this is exactly, at the same time, what is
fatal to their pictorial unity. With their thirty-seven towers and seven
gates, they lose themselves too much to make a picture that will compare
with the admirable little vignette of Carcassonne. I may mention, now
that I am speaking of the general mass of Avignon, that nothing is more
curious than the way in which, viewed from a distance, it is all reduced
to naught by the vast bulk of the palace of the Popes. From across the
Rhone, or from the train as you leave the place, this great grey block
is all Avignon; it seems to occupy the whole city, extensive, with its
shrunken population, as the city is.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxv

[Vaucluse]


It was the morning after this, I think (a certain Saturday), that when I
came out of the Hôtel de l'Europe, which lies in shallow concavity just
within the city gate that opens on the Rhone--came out to look at the
sky from the little _place_ before the inn and see how the weather
promised for the obligatory excursion to Vaucluse--I found the whole
town in a terrible taking. I say the whole town advisedly, for every
inhabitant appeared to have taken up a position on the bank of the
river, or on the uppermost parts of the promenade of the Doms, where a
view of its course was to be obtained. It had risen surprisingly in the
night, and the good people of Avignon had reason to know what a rise of
the Rhone might signify. The town, in its lower portions, is quite at
the mercy of the swollen waters; and it was mentioned to me that in 1856
the Hôtel de l'Europe, in its convenient hollow, was flooded up to
within a few feet of the ceiling of the dining-room, where the long
board which had served for so many a table d'hôte floated disreputably,
with its legs in the air. On the present occasion the mountains of the
Ardêche, where it had been raining for a month, had sent down torrents
which, all that fine Friday night, by the light of the innocent-looking
moon, poured themselves into the Rhone and its tributary the Durance.
The river was enormous and continued to rise, and the sight was
beautiful and horrible. The water in many places was already at the base
of the city walls, the quay, with its parapet just emerging, being
already covered. The country, seen from the Plateau des Doms, resembled
a vast lake, with protrusions of trees, houses, bridges, gates. The
people looked at it in silence, as I had seen people before--on the
occasion of a rise of the Arno, at Pisa--appear to consider the prospect
of an inundation. "Il monte; il monte toujours"--there was not much said
but that. It was a general holiday, and there was an air of wishing to
profit, for sociability's sake, by any interruption of the commonplace
(the popular mind likes "a change," and the element of change mitigates
the sense of disaster); but the affair was not otherwise a holiday.
Suspense and anxiety were in the air, and it never is pleasant to be
reminded of the helplessness of man. In the presence of a loosened
river, with its ravaging, unconquerable volume, this impression is as
strong as possible; and as I looked at the deluge which threatened to
make an island of the Papal palace I perceived that the scourge of water
is greater than the scourge of fire. A blaze may be quenched, but where
could the flame be kindled that would arrest the quadrupled Rhone? For
the population of Avignon a good deal was at stake, and I am almost
ashamed to confess that in the midst of the public alarm I considered
the situation from the point of view of the little projects of a
sentimental tourist. Would the prospective inundation interfere with my
visit to Vaucluse, or make it imprudent to linger twenty-four hours
longer at Avignon? I must add that the tourist was not perhaps, after
all, so sentimental. I have spoken of the pilgrimage to the shrine of
Petrarch as obligatory, and that was, in fact, the light in which it
presented itself to me; all the more that I had been twice at Avignon
without undertaking it. This is why I was vexed at the Rhone.--if vexed
I was--for representing as impracticable an excursion which I cared
nothing about. How little I cared was manifest from my inaction on
former occasions. I had a prejudice against Vaucluse, against Petrarch,
even against the incomparable Laura. I was sure that the place was
cockneyfied and threadbare, and I had never been able to take an
interest in the poet and the lady. I was sure that I had known many
women as charming and as handsome as she, about whom much less noise had
been made; and I was convinced that her singer was factitious and
literary, and that there are half a dozen stanzas in Wordsworth that
speak more to the soul than the whole collection of his _fioriture_.
This was the crude state of mind in which I determined to go, at any
risk, to Vaucluse. Now that I think it over, I seem to remember that I
had hoped, after all, that the submersion of the roads would forbid it.
Since morning the clouds had gathered again, and by noon they were so
heavy that there was every prospect of a torrent. It appeared absurd to
choose such a time as this to visit a fountain--a fountain which would
be indistinguishable in the general cataract. Nevertheless I took a
vow, that if at noon the rain should not have begun to descend upon
Avignon I would repair to the head-spring of the Sorgues. When the
critical moment arrived the clouds were hanging over Avignon like
distended water-bags, which only needed a prick to empty themselves. The
prick was not given, however; all nature was too much occupied in
following the aberrations of the Rhone to think of playing tricks
elsewhere. Accordingly I started for the station in a spirit which, for
a tourist who sometimes had prided himself on his unfailing supply of
sentiment, was shockingly perfunctory.

    "For tasks in hours of insight willed
     May be in hours of gloom fulfilled."

I remembered these lines of Matthew Arnold (written, apparently, in an
hour of gloom), and carried out the idea, as I went, by hoping that with
the return of insight I should be glad to have seen Vaucluse. Light has
descended upon me since then, and I declare that the excursion is in
every way to be recommended. The place makes a great impression, quite
apart from Petrarch and Laura.

There was no rain; there was only, all the afternoon, a mild, moist wind
and a sky magnificently black; which made a _repoussoir_ for the paler
cliffs of the fountain. The road, by train, crosses a flat,
expressionless country, towards the range of arid hills which lie to the
east of Avignon, and which spring (says Murray) from the mass of the
Mont-Ventoux. At Isle-sur-Sorgues, at the end of about an hour, the
foreground becomes much more animated and the distance much more (or
perhaps I should say much less) actual. I descended from the train and
ascended to the top of an omnibus which was to convey me into the
recesses of the hills. It had not been among my previsions that I
should be indebted to a vehicle of that kind for an opportunity to
commune with the spirit of Petrarch; and I had to borrow what
consolation I could from the fact that at least I had the omnibus to
myself. I was the only passenger; every one else was at Avignon watching
the Rhone. I lost no time in perceiving that I could not have come to
Vaucluse at a better moment. The Sorgues was almost as full as the
Rhone, and of a colour much more romantic. Rushing along its narrowed
channel under an avenue of fine _platanes_ (it is confined between solid
little embankments of stone), with the good wives of the village, on the
brink, washing their linen in its contemptuous flood, it gave promise of
high entertainment farther on.

The drive to Vaucluse is of about three-quarters of an hour; and though
the river, as I say, was promising, the big pale hills, as the road
winds into them, did not look as if their slopes of stone and shrub were
a nestling-place for superior scenery. It is a part of the merit of
Vaucluse indeed that it is as much as possible a surprise. The place has
a right to its name, for the valley appears impenetrable until you get
fairly into it. One perverse twist follows another until the omnibus
suddenly deposits you in front of the "cabinet" of Petrarch. After that
you have only to walk along the left bank of the river. The cabinet of
Petrarch is to-day a hideous little _café_, bedizened, like a signboard,
with extracts from the ingenious "Rime." The poet and his lady are of
course the stock-in-trade of the little village, which has had for
several generations the privilege of attracting young couples engaged in
their wedding-tour and other votaries of the tender passion. The place
has long been familiar, on festal Sundays, to the swains of Avignon and
their attendant nymphs. The little fish of the Sorgues are much
esteemed, and, eaten on the spot, they constitute, for the children of
the once Papal city, the classic suburban dinner. Vaucluse has been
turned to account, however, not only by sentiment, but by industry; the
banks of the stream being disfigured by a pair of hideous mills for the
manufacture of paper and of wool. In an enterprising and economical age
the water-power of the Sorgues was too obvious a motive; and I must say
that, as the torrent rushed past them, the wheels of the dirty little
factories appeared to turn merrily enough. The footpath on the left
bank, of which I just spoke, carries one fortunately quite out of sight
of them, and out of sound as well, inasmuch as on the day of my visit
the stream itself, which was in tremendous force, tended more and more,
as one approached the fountain, to fill the valley with its own echoes.
Its colour was magnificent, and the whole spectacle more like a corner
of Switzerland than a nook in Provence. The protrusions of the mountain
shut it in, and you penetrate to the bottom of the recess which they
form. The Sorgues rushes and rushes; it is almost like Niagara after the
jump of the cataract. There are dreadful little booths beside the path,
for the sale of photographs and _immortelles_--I don't know what one is
to do with the immortelles--where you are offered a brush dipped in tar
to write your name withal on the rocks. Thousands of vulgar persons, of
both sexes, and exclusively, it appeared, of the French nationality, had
availed themselves of this implement, for every square inch of
accessible stone was scored over with some human appellation. It is not
only we in America, therefore, who besmirch our scenery; the practice

[Illustration: VAUCLUSE--RUINS OF CASTLE]

exists, in a more organised form (like everything else in France), in
the country of good taste. You leave the little booths and stalls
behind; but the bescribbled crag, bristling with human vanity, keeps you
company even when you stand face to face with the fountain. This happens
when you find yourself at the foot of the enormous straight cliff out of
which the river gushes. It rears itself to an extraordinary height--a
huge forehead of bare stone--looking as if it were the half of a
tremendous mound split open by volcanic action. The little valley,
seeing it there, at a bend, stops suddenly and receives in its arms the
magical spring. I call it magical on account of the mysterious manner in
which it comes into the world, with the huge shoulder of the mountain
rising over it as if to protect the secret. From under the mountain it
silently rises, without visible movement, filling a small natural basin
with the stillest blue water. The contrast between the stillness of this
basin and the agitation of the water directly after it has overflowed,
constitutes half the charm of Vaucluse. The violence of the stream when
once it has been set loose on the rocks is as fascinating and
indescribable as that of other cataracts; and the rocks in the bed of
the Sorgues have been arranged by a master-hand. The setting of the
phenomenon struck me as so simple and so fine--the vast sad cliff,
covered with the afternoon light, still and solid for ever, while the
liquid element rages and roars at its base--that I had no difficulty in
understanding the celebrity of Vaucluse. I understood it, but I will not
say that I understood Petrarch. He must have been very self-supporting,
and Madonna Laura must indeed have been much to him.

The aridity of the hills that shut in the valley is complete, and the
whole impression is best conveyed by that very expressive French epithet
_morne_. There are the very fragmentary ruins of a castle (of one of the
bishops of Cavaillon) on a high spur of the mountain, above the river;
and there is another remnant of a feudal habitation on one of the more
accessible ledges. Having half an hour to spare before my omnibus was to
leave (I must beg the reader's pardon for this atrociously false note;
call the vehicle a _diligence_, and for some undiscoverable reason the
offence is minimised), I clambered up to this latter spot and sat among
the rocks in the company of a few stunted olives. The Sorgues, beneath
me, reaching the plain, flung itself crookedly across the meadows like
an unrolled blue ribbon. I tried to think of the _amant de Laure_, for
literature's sake; but I had no great success, and the most I could do
was to say to myself that I must try again. Several months have elapsed
since then, and I am ashamed to confess that the trial has not yet come
off. The only very definite conviction I arrived at was that Vaucluse is
indeed cockneyfied, but that I should have been a fool, all the same,
not to come.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxvi

[Orange]


Mounted into my diligence at the door of the Hôtel de Pétrarque et de
Laure, and we made our way back to Isle-sur-Sorgues in the fading light.
This village, where at six o'clock every one appeared to have gone to
bed, was fairly darkened by its high, dense plane-trees, under which the
rushing river, on a level with its parapets, looked unnaturally, almost
wickedly, blue. It was a glimpse which has left a picture in my mind:
the little closed houses, the place empty and soundless in the autumn
dusk but for the noise of waters, and in the middle, amid the blackness
of the shade, the gleam of the swift, strange tide. At the station every
one was talking of the inundation being in many places an accomplished
fact, and, in particular, of the condition of the Durance at some point
that I have forgotten. At Avignon, an hour later, I found the water in
some of the streets. The sky cleared in the evening, the moon lighted up
the submerged suburbs, and the population again collected in the high
places to enjoy the spectacle. It exhibited a certain sameness, however,
and by nine o'clock there was considerable animation in the Place
Crillon, where there is nothing to be seen but the front of the theatre
and of several cafés--in addition indeed to a statue of this celebrated
brave, whose valour redeemed some of the numerous military disasters of
the reign of Louis XV. The next morning the lower quarters of the town
were in a pitiful state: the situation seemed to me odious. To express
my disapproval of it I lost no time in taking the train to Orange,
which, with its other attractions, had the merit of not being seated on
the Rhone. It was destiny to move northward; but even if I had been at
liberty to follow a less unnatural course I should not then have
undertaken it, inasmuch as the railway between Avignon and Marseilles
was credibly reported to be (in places) under water. This was the case
with almost everything but the line itself on the way to Orange. The day
proved splendid, and its brilliancy only lighted up the desolation.
Farmhouses and cottages were up to their middle in the yellow liquidity;
haystacks looked like dull little islands; windows and doors gaped open,
without faces; and interruption and flight were represented in the
scene. It was brought home to me that the _populations rurales_ have
many different ways of suffering, and my heart glowed with a grateful
sense of cockneyism. It was under the influence of this emotion that I
alighted at Orange to visit a collection of eminently civil monuments.
The collection consists of but two objects, but these objects are so
fine that I will let the word pass. One of them is a triumphal arch,
supposedly of the period of Marcus Aurelius; the other is a fragment,
magnificent in its ruin, of a Roman theatre. But for these fine Roman
remains and for its name, Orange is a perfectly featureless little town,
without the Rhone--which, as I have mentioned, is several miles
distant--to help it to a physiognomy. It seems one of the oddest things
that this obscure French borough--obscure, I mean, in our modern era,
for the Gallo-Roman Arausio must have been, judging it by its arches and
theatre, a place of some importance--should have given its name to the
heirs-apparent of the throne of Holland and been borne by a king of
England who had sovereign rights over it. During the Middle Ages it
formed part of an independent principality; but in 1531 it fell, by the
marriage of one of its princesses, who had inherited it, into the family
of Nassau. I read in my indispensable Murray that it was made over to
France by the treaty of Utrecht. The arch of triumph, which stands a
little way out of the town, is rather a pretty than an imposing vestige
of the Romans. If it had greater purity of style one might say of it
that it belonged to the same family of monuments as the Maison Carrée at
Nîmes. It has three passages--the middle much higher than the
others--and a very elevated attic. The vaults of the passages are richly
sculptured, and the whole structure is covered with friezes and military
trophies. This sculpture is rather mixed; much of it is broken and
defaced, and the rest seemed to me ugly, though its workmanship is
praised. The arch is at once well preserved and much injured. Its
general mass is there, and as Roman monuments go it is remarkably
perfect; but it has suffered, in patches, from the extremity of
restoration. It is not, on the whole, of absorbing interest. It has a
charm, nevertheless, which comes partly from its soft, bright yellow
colour, partly from a certain elegance of shape, of expression; and on
that well-washed Sunday morning, with its brilliant tone, surrounded by
its circle of thin poplars, with the green country lying beyond it and a
low blue horizon showing through its empty portals, it made, very
sufficiently, a picture that hangs itself to one of the lateral hooks of
the memory. I can take down the modest composition and place it before
me as I write. I see the shallow, shining puddles in the hard, fair
French road; the pale blue sky, diluted by days of rain; the
disgarnished autumnal fields; the mild sparkle of the low horizon; the
solitary figure in sabots, with a bundle under its arm, advancing along
the _chaussée_; and in the middle I see the little ochre-coloured trio
of apertures, which, in spite of its antiquity, looks bright and gay, as
everything must look in France of a fresh Sunday morning.

It is true that this was not exactly the appearance of the Roman
theatre, which lies on the other side of the town; a fact that did not
prevent me from making my way to it in less than five minutes, through a
succession of little streets concerning which I have no observations to
record. None of the Roman remains in the south of France are more
impressive than this stupendous fragment. An enormous mound rises above
the place, which was formerly occupied--I quote from Murray--first by a
citadel of the Romans, then by a castle of the princes of Nassau, razed
by Louis XIV. Facing this hill a mighty wall erects itself, thirty-six
metres high and composed of massive blocks of dark brown stone simply
laid one on the other; the whole naked, rugged

[Illustration: ORANGE--THE THEATRE.]

surface of which suggests a natural cliff (say of the Vaucluse order)
rather than an effort of human or even of Roman labour. It is the
biggest thing at Orange--it is bigger than all Orange put together--and
its permanent massiveness makes light of the shrunken city. The face it
presents to the town--the top of it garnished with two rows of brackets
perforated with holes to receive the staves of the _velarium_--bears the
traces of more than one tier of ornamental arches; though how these flat
arches were applied, or incrusted, upon the wall, I do not profess to
explain. You pass through a diminutive postern--which seems in
proportion about as high as the entrance of a rabbit-hutch--into the
lodge of the custodian, who introduces you to the interior of the
theatre. Here the mass of the hill affronts you, which the ingenious
Romans treated simply as the material of their auditorium. They inserted
their stone seats, in a semicircle, in the slope of the hill, and
planted their colossal wall opposite to it. This wall, from the inside,
is, if possible, even more imposing. It formed the back of the stage,
the permanent scene, and its enormous face was coated with marble. It
contains three doors, the middle one being the highest and having above
it, far aloft, a deep niche apparently intended for an imperial statue.
A few of the benches remain on the hillside, which, however, is mainly a
confusion of fragments. There is part of a corridor built into the hill,
high up, and on the crest are the remnants of the demolished castle. The
whole place is a kind of wilderness of ruin; there are scarcely any
details; the great feature is the overtopping wall. This wall being the
back of the scene, the space left between it and the chord of the
semicircle (of the auditorium) which formed the proscenium is rather
less than one would have supposed. In other words, the stage was very
shallow, and appears to have been arranged for a number of performers
placed in a line like a company of soldiers. There stands the silent
skeleton, however, as impressive by what it leaves you to guess and
wonder about as by what it tells you. It has not the sweetness, the
softness of melancholy, of the theatre at Aries; but it is more
extraordinary, and one can imagine only tremendous tragedies being
enacted there--

"Presenting Thebes' or Pelops' line."

At either end of the stage, coming forward, is an immense wing--immense
in height, I mean, as it reaches to the top of the scenic wall; the
other dimensions are not remarkable. The division to the right, _as you_
face the stage, is pointed out as the green-room; its portentous
altitude and the open arches at the top give it the air of a well. The
compartment on the left is exactly similar, save that it opens into the
traces of other chambers, said to be those of a hippodrome adjacent to
the theatre. Various fragments are visible which refer themselves
plausibly to such an establishment; the greater axis of the hippodrome
would appear to have been on a line with the triumphal arch. This is all
I saw, and all there was to see, of Orange, which had a very rustic,
bucolic aspect, and where I was not even called upon to demand breakfast
at the hotel. The entrance of this resort might have been that of a
stable of the Roman days.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxvii

[Macon]


I have been trying to remember whether I fasted all the way to Macon,
which I reached at an advanced hour of the evening, and think I must
have done so except for the purchase of a box of nougat at Montélimart
(the place is famous for the manufacture of this confection, which, at
the station, is hawked at the windows of the train) and for a bouillon,
very much later, at Lyons. The journey beside the Rhone--past Valence,
past Tournon, past Vienne--would have been charming, on that luminous
Sunday, but for two disagreeable accidents. The express from Marseilles,
which I took at Orange, was full to overflowing; and the only refuge I
could find was an inside angle in a carriage laden with Germans who had
command of the windows, which they occupied as strongly as they have
been known to occupy other strategical positions. I scarcely know,
however, why I linger on this particular discomfort, for it was but a
single item in a considerable list of grievances--grievances dispersed
through six weeks of constant railway-travel in France. I have not
touched upon them at an earlier stage of this chronicle, but my reserve
is not owing to any sweetness of association. This form of locomotion,
in the country of the amenities, is attended with a dozen discomforts;
almost all the conditions of the business are detestable. They force the
sentimental tourist again and again to ask himself whether, in
consideration of such mortal annoyances, the game is worth the candle.
Fortunately a railway journey is a good deal like a sea-voyage; its
miseries fade from the mind as soon as you arrive. That is why I
completed, to my great satisfaction, my little tour in France. Let this
small effusion of ill-nature be my first and last tribute to the whole
despotic _gare_: the deadly _salle d'attente_, the insufferable delays
over one's luggage, the porterless platform, the overcrowded and
illiberal train. How many a time did I permit myself the secret
reflection that it is in perfidious Albion that they order this matter
best! How many a time did the eager British mercenary, clad in velveteen
and clinging to the door of the carriage as it glides into the station,
revisit my invidious dreams! The paternal porter and the responsive
hansom are among the best gifts of the English genius to the world. I
hasten to add, faithful to my habit (so insufferable to some of my
friends) of ever and again readjusting the balance after I have given it
an honest tip, that the bouillon at Lyons, which I spoke of above, was,
though by no means an idea bouillon, much better than any I could have
obtained at an English railway-station. After I had imbibed it I sat in
the train (which waited a long time at Lyons) and, by the light of one
of the big lamps on the platform, read all sorts of disagreeable things
in certain

[Illustration: LYONS.]

radical newspapers which I had bought at the bookstall. I gathered from
these sheets that Lyons was in extreme commotion. The Rhone and the
Saone, which form a girdle for the splendid town, were almost in the
streets, as I could easily believe from what I had seen of the country
after leaving Orange. The Rhone, all the way to Lyons, had been in all
sorts of places where it had no business to be, and matters were
naturally not improved by its confluence with the charming and copious
stream which, at Macon, is said once to have given such a happy
opportunity to the egotism of the capital. A visitor from Paris (the
anecdote is very old), being asked on the quay of that city whether he
didn't admire the Saone, replied good-naturedly that it was very pretty,
but that in Paris they spelled it with the _ei_. This moment of general
alarm at Lyons had been chosen by certain ingenious persons (I credit
them perhaps with too sure a prevision of the rise of the rivers) for
practising further upon the apprehensions of the public. A bombshell
filled with dynamite had been thrown into a café, and various votaries
of the comparatively innocuous _petit verre_ had been wounded (I am not
sure whether any one had been killed) by the irruption. Of course there
had been arrests and incarcerations, and the _Intransigeant_ and the
_Rappel_ were filled with the echoes of the explosion. The tone of these
organs is rarely edifying, and it had never been less so than on this
occasion. I wondered as I looked through them whether I was losing all
my radicalism; and then I wondered whether, after all, I had any to
lose. Even in so long a wait as that tiresome delay at Lyons I failed to
settle the question, any more than I made up my mind as to the probable
future of the militant democracy, or the ultimate form of a
civilisation which should have blown up everything else. A few days
later the water went down at Lyons; but the democracy has not gone down.

I remember vividly the remainder of that evening which I spent at
Macon--remember it with a chattering of the teeth. I know not what had
got into the place; the temperature, for the last day of October, was
eccentric and incredible. These epithets may also be applied to the
hotel itself--an extraordinary structure, all façade, which exposes an
uncovered rear to the gaze of nature. There is a demonstrative, voluble
landlady, who is of course part of the façade; but everything behind her
is a trap for the winds, with chambers, corridors, staircases all
exhibited to the sky as if the outer wall of the house had been lifted
off. It would have been delightful for Florida, but it didn't do for
Burgundy even on the eve of November 1, so that I suffered absurdly from
the rigour of a season that had not yet begun. There was something in
the air; I felt it the next day, even on the sunny quay of the Saone,
where in spite of a fine southerly exposure I extracted little warmth
from the reflection that Alphonse de Lamartine had often trodden the
flags. Macon struck me, somehow, as suffering from a chronic numbness,
and there was nothing exceptionally cheerful in the remarkable extension
of the river. It was no longer a river--it had become a lake; and from
my window, in the painted face of the inn, I saw that the opposite bank
had been moved back, as it were, indefinitely. Unfortunately the various
objects with which it was furnished had not been moved as well, the
consequence of which was an extraordinary confusion in the relations of
things. There were always poplars to be seen, but the poplar had become
an aquatic plant. Such phenomena, however, at Macon attract but little
attention, as the Saone, at certain seasons of the year, is nothing if
not expansive. The people are as used to it as they appeared to be to
the bronze statue of Lamartine, which is the principal monument of the
_place_, and which, representing the poet in a frogged overcoat and
top-boots, improvising in a high wind, struck me as even less casual in
its attitude than monumental sculpture usually succeeds in being. It is
true that in its present position I thought better of this work of art,
which is from the hand of M. Falguière, than when I had seen it through
the factitious medium of the Salon of 1876. I walked up the hill where
the older part of Macon lies, in search of the natal house of the _amant
d'Elvire_, the Petrarch whose Vaucluse was the bosom of the public. The
Guide-Joanne quotes from "Les Confidences" a description of the
birthplace of the poet, whose treatment of the locality is indeed
poetical. It tallies strangely little with the reality, either as
regards position or other features; and it may be said to be not an aid,
but a direct obstacle, to a discovery of the house. A very humble
edifice, in a small back street, is designated by a municipal tablet,
set into its face, as the scene of Lamartine's advent into the world. He
himself speaks of a vast and lofty structure, at the angle of a _place_,
adorned with iron clamps, with a _porte haute et large_ and many other
peculiarities. The house with the tablet has two meagre storeys above
the basement, and (at present, at least) an air of extreme shabbiness;
the _place_, moreover, never can have been vast. Lamartine was accused
of writing history incorrectly, and apparently he started wrong at
first; it had never become clear to him where he was born. Or is the
tablet wrong? If the house is small, the tablet is very big.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxviii

[Bourg-en-Bresse]


The foregoing reflections occur, in a cruder form, as it were, in my
note-book, where I find this remark appended to them: "Don't take leave
of Lamartine on that contemptuous note; it will be easy to think of
something more sympathetic!" Those friends of mine, mentioned a little
while since, who accuse me of always tipping back the balance, could not
desire a paragraph more characteristic; but I wish to give no further
evidence of such infirmities, and will therefore hurry away from the
subject--hurry away in the train which, very early on a crisp, bright
morning, conveyed me, by way of an excursion, to the ancient city of
Bourg-en-Bresse. Shining in early light, the Saone was spread, like a
smooth white tablecloth, over a considerable part of the flat country
that I traversed. There is no provision made in this image for the long,
transparent screens of thin-twigged trees which rose at intervals out of
the watery plain; but as, in all the conditions, there seemed to be no
provision for them in fact, I will let my metaphor go for what it is
worth. My journey was (as I remember it) of about an hour and a half;
but I passed no object of interest, as the phrase is, whatever. The
phrase hardly applies even to Bourg itself, which is simply a town
_quelconque_, as M. Zola would say. Small, peaceful, rustic, it stands
in the midst of the great dairy-feeding plains of Bresse, of which fat
county, sometime property of the house of Savoy, it was the modest
capital. The blue masses of the Jura give it a creditable horizon, but
the only nearer feature it can point to is its famous sepulchral church.
This edifice lies at a fortunate distance from the town, which, though
inoffensive, is of too common a stamp to consort with such a treasure.
All I ever knew of the church of Brou I had gathered, years ago, from
Matthew Arnold's beautiful poem which bears its name. I remember
thinking, in those years, that it was impossible verses could be more
touching than these; and as I stood before the object of my pilgrimage,
in the gay French light (though the place was so dull), I recalled the
spot where I had first read them and where I had read them again and yet
again, wondering whether it would ever be my fortune to visit the church
of Brou. The spot in question was an armchair in a window which looked
out on some cows in a field; and whenever I glanced at the cows it came
over me--I scarcely know why--that I should probably never behold the
structure reared by the Duchess Margaret. Some of our visions never come
to pass; but we must be just--others do. "So sleep, for ever sleep, O
princely pair!" I remembered that line of Matthew Arnold's, and the
stanza about the Duchess Margaret coming to watch the builders on her
palfrey white. Then there came to me something in regard to the moon
shining on winter nights through the cold clere-storey. The tone of the
place at that hour was not at all lunar; it was cold and bright, but
with the chill of an autumn morning; yet this, even with the fact of the
unexpected remoteness of the church from the Jura added to it, did not
prevent me from feeling that I looked at a monument in the production of
which--or at least in the effect of which on the tourist-mind of
to-day--Matthew Arnold had been much concerned. By a pardonable licence
he has placed it a few miles nearer to the forests of the Jura than it
stands at present. It is very true that, though the mountains in the
sixteenth century can hardly have been in a different position, the
plain which separates the church from them may have been bedecked with
woods. The visitor to-day cannot help wondering why the beautiful
building, with its splendid works of art, is dropped down in that
particular spot, which looks so accidental and arbitrary. But there are
reasons for most things, and there were reasons why the church of Brou
should be at Brou, which is a vague little suburb of a vague little
town.

[The Church of Brou]

The responsibility rests, at any rate, upon the Duchess
Margaret--Margaret of Austria, daughter of the Emperor Maximilian and
his wife Mary of Burgundy, daughter of Charles the Bold. This lady has a
high name in history, having been regent of the Netherlands in behalf of
her nephew, the Emperor Charles V., of whose early education she had had
the care. She married in 1501 Philibert the Handsome, Duke of Savoy, to
whom the province of Bresse belonged, and who died two years later. She
had been betrothed, as a child, to Charles VIII. of France, and was kept
for some time at the French court--that of

[Illustration: BROU--THE CHURCH.]

her prospective father-in-law, Louis XI.; but she was eventually
repudiated, in order that her _fiancé_ might marry Anne of Brittany--an
alliance so magnificently political that we almost condone the offence
to a sensitive princess. Margaret did not want for husbands, however,
inasmuch as before her marriage to Philibert she had been united to John
of Castile, son of Ferdinand V., King of Aragon--an episode terminated
by the death of the Spanish prince within a year. She was twenty-two
years regent of the Netherlands and died, at fifty-one, in 1530. She
might have been, had she chosen, the wife of Henry VII. of England. She
was one of the signers of the League of Cambray against the Venetian
Republic, and was a most politic, accomplished, and judicious princess.
She undertook to build the church of Brou as a mausoleum for her second
husband and herself, in fulfilment of a vow made by Margaret of Bourbon,
mother of Philibert, who died before she could redeem her pledge and who
bequeathed the duty to her son. He died shortly afterwards, and his
widow assumed the pious task. According to Murray, she entrusted the
erection of the church to "Maistre Loys von Berghem," and the sculpture
to "Maistre Conrad." The author of a superstitious but carefully
prepared little Notice which I bought at Bourg calls the architect and
sculptor (at once) Jehan de Paris, author (_sic_) of the tomb of Francis
II. of Brittany, to which we gave some attention at Nantes, and which
the writer of my pamphlet ascribes only subordinately to Michel Colomb.
The church, which is not of great size, is in the last and most
flamboyant phase of gothic and in admirable preservation; the west
front, before which a quaint old sun-dial is laid out on the ground--a
circle of numbers marked in stone, like those on a clock-face, let into
the earth--is covered with delicate ornament. The great feature, however
(the nave is perfectly bare and wonderfully new-looking, though the
warden, a stolid yet sharp old peasant in a blouse, who looked more as
if his line were chaffering over turnips than showing off works of art,
told me that it has never been touched and that its freshness is simply
the quality of the stone)--the great feature is the admirable choir, in
the midst of which the three monuments have bloomed under the chisel
like exotic plants in a conservatory. I saw the place to small
advantage, for the stained glass of the windows, which are fine, was
under repair, and much of it was masked with planks.

In the centre lies Philibert-le-Bel, a figure of white marble on a great
slab of black, in his robes and his armour, with two boy-angels holding
a tablet at his head, and two more at his feet. On either side of him is
another cherub; one guarding his helmet, the other his stiff gauntlets.
The attitudes of these charming children, whose faces are all bent upon
him in pity, have the prettiest tenderness and respect. The table on
which he lies is supported by elaborate columns adorned with niches
containing little images and with every other imaginable elegance; and
beneath it he is represented in that other form so common in the tombs
of the Renaissance--a man naked and dying, with none of the state and
splendour of the image above. One of these figures embodies the duke,
the other simply the mortal; and there is something very strange and
striking in the effect of the latter, seen dimly and with difficulty
through the intervals of the rich supports of the upper slab. The
monument of Margaret herself is on the left, all in white marble
tormented into a multitude of exquisite patterns, the last extravagance
of a gothic which had gone so far that nothing was left it but to return
upon itself. Unlike her husband, who has only the high roof of the
church above him, she lies under a canopy supported and covered by a
wilderness of embroidery--flowers, devices, initials, arabesques,
statuettes. Watched over by cherubs, she is also in her robes and
ermine, with a greyhound sleeping at her feet (her husband, at his, has
a waking lion); and the artist has not, it is to be presumed,
represented her as more beautiful than she was. She looks indeed like
the regent of a turbulent realm. Beneath her couch is stretched another
figure--a less brilliant Margaret, wrapped in her shroud, with her long
hair over her shoulders. Round the tomb is the battered iron railing
placed there originally, with the mysterious motto of the duchess worked
into the top--_fortune infortune fort une_. The other two monuments are
protected by barriers of the same pattern. That of Margaret of Bourbon,
Philibert's mother, stands on the right of the choir; and I suppose its
greatest distinction is that it should have been erected to a
mother-in-law. It is but little less florid and sumptuous than the
others; it has, however, no second recumbent figure. On the other hand,
the statuettes that surround the base of the tomb are of even more
exquisite workmanship: they represent weeping women, in long mantles and
hoods, which latter hang forward over the small face of the figure,
giving the artist a chance to carve the features within this hollow of
drapery--an extraordinary play of skill. There is a high, white marble
shrine of the Virgin, as extraordinary as all the rest (a series of
compartments representing the various scenes of her life, with the
Assumption in the middle); and there is a magnificent series of stalls,
which are simply the intricate embroidery of the tombs translated into
polished oak. All these things are splendid, ingenious, elaborate,
precious; it is goldsmith's work on a monumental scale, and the general
effect is none the less beautiful and solemn because it is so rich. But
the monuments of the church of Brou are not the noblest that one may
see; the great tombs of Verona are finer, and various other early
Italian work. These things are not insincere, as Ruskin would say; but
they are pretentious, and they are not positively _naïfs_. I should
mention that the walls of the choir are embroidered in places with
Margaret's tantalising device, which--partly perhaps because it is
tantalising--is so very decorative, as they say in London. I know not
whether she was acquainted with this epithet, but she had anticipated
one of the fashions most characteristic of our age.

One asks one's self how all this decoration, this luxury of fair and
chiselled marble, survived the French Revolution. An hour of liberty in
the choir of Brou would have been a carnival for the image-breakers. The
well-fed Bressois are surely a good-natured people. I call them well-fed
both on general and on particular grounds. Their province has the most
savoury aroma, and I found an opportunity to test its reputation. I
walked back into the town from the church (there was really nothing to
be seen by the way), and as the hour of the midday breakfast had struck,
directed my steps to the inn. The table d'hôte was going on, and a
gracious, bustling, talkative landlady welcomed me. I had an excellent
repast--the best repast possible--which consisted simply of boiled eggs
and bread and butter. It was the quality of these simple ingredients
that made the occasion memorable. The eggs were so good that I am
ashamed to say how many of them I consumed. "La plus belle fille du
monde," as the French proverb says, "ne peut donner que ce qu'elle a;"
and it might seem that an egg which has succeeded in being fresh has
done all that can reasonably be expected of it. But there was a bloom of
punctuality, so to speak, about these eggs of Bourg, as if it had been
the intention of the very hens themselves that they should be promptly
served. "Nous sommes en Bresse, et le beurre n'est pas mauvais," the
landlady said with a sort of dry coquetry, as she placed this article
before me. It was the poetry of butter, and I ate a pound or two of it;
after which I came away with a strange mixture of impressions of late
gothic sculpture and thick _tartines_. I came away through the town,
where, on a little green promenade, facing the hotel, is a bronze statue
of Bichat the physiologist, who was a Bressois. I mention it not on
account of its merit (though, as statues go, I don't remember that it is
bad), but because I learned from it--my ignorance, doubtless, did me
little honour--that Bichat had died at thirty years of age, and this
revelation was almost agitating. To have done so much in so short a life
was to be truly great. This reflection, which looks deplorably trite as
I write it here, had the effect of eloquence as I uttered it for my own
benefit on the bare little mall at Bourg.

[Illustration]




Chapter xxxix

[Beaune]


On my return to Macon I found myself fairly face to face with the fact
that my tour was near its end. Dijon had been marked by fate as its
farthest limit, and Dijon was close at hand. After that I was to drop
the tourist and re-enter Paris as much as possible like a Parisian. Out
of Paris the Parisian never loiters, and therefore it would be
impossible for me to stop between Dijon and the capital. But I might be
a tourist a few hours longer by stopping somewhere between Macon and
Dijon. The question was where I should spend these hours. Where better,
I asked myself (for reasons not now entirely clear to me), than at
Beaune? On my way to this town I passed the stretch of the Côte d'Or,
which, covered with a mellow autumn haze, with the sunshine shimmering
through, looked indeed like a golden slope. One regards with a kind of
awe the region in which the famous _crûs_ of Burgundy (Vougeot,
Chambertin, Nuits, Beaune) are, I was going to say, manufactured. Adieu,
paniers; vendanges sont faites! The vintage was over; the shrunken
russet fibres alone clung to their ugly stick. The horizon on the left
of the road had a charm, however; there is something picturesque in the
big, comfortable shoulders of the Côte. That delicate critic M. Emile
Montégut, in a charming record of travel through this region published
some years ago, praises Shakespeare for having talked (in "Lear") of
"waterish Burgundy." Vinous Burgundy would surely be more to the point.
I stopped at Beaune in pursuit of the picturesque, but I might almost
have seen the little I discovered without stopping. It is a drowsy
Burgundian town, very old and ripe, with crooked streets, vistas always
oblique, and steep, moss covered roofs. The principal lion is the
Hôpital-Saint-Esprit, or the Hôtel-Dieu simply, as they call it there,
founded in 1443 by Nicholas Rollin, Chancellor of Burgundy. It is
administered by the sisterhood of the Holy Ghost, and is one of the most
venerable and stately of hospitals. The face it presents to the street
is simple, but striking--a plain, windowless wall, surmounted by a vast
slate roof, of almost mountainous steepness. Astride this roof sits a
tall, slate-covered spire, from which, as I arrived, the prettiest
chimes I ever heard (worse luck to them, as I will presently explain)
were ringing. Over the door is a high, quaint canopy, without supports,
with its vault painted blue and covered with gilded stars. (This, and
indeed the whole building, have lately been restored, and its antiquity
is quite of the spick-and-span order. But it is very delightful.) The
treasure of the place is a precious picture--a Last Judgment, attributed
equally to John van Eyck and Roger van der Weyden--given to the hospital
in the fifteenth century by Nicholas Rollin aforesaid.

I learned, however, to my dismay, from a sympathising but inexorable
concierge, that what remained to me of the time I had to spend at
Beaune, between trains--I had rashly wasted half an hour of it in
breakfasting at the station--was the one hour of the day (that of the
dinner of the nuns; the picture is in their refectory) during which the
treasure could not be shown. The purpose of the musical chimes to which
I had so artlessly listened was to usher in this fruitless interval. The
regulation was absolute, and my disappointment relative, as I have been
happy to reflect since I "looked up" the picture. Crowe and Cavalcaselle
assign it without hesitation to Roger van der Weyden, and give a weak
little drawing of it in their "Flemish Painters." I learn from them
also--what I was ignorant of--that Nicholas Rollin, Chancellor of
Burgundy and founder of the establishment at Beaune, was the original of
the worthy kneeling before the Virgin in the magnificent John van Eyck
of the Salon Carré. All I could see was the court of the hospital and
two or three rooms. The court, with its tall roofs, its pointed gables
and spires, its wooden galleries, its ancient well, with an elaborate
superstructure of wrought iron, is one of those places into which a
sketcher ought to be let loose. It looked Flemish or English rather than
French, and a splendid tidiness pervaded it. The porter took me into
two

[Illustration: BEAUNE--THE HOSPITAL.]

rooms on the ground-floor, into which the sketcher should also be
allowed to penetrate, for they made irresistible pictures. One of them,
of great proportions, painted in elaborate "subjects" like a ball-room
of the seventeenth century, was filled with the beds of patients, all
draped in curtains of dark red cloth, the traditional uniform of these
eleemosynary couches. Among them the sisters moved about in their robes
of white flannel with big white linen hoods. The other room was a
strange, immense apartment, lately restored with much splendour. It was
of great length and height, had a painted and gilded barrel-roof, and
one end of it--the one I was introduced to--appeared to serve as a
chapel, as two white-robed sisters were on their knees before an altar.
This was divided by red curtains from the larger part; but the porter
lifted one of the curtains and showed me that the rest of it, a long,
imposing vista, served as a ward lined with little red-draped beds.
"C'est l'heure de la lecture," remarked my guide; and a group of
convalescents--all the patients I saw were women--were gathered in the
centre around a nun, the points of whose white hood nodded a little
above them and whose gentle voice came to us faintly, with a little
echo, down the high perspective. I know not what the good sister was
reading--a dull book, I am afraid--but there was so much colour and such
a fine, rich air of tradition about the whole place that it seemed to me
I would have risked listening to her. I turned away, however, with that
sense of defeat which is always irritating to the appreciative tourist,
and pottered about Beaune rather vaguely for the rest of my hour: looked
at the statue of Gaspard Monge, the mathematician, in the little _place_
(there is no _place_ in France too little to contain an effigy to a
glorious son); at the fine old porch--completely despoiled at the
Revolution--of the principal church; and even at the meagre treasures of
a courageous but melancholy little museum, which has been arranged--part
of it being the gift of a local collector--in a small hôtel de ville. I
carried away from Beaune the impression of something mildly
autumnal--something rusty yet kindly, like the taste of a sweet russet
pear.

[Illustration: DIJON.]

[Illustration]




Chapter xl

[Dijon]


It was very well that my little tour was to terminate at Dijon, for I
found, rather to my chagrin, that there was not a great deal, from the
pictorial point of view, to be done with Dijon. It was no great matter,
for I held my proposition to have been by this time abundantly
demonstrated--the proposition with which I started: that if Paris is
France, France is by no means Paris. If Dijon was a good deal of a
disappointment, I felt therefore that I could afford it. It was time for
me to reflect, also, that for my disappointments, as a general thing, I
had only myself to thank. They had too often been the consequence of
arbitrary preconceptions produced by influences of which I had lost the
trace. At any rate, I will say plumply that the ancient capital of
Burgundy is wanting in character; it is not up to the mark. It is old
and narrow and crooked, and it has been left pretty well to itself: but
it is not high and overhanging; it is not, to the eye, what the
Burgundian capital should be. It has some tortuous vistas, some mossy
roofs, some bulging fronts, some grey-faced hotels, which look as if in
former centuries--in the last, for instance, during the time of that
delightful Président de Brosses whose Letters from Italy throw an
interesting sidelight on Dijon--they had witnessed a considerable amount
of good living. But there is nothing else. I speak as a man who, for
some reason which he doesn't remember now, did not pay a visit to the
celebrated Puits de Moïse, an ancient cistern embellished with a
sculptured figure of the Hebrew lawgiver.

The ancient palace of the dukes of Burgundy, long since converted into
an hôtel de ville, presents to a wide, clean court, paved with
washed-looking stones, and to a small semicircular _place_, opposite,
which looks as if it had tried to be symmetrical and had failed, a
façade and two wings characterised by the stiffness, but not by the
grand air, of the early part of the eighteenth century. It contains,
however, a large and rich museum--a museum really worthy of a capital.
The gem of this collection is the great banqueting hall of the old
palace, one of the few features of the place that has not been
essentially altered. Of great height, roofed with the old beams and
cornices, it exhibits,

[Illustration: DIJON--THE PARK.]

filling one end, a colossal gothic chimney-piece with a fireplace large
enough to roast, not an ox, but a herd of oxen. In the middle of this
striking hall, the walls of which are covered with objects more or less
precious, have been placed the tombs of Philippe-le-Hardi and
Jean-sans-Peur. These monuments, very splendid in their general effect,
have a limited interest. The limitation comes from the fact that we see
them to-day in a transplanted and mutilated condition. Placed originally
in a church which has disappeared from the face of the earth, demolished
and dispersed at the Revolution, they have been reconstructed and
restored out of fragments recovered and pieced together. The piecing has
been beautifully done; it is covered with gilt and with brilliant paint;
the whole result is most artistic. But the spell of the old mortuary
figures is broken, and it will never work again. Meanwhile the monuments
are immensely decorative.

I think the thing that pleased me best at Dijon was the little old Parc,
a charming public garden, about a mile from the town, to which I walked
by a long, straight autumnal avenue. It is a _jardin français_ of the
last century--a dear old place, with little blue-green perspectives and
alleys and _rond-points_, in which everything balances. I went there
late in the afternoon, without meeting a creature, though I had hoped I
should meet the Président de Brosses. At the end of it was a little
river that looked like a canal, and on the farther bank was an
old-fashioned villa, close to the water, with a little French garden of
its own. On the hither side was a bench, on which I seated myself,
lingering a good while; for this was just the sort of place I like. It
was the farthermost point of my little tour. I thought that over, as I
sat there, on the eve of taking the express to Paris; and as the light
faded in the Parc the vision of some of the things I had enjoyed became
more distinct.

Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO. London & Edinburgh







We good Americans - I say it without presumption
- are too apt to think that France is Paris, just as we
are accused of being too apt to think that Paris is the
celestial city.  This is by no means the case, fortun-
ately for those persons who take an interest in modern
Gaul, and yet are still left vaguely unsatisfied by that
epitome of civilization which stretches from the Arc
de Triomphe to the Gymnase theatre.  It had already
been intimated to the author of these light pages that
there are many good things in the _doux pays de France_
of which you get no hint in a walk between those
ornaments of the capital; but the truth had been re-
vealed only in quick-flashing glimpses, and he was
conscious of a desire to look it well in the face.  To
this end he started, one rainy morning in mid-Septem-
ber, for the charming little city of Tours, from which
point it seemed possible to make a variety of fruitful
excursions.  His excursions resolved themselves ulti-
mately into a journey through several provinces, - a
journey which had its dull moments (as one may defy
any journey not to have), but which enabled him to feel
that his proposition was demonstrated.  France may
be Paris, but Paris is not France; that was perfectly
evident on the return to the capital.

I must not speak, however, as if I had discovered
the provinces.  They were discovered, or at least re-
vealed by BaIzac, if by any one, and are now easily
accessible to visitors.  It is true, I met no visitors, or
only one or two, whom it was pleasant to meet.
Throughout my little tour I was almost the only tourist.
That is perhaps one reason why it was so successful.



I.

I am ashamed to begin with saying that Touraine
is the garden of France; that remark has long ago lost
its bloom.  The town of Tours, however, has some
thing sweet and bright, which suggests that it is sur-
rounded by a land of fruits.  It is a very agreeable
little city; few towns of its size are more ripe, more
complete, or, I should suppose, in better humor with
themselves and less disposed to envy the responsibili-
ties of bigger places.  It is truly the capital of its smil-
ing province; a region of easy abundance, of good
living, of genial, comfortable, optimistic, rather indolent
opinions.  Balzac says in one of his tales that the real
Tourangeau will not make an effort, or displace him-
self even, to go in search of a pleasure; and it is not
difficult to understand the sources of this amiable
cynicism.  He must have a vague conviction that he
can only lose by almost any change.  Fortune has
been kind to him: he lives in a temperate, reasonable,
sociable climate, on the banks, of  a river which, it is
true, sometimes floods the country around it, but of
which the ravages appear to be so easily repaired that
its aggressions may perhaps be regarded (in a region
where so many good things are certain) merely as an
occasion for healthy suspense.  He is surrounded by
fine old traditions, religious, social, architectural, culi-
nary; and he may have the satisfaction of feeling that
he is French to the core.  No part of his admirable
country is more characteristically national.  Normandy
is Normandy, Burgundy is Burgundy, Provence is Pro-
vence; but Touraine is essentially France.  It is the
land of Rabelais, of Descartes, of Balzac, of good
books and good company, as well as good dinners and
good houses.  George Sand has somewhere a charm-
ing passage about the mildness, the convenient quality,
of the physical conditions of central France, - "son
climat souple et chaud, ses pluies abondantes et courtes." 
In the autumn of 1882 the rains perhaps were less
short than abundant; but when the days were fine it 
was impossible that anything in the way of weather
could be more charming.  The vineyards and orchards
looked rich in the fresh, gay light; cultivation was
everywhere, but everywhere it seemed to be easy.
There was no visible poverty; thrift and success pre-
sented themselves as matters of good taste.  The white
caps of the women glittered in the sunshire, and their
well-made sabots clicked cheerfully on the hard, clean
roads.  Touraine is a land of old chateaux, - a gallery
of architectural specimens and of large hereditary pro-
perties.  The peasantry have less of the luxury of
ownership than in most other parts of France; though
they have enough of it to give them quite their share
of that shrewdly conservative look which, in the little,
chaffering, _place_ of the market-town, the stranger ob-
serves so often in the wrinkled brown masks that sur-
mount the agricultural blouse.  This is, moreover, the
heart of the old French monarchy; and as that monarchy
was splendid and picturesque, a reflection of the splen-
dor still glitters in the current of the Loire.  Some of
the most striking events of French history have occurred
on the banks of that river, and the soil it waters
bloomed for a while with the flowering of the Renais-
sance.  The Loire gives a great "style" to a landscape
of which the features are not, as the phrase is, promi-
nent, and carries the eye to distances even more poetic
than the green horizons of Touraine.  It is a very fit-
ful stream, and is sometimes observed to run thin and
expose all the crudities of its channel, - a great defect
certainly in a river which is so much depended upon
to give an air to the places it waters.  But I speak of
it as I saw it last; full, tranquil, powerful, bending in
large slow curves, and sending back half the light of
the sky.  Nothing can be finer than the view of its
course which you get from the battlements and ter-
races of Amboise.  As I looked down on it from that
elevation one lovely Sunday morning, through a mild
glitter of autumn sunshine, it seemed the very model
of a generous, beneficent stream.  The most charming
part of Tours is naturally the shaded quay that over-
looks it, and looks across too at the friendly faubourg
of Saint Symphorien and at the terraced heights which
rise above this.  Indeed, throughout Touraine, it is
half the charm of the Loire that you can travel beside
it.  The great dike which protects it, or, protects the
country from it, from Blois to Angers, is an admirable
road; and on the other side, as well, the highway con-
stantly keeps it company.  A wide river, as you follow
a wide road, is excellent company; it heightens and
shortens the way.

The inns at Tours are in another quarter, and one
of them, which is midway between the town and the
station, is very good.  It is worth mentioning for the
fact that every one belonging to it is extraordinarily
polite, - so unnaturally polite as at first to excite your
suspicion that the hotel has some hidden vice, so that
the waiters and chambermaids are trying to pacify
you in advance.  There was one waiter in especial who
was the most accomplished social being I have ever
encountered; from morning till night he kept up an
inarticulate murmur of urbanity, like the hum of a
spinning-top.  I may add that I discovered no dark
secrets at the Hotel de l'Univers; for it is not a secret
to any traveller to-day that the obligation to partake
of a lukewarm dinner in an overheated room is as
imperative as it is detestable.  For the rest, at Tours,
there is a certain Rue Royale which has pretensions
to the monumental; it was constructed a hundred
years ago, and the houses, all alike, have on a
moderate scale a pompous eighteenth-century look.  It
connects the Palais de Justice, the most important
secular building in the town, with the long bridge
which spans the Loire, - the spacious, solid bridge
pronounced by Balzac, in "Le Cure de Tours," "one of
the finest monuments of French architecture."  The
Palais de Justice was the seat of the Government of
Leon Gambetta in the autumn of 1870, after the
dictator had been obliged to retire in his balloon from
Paris, and before the Assembly was constituted at
Bordeaux.  The Germans occupied Tours during that
terrible winter; it is astonishing, the number of
places the Germans occupied.  It is hardly too much
to say that wherever one goes in, certain parts of
France, one encounters two great historic facts: one
is the Revolution; the other is the German invasion.
The traces of the Revolution remain in a hundred
scars and bruises and mutilations, but the visible
marks of the war of 1870 have passed away.  The
country is so rich, so living, that she has been able to
dress her wounds, to hold up her head, to smile again;
so that the shadow of that darkness has ceased to rest
upon her.  But what you do not see you still may
hear; and one remembers with a certain shudder that
only a few short years ago this province, so intimately
French, was under the heel of a foreign foe.  To be
intimately French was apparently not a safeguard; for
so successful an invader it could only be a challenge.
Peace and plenty, however, have succeeded that
episode; and among the gardens and vineyards of
Touraine it seems, only a legend the more in a country
of legends.

It was not, all the same, for the sake of this check-
ered story that I mentioned the Palais de Justice and
the Rue Royale.  The most interesting fact, to my
mind, about the high-street of Tours was that as you
walked toward the bridge on the right-hand _trottoir_
you can look up at the house, on the other side of
the way, in which Honore de Balzac first saw the
light.  That violent and complicated genius was a
child of the good-humored and succulent Touraine.
There is something anomalous in the fact, though, if
one thinks about it a little, one may discover certain
correspondences between his character and that of his
native province.  Strenuous, laborious, constantly in
felicitous in spite of his great successes, he suggests
at times a very different set of influences.  But he had
his jovial, full-feeding side, - the side that comes out
in the "Contes Drolatiques," which are the romantic
and epicurean chronicle of the old manors and abbeys
of this region.  And he was, moreover, the product
of a soil into which a great deal of history had been
trodden.  Balzac was genuinely as well as affectedly
monarchical, and he was saturated with, a sense of the
past.  Number 39 Rue Royale - of which the base
ment, like all the basements in the Rue Royale, is
occupied by a shop - is not shown to the public; and
I know not whether tradition designates the chamber
in which the author of "Le Lys dans la Vallee"
opened his eyes into a world in which he was to see
and to imagine such extraordinary things.  If this
were the case, I would willingly have crossed its
threshold; not for the sake of any relic of the great
novelist which it may possibly contain, nor even for
that of any mystic virtue which may be supposed to
reside within its walls, but simply because to look at
those four modest walls can hardly fail to give one a
strong impression of the force of human endeavour.
Balzac, in the maturity of his vision, took in more of
human life than any one, since Shakspeare, who has
attempted to tell us stories about it; and the very
small scene on which his consciousness dawned is one
end of the immense scale that he traversed.  I confess
it shocked me a little to find that he was born in a
house "in a row," - a house, moreover, which at the
date of his birth must have been only about twenty
years old.  All that is contradictory.  If the tenement
selected for this honour could not be ancient and em-
browned, it should at least have been detached.

There is a charming description, in his little tale
of "La Grenadiere," of the view of the opposite side
of the Loire as you have it from the square at the end
of the Rue Royale, - a square that has some preten-
sions to grandeur, overlooked as it is by the Hotel de
Ville and the Musee, a pair of edifices which directly
contemplate the river, and ornamented with marble
images of Francois Rabelais and Rene Descartes.
The former, erected a few years since, is a very honor-
able production; the pedastal of the latter could, as
a matter of course, only be inscribed with the _Cogito
ergo Sum._  The two statues mark the two opposite
poles to which the brilliant French mind has travelled;
and if there were an effigy of Balzac at Tours, it ought
to stand midway between them.  Not that he, by any
means always struck the happy mean between the
sensible and the metaphysical; but one may say of
him that half of his genius looks in one direction
and half in the other.  The side that turns toward
Francois Rabelais would be, on the whole, the side
that takes the sun.  But there is no statue of Balzac
at Tours; there is only, in one of the chambers of
the melancholy museum, a rather clever, coarse bust.
The description in "La Grenadiere," of which I just
spoke, is too long to quote; neither have I space for
any one of the brilliant attempts at landscape paint-
ing which are woven into the shimmering texture of
"Le Lys dans la Vallee."  The little manor of Cloche-
gourde, the residence of Madame de Mortsauf, the
heroine of that extraordinary work, was within a
moderate walk of Tours, and the picture in the novel is
presumably a copy from an original which it would be
possible to-day to discover.  I did not, however, even
make the attempt.  There are so many chateaux in
Touraine commemorated in history, that it would take
one too far to look up those which have been com-
memorated in fiction.  The most I did was to endeavor
to identify the former residence of  Mademoiselle
Gamard, the sinister old maid of "Le Cure de Tours."
This terrible woman occupied a small house in the
rear of the cathedral, where I spent a whole morning
in wondering rather stupidly which house it could be.
To reach the cathedral from the little _place_ where we
stopped just now to look across at the Grenadiere,
without, it must be confessed, very vividly seeing it,
you follow the quay to the right, and pass out of sight
of the charming _coteau_ which, from beyond the river,
faces the town, - a soft agglomeration of gardens, vine-
yards, scattered villas, gables and turrets of slate-
roofed chateaux, terraces with gray balustrades, moss-
grown walls draped in scarlet Virginia-creeper.  You
turn into the town again beside a great military
barrack which is ornamented with a rugged mediaeval
tower, a relic of the ancient fortifications, known to
the Tourangeaux of to-day as the Tour de Guise.
The young Prince of Joinville, son of that Duke of
Guise who was murdered by the order of Henry II. at
Blois, was, after the death of his father, confined here
for more than two years, but made his escape one
summer evening in 1591, under the nose of his keepers,
with a gallant audacity which has attached the memory
of the exploit to his sullen-looking prison.  Tours has
a garrison of five regiments, and the little red-legged
soldiers light up the town.  You see them stroll upon
the clean, uncommercial quay, where there are no
signs of navigation, not even by oar, no barrels nor
bales, no loading nor unloading, no masts against the
sky nor booming of steam in the air.  The most active
business that goes on there is that patient and fruitless
angling in, which the French, as the votaries of art for
art, excel all other people.  The little soldiers, weighed
down by the contents of their enormous pockets, pass
with respect from one of these masters of the rod to
the other,as he sits soaking an indefinite bait in the
large, indifferent stream.  After you turn your back to
the quay you have only to go a little way before you
reach the cathedral.



II.

It is a very beautiful church of the second order
of importance, with a charming mouse-colored com-
plexion and a pair of fantastic towers.  There is a
commodious little square in front of it, from which
you may look up at its very ornamental face; but for
purposes of frank admiration the sides and the rear
are perhaps not sufficiently detached.  The cathedral
of Tours, which is dedicated to Saint Gatianus, took
a long time to build.  Begun in 1170, it was finished
only in the first half of the sixteenth century; but the
ages and the weather have interfused so well the tone
of the different parts, that it presents, at first at least,
no striking incongruities, and looks even exception-
ally harmonious and complete.  There are many
grander cathedrals, but there are probably few more
pleasing; and this effect of delicacy and grace is at
its best toward the close of a quiet afternoon, when the
densely decorated towers, rising above the little Place
de l'Archeveche, lift their curious lanterns into the
slanting light, and offer a multitudinous perch to
troops of circling pigeons.  The whole front, at such
a time, has an appearance of great richness, although
the niches which surround the three high doors (with
recesses deep enough for several circles of sculpture)
and indent the four great buttresses that ascend beside
the huge rose-window, carry no figures beneath their
little chiselled canopies.  The blast of the great Revo-
lution blew down most of the statues in France, and
the wind has never set very strongly toward putting
them up again.  The embossed and crocketed cupolas
which crown the towers of Saint Gatien are not very
pure in taste; but, like a good many impurities, they
have a certain character.  The interior has a stately
slimness with which no fault is to be found, and
which in the choir, rich in early glass and surrounded
by a broad passage, becomes very bold and noble.
Its principal treasure, perhaps, is the charming little tomb
of the two children (who died young) of Charles VIII. and
Anne of Brittany, in white marble, embossed with sym-
bolic dolphins and exquisite arabesques.  The little
boy and girl lie side by side on a slab of black marble,
and a pair of small kneeling angels, both at their head
and at their feet, watch over them.  Nothing could be
more perfect than this monument, which is the work
of Michel Colomb, one of the earlier glories of the
French Renaissance; it is really a lesson in good taste.
Originally placed in the great abbey-church of Saint
Martin, which was for so many ages the holy place of
Tours, it happily survived the devastation to which
that edifice, already sadly shattered by the wars of
religion and successive profanations, finally succumbed
in 1797.  In 1815 the tomb found an asylum in a
quiet corner of the cathedral.

I ought, perhaps, to be ashamed to acknowledge,
that I found the profane name of Balzac capable of
adding an interest even to this venerable sanctuary.
Those who have read the terrible little story of "Le
Cure de Tours" will perhaps remember that, as I
have already mentioned, the simple and childlike old
Abbe Birotteau, victim of the infernal machinations
of the Abbe Troubert and Mademoiselle Gamard, had
his quarters in the house of that lady (she had a
speciality of letting lodgings to priests), which stood
on the north side of the cathedral, so close under its
walls that the supporting pillar of one of the great
flying buttresses was planted in the spinster's garden.
If you wander round behind the church, in search of
this more than historic habitation, you will have oc-
casion to see that the side and rear of Saint Gatien
make a delectable and curious figure.  A narrow lane
passes beside the high wall which conceals from sight
the palace of the archbishop, and beneath the flying
buttresses, the far-projecting gargoyles, and the fine
south porch of the church.  It terminates in a little,
dead, grass-grown square entitled the Place Gregoire
de Tours.  All this part of the exterior of the cathe-
dral is very brown, ancient, Gothic, grotesque; Balzac
calls the whole place "a desert of stone."  A battered
and gabled wing, or out-house (as it appears to be)
of the hidden palace, with a queer old stone pulpit
jutting out from it, looks down on this melancholy
spot, on the other side of which is a seminary for
young priests, one of whom issues from a door in a
quiet corner, and, holding it open a moment behind
him, shows a glimpse of a sunny garden, where you
may fancy other black young figures strolling up and
down.  Mademoiselle Gamard's house, where she took
her two abbes to board, and basely conspired with
one against the other, is still further round the cathe-
dral.  You cannot quite put your hand upon it to-
day, for the dwelling which you say to yourself that
it _must_ have been Mademoiselle Gamard's does not
fulfil all the conditions mentioned in BaIzac's de-
scription.  The edifice in question, however, fulfils con-
ditions enough; in particular, its little court offers
hospitality to the big buttress of the church.  Another
buttress, corresponding with this (the two, between
them, sustain the gable of the north transept), is
planted in the small cloister, of which the door on the
further side of the little soundless Rue de la Psalette,
where nothing seems ever to pass, opens opposite to
that of Mademoiselle Gamard.  There is a very genial
old sacristan, who introduced me to this cloister from
the church.  It is very small and solitary, and much
mutilated; but it nestles with a kind of wasted friend-
liness beneath the big walls of the cathedral.  Its
lower arcades have been closed, and it has a small
plot of garden in the middle, with fruit-trees which I
should imagine to be too much overshadowed.  In
one corner is a remarkably picturesque turret, the
cage of a winding staircase which ascends (no great
distance) to an upper gallery, where an old priest, the
_chanoine-gardien_ of the church, was walking to and fro
with his breviary.  The turret, the gallery, and even
the chanoine-gardien, belonged, that sweet September
morning, to the class of objects that are dear to paint-
ers in water-colors.



III.

I have mentioned the church of Saint Martin,
which was for many years the sacred spot, the shrine
of pilgrimage, of Tours.  Originally the simple burial-
place of the great apostle who in the fourth century
Christianized Gaul, and who, in his day a brilliant
missionary and worker of miracles, is chiefly known
to modem fame as the worthy that cut his cloak in
two at the gate of Amiens to share it with a beggar
(tradition fails to say, I believe, what he did with the
other half), the abbey of Saint Martin, through the
Middle Ages, waxed rich and powerful, till it was
known at last as one of the most luxurious religious
houses in Christendom, with kings for its titular ab-
bots (who, like Francis I., sometimes turned and
despoiled it) and a great treasure of precious things.
It passed, however, through many vicissitudes.  Pillaged
by the Normans in the ninth century and by the
Huguenots in the sixteenth, it received its death-blow
from the Revolution, which must have brought to
bear upon it an energy of destruction proportionate
to its mighty bulk.  At the end of the last century
a huge group of ruins alone remained, and what we
see to-day may be called the ruin of a ruin.  It is
difficult to understand how so vast an ediface can
have been so completely obliterated.  Its site is given
up to several ugly streets, and a pair of tall towers,
separated by a space which speaks volumes as to the
size of the church, and looking across the close-pressed
roofs to the happier spires of the cathedral, preserved
for the modern world the memory of a great fortune,
a great abuse, perhaps, and at all events a great pen-
alty.  One may believe that to this day a consider-
able part of the foundations of the great abbey is
buried in the soil of Tours.  The two surviving towers,
which are dissimilar in shape, are enormous; with
those of the cathedral they form the great landmarks
of the town.  One of them bears the name of the Tour
de l'Horloge; the other, the so-called Tour Charle-
magne, was erected (two centuries after her death)
over the tomb of Luitgarde, wife of the great Em-
peror, who died at Tours in 800.  I do not pretend to
understand in what relation these very mighty and
effectually detached masses of masonry stood to each
other, but in their gray elevation and loneliness they
are striking and suggestive to-day; holding their hoary
heads far above the modern life of the town, and
looking sad and conscious, as they had outlived all
uses.  I know not what is supposed to have become
of the bones of the blessed saint during the various
scenes of confusion in which they may have got mis-
laid; but a mystic connection with his wonder-working
relics may be perceived in a strange little sanctuary
on the left of the street, which opens in front of the
Tour Charlemagne, - the rugged base of which, by
the way, inhabited like a cave, with a diminutive
doorway, in which, as I passed, an old woman stood
cleaning a pot, and a little dark window decorated
with homely flowers, would be appreciated by a
painter in search of "bits."  The present shrine of
Saint Martin is enclosed (provisionally, I suppose) in
a very modem structure of timber, where in a dusky
cellar, to which you descend by a wooden staircase
adorned with votive tablets and paper roses, is placed
a tabernacle surrounded by twinkling tapers and pros-
trate worshippers.  Even this crepuscular vault, how-
ever, fails, I think, to attain solemnity; for the whole
place is strangely vulgar and garish.  The Catholic
church, as churches go to-day, is certainly the most
spectacular; but it must feel that it has a great fund
of impressiveness to draw upon when it opens such
sordid little shops of sanctity as this.  It is impos-
sible not to be struck with the grotesqueness of such
an establishment, as the last link in the chain of a
great ecclesiastical tradition.

In the same street, on the other side, a little below,
is something better worth your visit than the shrine
of Saint Martin.  Knock at a high door in a white
wall (there is a cross above it), and a fresh-faced
sister of the convent of the Petit Saint Martin will
let you into the charming little cloister, or rather
fragment of a cloister.  Only one side of this exqui-
site structure remains, but the whole place is effective.
In front of the beautiful arcade, which is terribly
bruised and obliterated, is one of those walks of inter-
laced _tilleuls_ which are so frequent in Touraine, and
into which the green light filters so softly through a
lattice of clipped twigs.  Beyond this is a garden,
and beyond the garden are the other buildings of the
Convent, - where the placid sisters keep a school, - a
test, doubtless, of placidity.  The imperfect arcade,
which dates from the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury (I know nothing of it but what is related in Mrs.
Pattison's "Rennaissance in France") is a truly en-
chanting piece of work; the cornice and the angles of
the arches, being covered with the daintiest sculpture
of arabesques, flowers, fruit, medallions, cherubs, griffins,
all in the finest and most attenuated relief.  It is like
the chasing of a bracelet in stone.  The taste, the
fancy, the elegance, the refinement, are of those things
which revive our standard of  the exquisite.  Such
a piece of work is the purest flower of the French
Renaissance; there is nothing more delicate in all
Touraine.

There is another fine thing at Tours which is not
particularly delicate, but which makes a great impres-
sion, - the- very interesting old church of Saint Julian,
lurking in a crooked corner at the right of the Rue
Royale, near the point at which this indifferent thorough-
fare emerges, with its little cry of admiration, on the
bank of the Loire.  Saint Julian stands to-day in a
kind of neglected hollow, where it is much shut in by
houses; but in the year 1225, when the edifice was
begun, the site was doubtless, as the architects say,
more eligible.  At present, indeed, when once you have
caught a glimpse of the stout, serious Romanesque
tower, - which is not high, but strong, - you feel that
the building has something to say, and that you must
stop to listen to it.  Within, it has a vast and splendid
nave, of immense height, - the nave of a cathedral, -
with a shallow choir and transepts, and some admir-
able old glass.  I spent half an hour there one morn-
ing, listening to what the church had to say, in perfect
solitude.  Not a worshipper entered, - not even an old
man with a broom.  I have always thought there is a
sex in fine buildings; and Saint Julian, with its noble
nave, is of the gender of the name of its patron.

It was that same morning, I think, that I went in
search of the old houses of Tours; for the town con-
tains several goodly specimens of the domestic archi-
tecture of the past.  The dwelling to which the average
Anglo-Saxon will most promptly direct his steps, and
the only one I have space to mention, is the so-called
Maison de Tristan l'Hermite, - a gentleman whom the
readers of "Quentin Durward" will not have forgotten,
- the hangman-in-ordinary to the great King Louis XI.
Unfortunately the house of Tristan is not the house of
Tristan at all; this illusion has been cruelly dispelled.
There are no illusions left, at all, in the good city of
Tours, with regard to Louis XI.  His terrible castle of
Plessis, the picture of which sends a shiver through
the youthful reader of Scott, has been reduced to sub-
urban insignificance; and the residence of his _triste
compere,_ on the front of which a festooned rope figures
as a motive for decoration, is observed to have been
erected in the succeeding century.  The Maison de
Tristan may be visited for itself, however, if not for
Walter Scott; it is an exceedingly picturesque old
facade, to which you pick your way through a narrow
and tortuous street, - a street terminating, a little be-
yond it, in the walk beside the river.  An elegant
Gothic doorway is let into the rusty-red brick-work,
and strange little beasts crouch at the angles of the
windows, which are surmounted by a tall graduated
gable, pierced with a small orifice, where the large
surface of brick, lifted out of the shadow of the street,
looks yellow and faded.  The whole thing is disfigured
and decayed; but it is a capital subject for a sketch
in colors.  Only I must wish the sketcher better luck
- or a better temper - than my own.  If he ring the
bell to be admitted to see the court, which I believe
is more sketchable still, let him have patience to wait
till the bell is answered.  He can do the outside while
they are coming.

The Maison de Tristan, I say, may be visited for
itself; but I hardly know what the remnants of Plessis-
les-Tours may be visited for.  To reach them you
wander through crooked suburban lanes, down the
course of the Loire, to a rough, undesirable, incon-
gruous spot, where a small, crude building of red
brick is pointed out to you by your cabman (if you
happen to drive) as the romantic abode of a super-
stitious king, and where a strong odor of pigsties and
other unclean things so prostrates you for the moment
that you have no energy to protest against the obvious
fiction.  You enter a yard encumbered with rubbish
and a defiant dog, and an old woman emerges from a
shabby lodge and assures you that you are indeed in
an historic place.  The red brick building, which looks
like a small factory, rises on the ruins of the favorite
residence of the dreadful Louis.  It is now occupied
by a company of night-scavengers, whose huge carts
are drawn up in a row before it.  I know not whether
this be what is called the irony of fate; at any rate,
the effect of it is to accentuate strongly the fact (and
through the most susceptible of our senses) that there
is no honor for the authors of great wrongs.  The
dreadful Louis is reduced simply to an offence to the
nostrils.  The old woman shows you a few fragments,
- several dark, damp, much-encumbered vaults, de-
nominated dungeons, and an old tower staircase,
in good condition.  There are the outlines of the old
moat; there is also the outline of the old guard-room,
which is now a stable; and there are other vague out-
lines and inconsequent lumps, which I have forgotten.
You need all your imagination, and even then you
cannot make out that Plessis was a castle of large ex-
tent, though the old woman, as your eye wanders over
the neighboring _potagers,_ talks a good deal about the
gardens and the park.  The place looks mean and
flat; and as you drive away you scarcely know whether
to be glad or sorry that all those bristling horrors have
been reduced to the commonplace.

A certain flatness of impression awaits you also, I
think, at Marmoutier, which is the other indisuensable
excursion in the near neighborhood of Tours.  The
remains of this famous abbey lie on the other bank of
the stream, about a mile and a half from the town.
You follow the edge of the big brown river; of a fine
afternoon you will be glad to go further still.  The
abbey has gone the way of most abbeys; but the place
is a restoration as well as a ruin, inasmuch as the
sisters of the Sacred Heart have erected a terribly
modern convent here.  A large Gothic doorway, in a
high fragment of ancient wall, admits you to a garden-
like enclosure, of great extent, from which you are
further introduced into an extraordinarily tidy little
parlor, where two good nuns sit at work.  One of these
came out with me, and showed me over the place, -
a very definite little woman, with pointed features, an
intensely distinct enunciation, and those pretty man-
ners which (for whatever other teachings it may be
responsible) the Catholic church so often instils into
its functionaries.  I have never seen a woman who had
got her lesson better than this little trotting, murmur-
ing, edifying nun.  The interest, of Marmoutier to-day
is not so much an interest of vision, so to speak, as an
interest of reflection, - that is, if you choose to reflect
(for instance) upon the wondrous legend of the seven
sleepers (you may see where they lie in a row), who
lived together - they were brothers and cousins - in
primitive piety, in the sanctuary constructed by the
blessed Saint Martin (emulous of his precursor, Saint
Gatianus), in the face of the hillside that overhung the
Loire, and who, twenty-five years after his death,
yielded up their seven souls at the same moment, and
enjoyed the curious privilege of retaining in their faces,
in spite of this process, the rosy tints of life.  The
abbey of Marmoutier, which sprung from the grottos in
the cliff to which Saint Gatianus and Saint Martin re-
tired to pray, was therefore the creation of the latter
worthy, as the other great abbey, in the town proper,
was the monument of his repose.  The cliff is still
there; and a winding staircase, in the latest taste, en-
ables you conveniently to explore its recesses.  These
sacred niches are scooped out of the rock, and will
give you an impression if you cannot do without one.
You will feel them to be sufficiently venerable when
you learn that the particular pigeon-hole of Saint
Gatianus, the first Christian missionary to Gaul, dates
from the third century.  They have been dealt with as
the Catholic church deals with most of such places to-
day; polished and furnished up; labelled and ticketed,
- _edited,_ with notes, in short, like an old book.  The
process is a mistake, - the early editions had more
sanctity.  The modern buildings (of the Sacred Heart),
on which you look down from these points of vantage,
are in the vulgar taste which seems doomed to stamp
itself on all new Catholic work; but there was never-
theless a great sweetness in the scene.  The afternoon
was lovely, and it was flushing to a close.  The large
garden stretched beneath us, blooming with fruit and
wine and succulent vegetables, and beyond it flowed
the shining river.  The air was still, the shadows were
long, and the place, after all, was full of memories,
most of which might pass for virtuous.  It certainly
was better than Plessis-les-Tours.



IV.

Your business at Tours is to make excursions; and
if you make them all, you will be very well occupied.
Touraine is rich in antiquities; and an hour's drive
from the town in almost any direction will bring you
to the knowledge of some curious fragment of domestic
or ecclesiastical architecture, some turreted manor,
some lonely tower, some gabled village, or historic
site.  Even, however, if you do everything, - which was
not my case, - you cannot hope to relate everything,
and, fortunately for you, the excursions divide them-
selves into the greater and the less.  You may achieve
most of the greater in a week or two; but a summer
in Touraine (which, by the way must be a charming
thing) would contain none too many days for the others.
If you come down to Tours from Paris, your best
economy is to spend a few days at Blois, where a
clumsy, but rather attractive little inn, on the edge of
the river, will offer you a certain amount of that
familiar and intermittent hospitality which a few weeks
spent in the French provinces teaches you to regard
as the highest attainable form of accommodation.  Such
an economy I was unable to practise.  I could only go
to Blois (from Tours) to spend the day; but this feat
I accomplished twice over.  It is a very sympathetic
little town, as we say nowadays, and one might easily
resign one's self to a week there.  Seated on the north
bank of the Loire, it presents a bright, clean face to
the sun, and has that aspect of cheerful leisure which
belongs to all white towns that reflect, themselves in
shining waters.  It is the water-front only of Blois,
however, that exhibits, this fresh complexion; the in-
terior is of a proper brownness, as befits a signally
historic city.  The only disappointment I had there
was the discovery that the castle, which is the special
object of one's pilgrimage, does not overhang the river,
as I had always allowed myself to understand.  It
overhangs the town, but it is scarcely visible from the
stream.  That peculiar good fortune is reserved for
Amboise and Chaurnont.

The Chateau de Blois is one of the most beautiful
and elaborate of all the old royal residences of this
part of France, and I suppose it should have all the
honors of my description.  As you cross its threshold,
you step straight into the brilliant movement of the
French Renaissance.  But it is too rich to describe, -
I can only touch it here and there.  It must be pre-
mised that in speaking of it as one sees it to-day,
one speaks of a monument unsparingly restored.  The
work of restoration has been as ingenious as it is pro-
fuse, but it rather chills the imagination.  This is
perhaps almost the first thing you feel as you ap-
proach the castle from the streets of the town.  These
little streets, as they, leave the river, have pretensions
to romantic steepness; one of them, indeed, which
resolves itself into a high staircase with divergent
wings (the _escalier monumental_), achieved this result
so successfully as to remind me vaguely - I hardly
know why - of the great slope of the Capitol, beside
the Ara Coeli, at Rome.  The view of that part of the
castle which figures to-day as the back (it is the only
aspect I had seen reproduced) exhibits the marks of
restoration with the greatest assurance.  The long
facade, consisting only of balconied windows deeply
recessed, erects itself on the summit of a considerable
hill, which gives a fine, plunging movement to its
foundations.  The deep niches of the windows are all
aglow with color.  They have been repainted with red
and blue, relieved with gold figures; and each of them
looks more like the royal box at a theatre than like
the aperture of a palace dark with memories.  For all
this, however, and in spite of the fact that, as in some
others of the chateaux of Touraine, (always excepting
the colossal Chambord, which is not in Touraine!)
there is less vastness than one had expected, the least
hospitable aspect of Blois is abundantly impressive.
Here, as elsewhere, lightness and grace are the key-
note; and the recesses of the windows, with their
happy proportions, their sculpture, and their color, are
the empty frames of brilliant pictures.  They need
the figure of a Francis I. to complete them, or of a
Diane de Poitiers, or even of a Henry III.  The base
of this exquisite structure emerges from a bed of light
verdure, which has been allowed to mass itself there,
and which contributes to the springing look of the
walls; while on the right it joins the most modern
portion of the castle, - the building erected, on founda-
tions of enormous height and solidity, in 1635, by
Gaston d'Orleans.  This fine, frigid mansion - the proper
view of it is from the court within - is one of the
masterpieces of Francois Mansard, whom. a kind pro-
vidence did not allow to make over the whole palace
in the superior manner of his superior age.  This had
been a part of Gaston's plan, - he was a blunderer
born, and this precious project was worthy of him.
This execution of it would surely have been one of
the great misdeeds of history.  Partially performed,
the misdeed is not altogether to be regretted; for as
one stands in the court of the castle, and lets one's
eye wander from the splendid wing of Francis I. -
which is the last work of free and joyous invention -
to the ruled lines and blank spaces of the ponderous
pavilion of Mansard, one makes one's reflections upon
the advantage, in even the least personaI of the arts,
of having something to say, and upon the stupidity of
a taste which had ended by becoming an aggregation
of negatives.  Gaston's wing, taken by itself, has much
of the _bel air_ which was to belong to the architecture
of Louis XIV.; but, taken in contrast to its flowering,
laughing, living neighbor, it marks the difference be-
tween inspiration and calculation.  We scarcely grudge
it its place, however, for it adds a price to the rest of
the chateau.

We have entered the court, by the way, by jump-
ing over the walls.  The more orthodox method is to
follow a modern, terrace, which leads to the left, from
the side of the chateau that I began by speaking of,
and passes round, ascending, to a little square on a
considerably higher level, which is not, like a very
modern square on which the back (as I have called
it) looks out, a thoroughfare.  This small, empty _place,_
oblong in form, at once bright and quiet, with a cer-
tain grass-grown look, offers an excellent setting to the
entrance-front of the palace, - the wing of Louis XII.
The restoration here has been lavish; but it was per-
haps but an inevitable reaction against the injuries,
still more lavish, by which the unfortunate building
had long been overwhelmed.  It had fallen into a state
of ruinous neglect, relieved only by the misuse pro-
ceeding from successive generations of soldiers, for
whom its charming chambers served as barrack-room.
Whitewashed, mutilated, dishonored, the castle of Blois
may be said to have escaped simply with its life.  This
is the history of Amboise as well, and is to a certain
extent the history of Chambord.  Delightful, at any
rate, was the refreshed facade of Louis XII. as I stood
and looked at it one bright September morning.  In
that soft, clear, merry light of Touraine, everything
shows, everything speaks.  Charming are the taste, the
happy proportions, the color of this beautiful front, to
which the new feeling for a purely domestic architec-
ture - an architecture of security and tranquillity, in
which art could indulge itself - gave an air of youth
and gladness.  It is true that for a long time to come
the castle of Blois was neither very safe nor very
quiet; but its dangers came from within, from the evil
passions of its inhabitants, and not from siege or in-
vasion.  The front of Louis XII. is of red brick, crossed
here and there with purple; and the purple slate of
the high roof, relieved with chimneys beautifully
treated, and with the embroidered caps of pinnacles
and arches, with the porcupine of Louis, the ermine
and the festooned rope which formed the devices of
Anne of Brittany, - the tone of this rich-looking roof
carries out the mild glow of the wall.  The wide, fair
windows look as if they had expanded to let in the
rosy dawn of the Renaissance.  Charming, for that
matter, are the windows of all the chateaux of Touraine,
with their squareness corrected (as it is not in the
Tudor architecture) by the curve of the upper corners,
which makes this line look - above the expressive
aperture - like a pencilled eyebrow.  The low door of
this front is crowned by a high, deep niche, in which,
under a splendid canopy, stiffly astride of a stiffly
draped charger, sits in profile an image of the good
King Louis.  Good as he had been, - the father of
his people, as he was called (I believe he remitted
various taxes), - he was not good enough to pass
muster at the Revolution; and the effigy I have just
described is no more than a reproduction of the
primitive statue demolished at that period.

Pass beneath it into the court, and the sixteenth
century closes round you.  It is a pardonable flight
of fancy to say that the expressive faces of an age
in which human passions lay very near the surface
seem to look out at you from  the windows, from the
balconies, from the thick foliage of the sculpture.  The
portion of the wing of Louis XII. that looks toward
the court is supported on a deep arcade.  On your
right is the wing erected by Francis I., the reverse of
the mass of building which you see on approaching
the castle.  This exquisite, this extravagant, this trans-
cendent piece of architecture is the most joyous ut-
terance of the French Renaissance.  It is covered with
an embroidery of sculpture, in which every detail is
worthy of the hand of a goldsmith.  In the middle of
it, or rather a little to the left, rises the famous wind-
ing staircase (plausibly, but I believe not religiously,
restored), which even the ages which most misused it
must vaguely have admired.  It forms a kind of chiselled
cylinder, with wide interstices, so that the stairs are
open to the air.  Every inch of this structure, of its
balconies, its pillars, its great central columns, is
wrought over with lovely images, strange and ingenious
devices, prime among which is the great heraldic sala-
mander of Francis I.  The salamander is everywhere
at Blois, - over the chimneys, over the doors, on the
walls.  This whole quarter , of the castle bears the
stamp of that eminently pictorial prince.  The run-
ning cornice along the top of the front is like all un-
folded, an elongated, bracelet.  The windows of the
attic are like shrines for saints.  The gargoyles, the
medallions, the statuettes, the festoons, are like the
elaboration of some precious cabinet rather than the
details of a building exposed to the weather and to
the ages.  In the interior there is a profusion of res-
toration, and it is all restoration in color.  This has
been, evidently, a work of great energy and cost, but
it will easily strike you as overdone.  The universal
freshness is a discord, a false note; it seems to light
up the dusky past with an unnatural glare.  Begun in
the reign of Louis Philippe, this terrible process - the
more terrible always the more you admit that it has
been necessary - has been carried so far that there is
now scarcely a square inch of the interior that has the
color of the past upon it.  It is true that the place
had been so coated over with modern abuse that
something was needed to keep it alive; it is only, per-
haps, a pity that the restorers, not content with saving
its life, should have undertaken to restore its youth.
The love of consistency, in such a business, is a
dangerous lure.  All the old apartments have been
rechristened, as it were; the geography of the castle
has been re-established.  The guardrooms, the bed-
rooms, the closets, the oratories, have recovered their
identity.  Every spot connected with the murder of
the Duke of Guise is pointed out by a small, shrill
boy, who takes you from room to room, and who has
learned his lesson in perfection.  The place is full of
Catherine de' Medici, of Henry III., of memories, of
ghosts, of echoes, of possible evocations and revivals.
It is covered with crimson and gold.  The fireplaces
and the ceilings are magnificent; they look like ex-
pensive "sets" at the grand opera.

I should have mentioned that below, in the court,
the front of the wing of Gaston d'Orleans faces you
as you enter, so that the place is a course of French
history.  Inferior in beauty and grace to the other
portions of the castle, the wing is yet a nobler monu-
ment than the memory of Gaston deserves.  The second
of the sons of Henry IV., - who was no more fortunate as
a father than as a husband, - younger brother of Louis
XIII., and father of the great Mademoiselle, the most
celebrated, most ambitious, most self-complacent, and
most unsuccessful _fille a marier_ in French history,
passed in enforced retirement at the castle of Blois
the close of a life of clumsy intrigues against Cardinal
Richelieu, in which his rashness was only equalled by
his pusillanimity and his ill-luck by his inaccessibility
to correction, and which, after so many follies and
shames, was properly summed up in the project - be-
gun, but not completed - of demolishing the beautiful
habitation of his exile in order to erect a better one.
With Gaston d'Orleans, however, who lived there with-
out dignity, the history of the Chateau de Blois de-
clines.  Its interesting period is that of the wars of
religion.  It was the chief residence of Henry III., and
the scene of the principal events of his depraved and
dramatic reign.  It has been restored more than enough,
as I have said, by architects and decorators; the visitor,
as he moves through its empty rooms, which are at
once brilliant and ill-lighted (they have not been re-
furnished), undertakes a little restoration of his own.
His imagination helps itself from the things that re-
main; he tries to see the life of the sixteenth century
in its form and dress, - its turbulence, its passions, its
loves and hates, its treacheries, falsities, touches of
faith, its latitude of personal development, its presen-
tation of the whole nature, its nobleness of costume,
charm of speech, splendor of taste, unequalled pic-
turesqueness.  The picture is full of movement, of
contrasted light and darkness, full altogether of abomi-
nations.  Mixed up with them all is the great name of
religion, so that the drama wants nothing to make it
complete.  What episode was ever more perfect - looked
at as a dramatic occurrence - than the murder of the
Duke of Guise?  The insolent prosperity of the victim;
the weakness, the vices, the terrors, of the author of
the deed; the perfect execution of the plot; the accu-
mulation of horror in what followed it, - give it, as a
crime, a kind of immortal solidity.

But we must not take the Chateau de Blois too
hard: I went there, after all, by way of entertainment.
If among these sinister memories your visit should
threaten to prove a tragedy, there is an excellent way
of removing the impression.  You may treat yourself
at Blois to a very cheerful afterpiece.  There is a
charming industry practised there, and practised in
charming conditions.  Follow the bright little quay
down the river till you get quite out of the town, and
reach the point where the road beside the Loire be-
comes sinuous and attractive, turns the corner of dimi-
nutive headlands, and makes you wonder what is be-
yond.  Let not your curiosity induce you, however, to
pass by a modest white villa which overlooks the
stream, enclosed in a fresh little court; for here dwells
an artist, - an artist in faience.  There is no sort of
sign, and the place looks peculiarly private.  But if
you ring at the gate, you will not be turned away.
You will, on the contrary, be ushered upstairs into a
parlor - there is nothing resembling a shop- encum-
bered with specimens - of remarkably handsome pottery.
The work is of the best, - a careful reproduction of
old forms, colors, devices; and the master of the
establishment is one of those completely artistic types
that are often found in France.  His reception is as
friendly as his work is ingenious; and I think it is not
too much to say that you like the work the better be-
cause he has produced it.  His vases, cups and jars,
lamps, platters, _plaques,_ with their brilliant glaze, their
innumerable figures, their family likeness, and wide
variations, are scattered, through his occupied rooms;
they serve at once as his stock-in-trade and as house-
hold ornament.  As we all know, this is an age of
prose, of machinery, of wholesale production, of coarse
and hasty processes.  But one brings away from the
establishment of the very intelligent M. Ulysse the
sense of a less eager activity and a greater search for
perfection.  He has but a few workmen, and he gives
them plenty of time.  The place makes a little vignette,
leaves an impression, - the quiet white house in its
garden on the road by the wide, clear river, without
the smoke, the bustle, the ugliness, of so much of our
modern industry.  It ought to gratify Mr. Ruskin.



V.

The second time I went to Blois I took a carriage
for Chambord, and came back by the Chateau de
Cheverny and the forest of Russy, - a charming little
expedition, to which the beauty of the afternoon (the
finest in a rainy season that was spotted with bright
days) contributed not a little.  To go to Chambord,
you cross the Loire, leave it on one side, and strike
away through a country in which salient features be-
come less and less numerous, and which at last has
no other quality than a look of intense, and peculiar
rurality, - the characteristic, even when it is not the
charm, of so much of the landscape of France.  This
is not the appearance of wildness, for it goes with
great cultivation; it is simply the presence of the
delving, drudging, economizing peasant.  But it is a
deep, unrelieved rusticity.  It is a peasant's landscape;
not, as in England, a landlord's.  On the way to Cham-
bord you enter the flat and sandy Sologne.  The wide
horizon opens out like a great _potager,_ without inter-
ruptions, without an eminence, with here and there a
long, low stretch of wood.  There is an absence of
hedges, fences, signs of property; everything is ab-
sorbed in the general flatness, - the patches of vine-
yard, the scattered cottages, the villages, the children
(planted and staring and almost always pretty), the
women in the fields, the white caps, the faded blouses,
the big sabots.  At the end of an hour's drive (they
assure you at Blois that even with two horses you will
spend double that time), I passed through a sort of
gap in a wall, which does duty as the gateway of the
domain of an exiled pretender.  I drove along a
straight avenue, through a disfeatured park, - the park
of Chambord has twenty-one miles of circumference, -
a very sandy, scrubby, melancholy plantation, in which
the timber must have been cut many times over and
is to-day a mere tangle of brushwood.  Here, as in so
many spots in France, the traveller perceives that he
is in a land of revolutoins.  Nevertheless, its great ex-
tent and the long perspective of its avenues give this
desolate boskage a certain majesty; just as its shabbi-
ness places it in agreement with one of the strongest
impressions of the chateau.  You follow one of these
long perspectives a proportionate time, and at last you
see the chimneys and pinnacles of Chambord rise ap-
parently out of the ground.  The filling-in of the wide
moats that formerly surrounded it has, in vulgar par-
lance, let it down, bud given it an appearance of top-
heaviness that is at the same time a magnificent Orien-
talism.  The towers, the turrets, the cupolas, the gables,
the lanterns, the chimneys, look more like the spires
of a city than the salient points of a single building.
You emerge from the avenue and find yourself at the
foot of an enormous fantastic mass.  Chambord has a
strange mixture of society and solitude.  A little village
clusters within view of its stately windows, and a couple
of inns near by offer entertainment to pilgrims.  These
things, of course, are incidents of the political pro-
scription which hangs its thick veil over the place.
Chambord is truly royal, - royal in its great scale, its
grand air, its indifference to common considerations.
If a cat may look at a king, a palace may lock at a
tavern.  I enjoyed my visit to this extraordinary struc-
ture as much as if I had been a legitimist; and indeed
there is something interesting in any monument of a
great system, any bold presentation of a tradition.

You leave your vehicle at one of the inns, which
are very decent and tidy, and in which every one is
very civil, as if in this latter respect the influence of
the old regime pervaded the neighborhood, and you
walk across the grass and the gravel to a small door,
- a door infinitely subordinate and conferring no title
of any kind on those who enter it.  Here you ring a
bell, which a highly respectable person answers (a per-
son perceptibly affiliated, again, to the old regime),
after which she ushers you across a vestibule into an
inner court.  Perhaps the strongest impression I got
at Chambord came to me as I stood in this court.
The woman who admitted me did not come with
me; I was to find my guide somewhere else.  The
specialty of Chambord is its prodigious round towers.
There are, I believe, no less than eight of them,
placed at each angle of the inner and outer square of
buildings; for the castle is in the form of a larger
structure which encloses a smaller one.  One of these
towers stood before me in the court; it seemed to
fling its shadow over the place; while above, as I
looked up, the pinnacles and gables, the enormous
chimneys, soared into the bright blue air.  The place
was empty and silent; shadows of gargoyles, of extra-
ordinary projections, were thrown across the clear
gray surfaces.  One felt that the whole thing was
monstrous.  A cicerone appeared, a languid young
man in a rather shabby livery, and led me about with
a mixture of the impatient and the desultory, of con-
descension and humility.  I do not profess to under-
stand the plan of Chambord, and I may add that I
do not even desire to do so; for it is much more
entertaining to think of it, as you can so easily, as an
irresponsible, insoluble labyrinth.  Within, it is a
wilderness of empty chambers, a royal and romantic
barrack.  The exiled prince to whom it gives its title
has not the means to keep up four hundred rooms;
he contents himself with preserving the huge outside.
The repairs of the prodigious roof alone must absorb
a large part of his revenue.  The great feature of
the interior is the celebrated double staircase, rising
straight through the building, with two courses of
steps, so that people may ascend and descend without
meeting.  This staircase is a truly majestic piece of
humor; it gives you the note, as it were, of Chambord.
It opens on each landing to a vast guard-room, in
four arms, radiations of the winding shaft.  My guide
made me climb to the great open-work lantern which,
springing from the roof at the termination of the
rotund staircase (surmounted here by a smaller one),
forms the pinnacle of the bristling crown of Cham-
bord.  This lantern is tipped with a huge _fleur-de-lis_
in stone, - the only one, I believe, that the Revolution
did not succeed in pulling down.  Here, from narrow
windows, you look over the wide, flat country and the
tangled, melancholy park, with the rotation of its
straight avenues.  Then you walk about the roof, in
a complication of galleries, terraces, balconies, through
the multitude of chimneys and gables.  This roof,
which is in itself a sort of castle in the air, has an
extravagant, faboulus quality, and with its profuse
ornamentation, - the salamander of Francis I. is a con-
tant motive, - its lonely pavements, its sunny niches,
the balcony that looks down over the closed and
grass-grown main entrance, a strange, half-sad, half-
brilliant charm.  The stone-work is covered with fine
mould.  There are places that reminded me of some
of those quiet, mildewed corners of courts and ter-
races, into which the traveller who wanders through
the Vatican looks down from neglected windows.  They
show you two or three furnished rooms, with Bourbon
portraits, hideous tapestries from the ladies of France,
a collection of the toys of the _enfant du miracle,_ all
military and of the finest make.  "Tout cela fonc-
tionne," the guide said of these miniature weapons;
and I wondered, if he should take it into his head to
fire off his little canon, how much harm the Comte de
Chambord would do.

From below, the castle would look crushed by
the redundancy of its upper protuberances if it were
not for the enormous girth of its round towers, which
appear to give it a robust lateral development.  These
towers, however, fine as they are in their way, struck
me as a little stupid; they are the exaggeration of
an exaggeration.  In a building erected after the days
of defence, and proclaiming its peaceful character from
its hundred embroideries and cupolas, they seem
to indicate a want of invention.  I shall risk the ac-
cusation of bad taste if I say that, impressive as it is,
the Chateau de Chambord seemed to me to have al-
together a little of that quality of stupidity.  The
trouble is that it represents nothing very particular;
it has not happened, in spite of sundry vicissitudes,
to have a very interesting history.  Compared with
that of Blois and Amboise, its past is rather vacant;
and one feels to a certain extent the contrast between
its pompous appearance and its spacious but some-
what colorless annals.  It had indeed the good for-
tune to be erected by Francis I., whose name by itself
expresses a good deal of history.  Why he should
have built a palace in those sandy plains will ever
remain an unanswered question, for kings have never
been obliged to give reasons.  In addition to the fact
that the country was rich in game and that Francis
was a passionate hunter, it is suggested by M. de la
Saussaye, the author of the very complete little history
of Chambord which you may buy at the bookseller's
at Blois, that he was govemed in his choice of the
site by the accident of a charming woman having
formerly lived there.  The Comtesse de Thoury had
a manor in the neighborhood, and the Comtesse de
Thoury had been the object of a youthful passion on
the part of the most susceptible of princes before his
accession to the throne.  This great pile was reared,
therefore, according to M. de la Saussaye, as a _souvenir
de premieres amours!_  It is certainly a very massive
memento; and if these tender passages were propor-
tionate to the building that commemorates them, they
were tender indeed.  There has been much discus-
sion as to the architect employed by Francis I., and
the honor of having designed this splendid residence
has been claimed for several of the Italian artists who
early in the sixteenth century came to seek patronage
in France.  It seems well established to-day, however,
that Chambord was the work neither of Primaticcio,
of Vignola, nor of Il Rosso, all of whom have left
some trace of their sojourn in France; but of an
obscure yet very complete genius, Pierre Nepveu,
known as Pierre Trinqueau, who is designated in the
papers which preserve in some degree the history of
the origin of the edifice, as the _maistre de l'oeuvre de
maconnerie._  Behind this modest title, apparently, we
must recognize one of the most original talents of
the French Renaissance; and it is a proof of the vigor
of the artistic life of that period that, brilliant pro-
duction being everywhere abundant, an artist of so
high a value should not have been treated by his con-
temporaries as a celebrity.  We manage things very
differently to-day.

The immediate successors of Francis I. continued
to visit, Chambord; but it was neglected by Henry IV.,
and was never afterwards a favorite residence of any
French king.  Louis XIV. appeared there on several
occasions, and the apparition was characteristically
brilliant; but Chambord could not long detain a
monarch who had gone to the expense of creating a
Versailles ten miles from Paris.  With Versailles, Fon-
tainebleau, Saint-Germain, and Saint-Cloud within easy
reach of their capital, the later French sovereigns had
little reason to take the air in the dreariest province
of their kingdom.  Chambord therefore suffered from
royal indifference, though in the last century a use
was found for its deserted halls.  In 1725 it was oc-
cupied by the luckless Stanislaus Leszczynski, who
spent the greater part of his life in being elected
King of Poland and being ousted from his throne,
and who, at this time a refugee in France, had found
a compensation for some of his misfortunes in marry-
ing his daughter to Louis XV.  He lived eight years
at Chambord, and filled up the moats of the castle.
In 1748 it found an illustrious tenant in the person
of Maurice de Saxe, the victor of Fontenoy, who, how-
ever, two years after he had taken possession of it,
terminated a life which would have been longer had
he been less determined to make it agreeable.  The
Revolution, of course, was not kind to Chambord.
It despoiled it in so far as possible of every vestige
of its royal origin, and swept like a whirlwind through
apartments to which upwards of two centuries had
contributed a treasure of decoration and furniture.  In
that wild blast these precious things were destroyed
or forever scattered.  In 1791 an odd proposal was
made to the French Government by a company of
English Quakers who had conceived the bold idea of
establishing in the palace a manufacture of some
peaceful commodity not to-day recorded.  Napoleon
allotted Chambord, as a "dotation," to one of his
marshals, Berthier, for whose benefit it was converted,
in Napoleonic fashion, into the so-called principality
of Wagram.  By the Princess of Wagram, the marshal's
widow, it was, after the Restoration, sold to the
trustees of a national subscription which had been
established for the purpose of presenting it to the in-
fant Duke of Bordeaux, then prospective King of
France.  The presentation was duly made; but the
Comte de Chambord, who had changed his title in
recognition of the gift, was despoiled of his property
by the Government of Louis Philippe.  He appealed
for redress to the tribunals of his country; and the
consequence of his appeal was an interminable litiga-
tion, by which, however, finally, after the lapse of
twenty-five years, he was established in his rights.  In
1871 he paid his first visit to the domain which had
been offered him half a century before, a term of
which he had spent forty years in exile.  It was from
Chambord that he dated his famous letter of the 5th
of July of that year, - the letter, directed to his so-
called subjects, in which he waves aloft the white
flag of the Bourbons.  This amazing epistle, which is
virtually an invitation to the French people to re-
pudiate, as their national ensign, that immortal tricolor,
the flag of the Revolution and the Empire, under
which they have, won the glory which of all glories
has hitherto been dearest to them, and which is as-
sociated with the most romantic, the most heroic, the
epic, the consolatory, period of their history, - this
luckless manifesto, I say, appears to give the measure
of the political wisdom of the excellent Henry V.  It
is the most factitious proposal ever addressed to an
eminently ironical nation.

On the whole, Chambord makes a great impression;
and the hour I was, there, while the yellow afternoon
light slanted upon the September woods, there was a
dignity in its desolation.  It spoke, with a muffled
but audible voice, of the vanished monarchy, which
had been so strong, so splendid, but to-day has be-
come a sort of fantastic vision, like the cupolas and
chimneys that rose before me.  I thought, while I
lingered there, of all the fine things it takes to make
up such a monarchy; and how one of them is a su-
perfluity of mouldering, empty, palaces.  Chambord is
touching, - that is the best word for it; and if the
hopes of another restoration are in the follies of the
Republic, a little reflection on that eloquence of ruin
ought to put the Republic on its guard.  A sentimental
tourist may venture to remark that in the presence of
several chateaux which appeal in this mystical manner
to the retrospective imagination, it cannot afford to be
foolish.  I thought of all this as I drove back to Blois
by the way of the Chateau de Cheverny.  The road
took us out of the park of Chambord, but through a
region of flat woodland, where the trees were not
mighty, and again into the prosy plain of the Sologne,
- a thankless soil, all of it, I believe, but lately much
amended by the magic of cheerful French industry
and thrift.  The light had already begun to fade, and
my drive reminded me of a passage in some rural
novel of Madame Sand.  I passed a couple of timber
and plaster churches, which looked very old, black,
and crooked, and had lumpish wooden porches and
galleries encircling the base.  By the time I reached
Cheverny, the clear twilight had approached.  It was
late to ask to be allowed to visit an inhabited house;
but it was the hour at which I like best to visit almost
anything.  My coachman drew up before a gateway,
in a high wall, which opened upon a short avenue,
along which I took my way on foot; the coachmen in
those parts being, for reasons best known to them-
selves, mortally averse to driving up to a house.  I
answered the challenge of a very tidy little portress,
who sat, in company with a couple of children, en-
joying the evening air in, front of her lodge, and who
told me to walk a little further and turn to the right.
I obeyed her to the letter, and my turn brought me
into sight of a house as charming as an old manor in
a fairy tale.  I had but a rapid and partial view of
Cheverny; but that view was a glimpse of perfection.
A light, sweet mansion stood looking over a wide green
lawn, over banks of flowers and groups of trees.  It
had a striking character of elegance, produced partly
by a series of Renaissance busts let into circular niches
in the facade.  The place looked so private, so reserved,
that it seemed an act of violence to ring, a stranger
and foreigner, at the graceful door.  But if I had not
rung I should be unable to express - as it is such a
pleasure to do - my sense of the exceeding courtesy
with which this admirable house is shown.  It was
near the dinner-hour, - the most sacred hour of the
day; but I was freely conducted into the inhabited
apartments.  They are extremely beautiful.  What I
chiefly remember is the charming staircase of white
embroidered stone, and the great _salle des gardes_ and
_chambre a coucher du roi_ on the second floor.  Che-
verny, built in 1634, is of a much later date than the
other royal residences of this part of France; it be-
longs to the end of the Renaissance, and has a touch
of the rococo.  The guard-room is a superb apartment;
and as it contains little save its magnificent ceiling
and fireplace and certain dim tapestries on its walls,
you the more easily take the measure of its noble
proportions.  The servant opened the shutters of a
single window, and the last rays of the twilight slanted
into the rich brown gloom.  It was in the same pic-
turesque fashion that I saw the bedroom (adjoining) of
Henry IV., where a legendary-looking bed, draped in
folds long unaltered, defined itself in the haunted
dusk.  Cheverny remains to me a very charming, a
partly mysterious vision.  I drove back to Blois in the
dark, some nine miles, through the forest of Russy,
which belongs to the State, and which, though con-
sisting apparently of small timber, looked under the
stars sufficiently vast and primeval.  There was a damp
autumnal smell and the occasional sound of a stirring
thing; and as I moved through the evening air I
thought of Francis I. and Henry IV.



VI.

You may go to Amboise either from Blois or from
Tours; it is about half-way between these towns.  The
great point is to go, especially if you have put it off
repeatedly; and to go, if possible, on a day when the
great view of the Loire, which you enjoy from the
battlements and terraces, presents itself under a friendly
sky.  Three persons, of whom the author of these
lines was one, spent the greater part of a perfect
Sunday morning in looking at it.  It was astonishing,
in the course of the rainiest season in the memory of
the oldest Tourangeau, how many perfect days we
found to our hand.  The town of Amboise lies, like
Tours, on the left bank of the river, a little white-
faced town, staring across an admirable bridge, and
leaning, behind, as it were, against the pedestal of
rock on which the dark castle masses itself.  The town
is so small, the pedestal so big, and the castle so high
and striking, that the clustered houses at the base of
the rock are like the crumbs that have fallen from a
well-laden table.  You pass among them, however, to
ascend by a circuit to the chateau, which you attack,
obliquely, from behind.  It is the property of the
Comte de Paris, another pretender to the French
throne; having come to him remotely, by inheritance,
from his ancestor, the Duc de Penthievre, who toward
the close of the last century bought it from the crown,
which had recovered it after a lapse.  Like the castle
of Blois it has been injured and defaced by base uses,
but, unlike the castle of Blois, it has not been com-
pletely restored.  "It is very, very dirty, but very
curious," - it is in these terms that I heard it described
by an English lady, who was generally to be found
engaged upon a tattered Tauchnitz in the little _salon
de lecture_ of the hotel at Tours.  The description is
not inaccurate; but it should be said that if part of
the dirtiness of Amboise is the result of its having
served for years as a barrack and as a prison, part of
it comes from the presence of restoring stone-masons,
who have woven over a considerable portion of it a
mask of scaffolding.  There is a good deal of neatness
as well, and the restoration of some of the parts seems
finished.  This process, at Amboise, consists for the
most part of simply removing the vulgar excrescences
of the last two centuries.

The interior is virtually a blank, the old apart-
ments having been chopped up into small modern
rooms; it will have to be completely reconstructed.  A
worthy woman, with a military profile and that sharp,
positive manner which the goodwives who show you
through the chateaux of Touraine are rather apt to
have, and in whose high respectability, to say nothing
of the frill of her cap and the cut of her thick brown
dress, my companions and I thought we discovered
the particular note, or _nuance_, of Orleanism, - a com-
petent, appreciative, peremptory person, I say, - at-
tended us through the particularly delightful hour we
spent upon the ramparts of Amboise.  Denuded and
disfeatured within, and bristling without with brick-
layers' ladders, the place was yet extraordinarily im-
pressive and interesting.  I should confess that we
spent a great deal of time in looking at the view.
Sweet was the view, and magnificent; we preferred it
so much to certain portions of the interior, and to oc-
casional effusions of historical information, that the
old lady with the prove sometimes lost patience with
us.  We laid ourselves open to the charge of pre-
ferring it even to the little chapel of Saint Hubert,
which stands on the edge of the great terrace, and
has, over the portal, a wonderful sculpture of the mi-
raculous hunt of that holy man.  In the way of plastic
art this elaborate scene is the gem of Amboise.  It
seemed to us that we had never been in a place where
there are so many points of vantage to look down
from.  In the matter of position Amboise is certainly
supreme among the old houses of the Loire; and I
say this with a due recollection of the claims of Chau-
mont and of Loches, - which latter, by the way (ex-
cuse the afterthought), is not on the Loire.  The plat-
forms, the bastions, the terraces, the high-perched
windows and balconies, the hanging gardens and dizzy
crenellations, of this complicated structure, keep you
in perpetual intercourse with an immense horizon.
The great feature of the-place is the obligatory round
tower which occupies the northern end of it, and
which has now been, completely restored.  It is of
astounding size, a fortress in itself, and contains,
instead of a staircase, a wonderful inclined plane, so
wide and gradual that a coach and four may be driven
to the top.  This colossal cylinder has to-day no
visible use; but it corresponds, happily enough, with
the great circle of the prospect.  The gardens of Am-
boise, perched in the air, covering the irregular rem-
nants of the platform on which the castle stands, and
making up in picturesqueness what they lack in ex-
tent, constitute of come but a scanty domain.  But
bathed, as we found them, in the autumn sunshine,
and doubly private from their aerial site, they offered
irresistible opportunities for a stroll, interrupted, as
one leaned against their low parapets, by long, con-
templative pauses.  I remember, in particular, a certain
terrace, planted with clipped limes, upon which we
looked down from the summit of the big tower.  It
seemed from that point to be absolutely necessary to
one's happiness to go down and spend the rest of the
morning there; it was an ideal place to walk to and
fro and talk.  Our venerable conductress, to whom
our relation had gradually become more filial, per-
mitted us to gratify this innocent wish, - to the extent,
that is, of taking a turn or two under the mossy _tilleuls._
At the end of this terrace is the low door, in a wall,
against the top of which, in 1498, Charles VIII., ac-
cording to an accepted tradition, knocked his head to
such good purpose that he died.  It was within the
walls of Amboise that his widow, Anne of Brittany,
already in mourning for three children, two of whom
we have seen commemorated in sepulchral marble at
Tours, spent the first violence of that grief which was
presently dispelled by a union with her husband's
cousin and successor, Louis XII.  Amboise was a fre-
quent resort of the French Court during the sixteenth
century; it was here that the young Mary Stuart spent
sundry hours of her first marriage.  The wars of re-
ligion have left here the ineffaceable stain which they
left wherever they passed.  An imaginative visitor at
Amboise to-day may fancy that the traces of blood
are mixed with the red rust on the crossed iron bars
of the grim-looking balcony, to which the heads of
the Huguenots executed on the discovery of the con-
spiracy of La Renaudie are rumored to have been
suspended.  There was room on the stout balustrade -
an admirable piece of work - for a ghastly array.  The
same rumor represents Catherine de' Medici and the
young queen as watching from this balcony the _noyades_
of the captured Huguenots in the Loire.  The facts of
history are bad enough; the fictions are, if possible,
worse; but there is little doubt that the future Queen
of Scots learnt the first lessons of life at a horrible
school.  If in subsequent years she was a prodigy of
innocence and virtue, it was not the fault of her whilom ???
mother-in-law, of her uncles of the house of Guise, or
of the examples presented to her either at the
windows of the castle of Amboise or in its more pri-
vate recesses.

It was difficult to believe in these dark deeds, how-
ever, as we looked through the golden morning at the
placidity of the far-shining Loire.  The ultimate con-
sequence of this spectacle was a desire to follow the
river as far as the castle of Chaumont.  It is true
that the cruelties practised of old at Amboise might
have seemed less phantasmal to persons destined to
suffer from a modern form of inhumanity.  The mis-
tress of the little inn at the base of the castle-rock -
it stands very pleasantly beside the river, and we had
breakfasted there - declared to us that the Chateau de
Chaumont, which is often during the autumn closed
to visitors, was at that particular moment standing so
wide open to receive us that it was our duty to hire
one of her carriages and drive thither with speed.
This assurance was so satisfactory that we presently
found ourselves seated in this wily woman's most com-
modious vehicle, and rolling, neither too fast nor too
slow, along the margin of the Loire.  The drive of
about an hour, beneath constant clumps of chestnuts,
was charming enough to have been taken for itself;
and indeed, when we reached Chaumont, we saw that
our reward was to be simply the usual reward of
virtue, - the consciousness of having attempted the
right.  The Chateau de Chaumont was inexorably
closed; so we learned from a talkative lodge-keeper,
who gave what grace she could to her refusal.  This
good woman's dilemma was almost touching; she
wished to reconcile two impossibles.  The castle was
not to be visited, for the family of its master was
staying there; and yet she was loath to turn away a
party of which she was good enough to say that it had
a _grand genre;_ for, as she also remarked, she had her
living to earn.  She tried to arrange a compromise,
one of the elements of which was that we should
descend from our carriage and trudge up a hill which
would bring us to a designated point, where, over the
paling of the garden, we might obtain an oblique and
surreptitious view of a small portion of the castle walls.
This suggestion led us to inquire (of each other) to
what degree of baseness it is allowed to an enlightened
lover of the picturesque to resort, in order to catch a
glimpse of a feudal chateau.  One of our trio decided,
characteristically, against any form of derogation; so
she sat in the carriage and sketched some object that
was public property, while her two companions, who
were not so proud, trudged up a muddy ascent which
formed a kind of back-stairs.  It is perhaps no more
than they deserved that they were disappointed.  Chau-
mont is feudal, if you please; but the modern spirit is
in possession.  It forms a vast clean-scraped mass,
with big round towers, ungarnished with a leaf of ivy
or a patch of moss, surrounded by gardens of moderate
extent (save where the muddy lane of which I speak
passes near it), and looking rather like an enormously
magnified villa.  The great merit of Chaumont is its
position, which almost exactly resembles that of Am-
boise; it sweeps the river up and down, and seems to
look over half the province.  This, however, was better
appreciated as, after coming down the hill and re-
entering the carriage, we drove across the long sus-
pension-bridge which crosses the Loire just beyond
the village, and over which we made our way to the
small station of Onzain, at the farther end, to take
the train back to Tours.  Look back from the middle
of this bridge; the whole picture composes, as the
painters say.  The towers, the pinnacles, the fair front
of the chateau, perched above its fringe of garden and
the rusty roofs of the village, and facing the afternoon
sky, which is reflected also in the great stream that
sweeps below, - all this makes a contribution to your
happiest memories of Touraine.



VII.

We never went to Chinon; it was a fatality.  We
planned it a dozen times; but the weather interfered,
or the trains didn't suit, or one of the party was
fatigued with the adventures of'the day before.  This
excursion was so much postponed that it was finally
postponed to everything.  Besides, we had to go to
Chenonceaux, to Azay-le-Rideau, to Langeais, to Loches.
So I have not the memory of Chinon; I have only the
regret.  But regret, as well as memory, has its visions;
especially when, like memory, it is assisted by photo-
graphs.  The castle of Chinon in this form appears
to me as an enormous ruin, a mediaeval fortress, of
the extent almost of a city.  It covers a hill above the
Vienne, and after being impregnable in its time is in-
destructible to-day.  (I risk this phrase in the face of
the prosaic truth.  Chinon, in the days when it was a
prize, more than once suflered capture, and at present
it is crumbling inch by inch.  It is apparent, however,
I believe, that these inches encroach little upon acres
of masonry.)  It was in the castle that Jeanne Darc  ?????
had her first interview with Charles VII., and it is in
the town that Francois Rabelais is supposed to have
been born.  To the castle, moreover, the lover of the
picturesque is earnestly recommended to direct his
steps.  But one cannot do everything, and I would
rather have missed Chinon than Chenonceaux.  For-
tunate exceedingly were the few hours that we passed
at this exquisite residence.

"In 1747," says Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in his
"Confessions," "we went to spend the autumn in Tou-
raine, at the Chateau, of Chenonceaux, a royal resi-
dence upon the Cher, built by Henry II. for Diana of
Poitiers, whose initials are still to be seen there, and
now in possession of M. Dupin, the farmer-general.
We amused ourselves greatly in this fine spot; the liv-
ing was of the best, and I became as fat as a monk.
We made a great deal of music, and acted comedies."

This is the only description that Rousseau gives
of one of the most romantic houses in France, and of
an episode that must have counted as one of the most
agreeable in his uncomfortable career.  The eighteenth
century contented itself with general epithets; and
when Jean-Jacques has said that Chenonceaux was a
"beau lieu," he thinks himself absolved from further
characterization.  We later sons of time have, both for
our pleasure and our pain, invented the fashion of
special terms, and I am afraid that even common
decency obliges me to pay some larger tribute than
this to the architectural gem of Touraine.  Fortunately
I can discharge my debt with gratitude.  In going
from Tours you leave the valley of the Loire and enter
that of the Cher, and at the end of about an hour you
see the turrets of the castle on your right, among the
trees, down in the meadows, beside the quiet little
river.  The station and the village are about ten
minutes' walk from the chateau, and the village con-
tains a very tidy inn, where, if you are not in too
great a hurry to commune with the shades of the royal
favorite and the jealous queen, you will perhaps stop
and order a dinner to be ready for you in the evening.
A straight, tall avenue leads to the grounds of the
castle; what I owe to exactitude compels me to add
that it is crossed by the railway-line.  The place is so
arranged, however, that the chateau need know nothing
of passing trains, - which pass, indeed, though the
grounds are not large, at a very sufficient distance.
I may add that the trains throughout this part of
France have a noiseless, desultory, dawdling, almost
stationary quality, which makes them less of an offence
than usual.  It was a Sunday afternoon, and the light
was yellow, save under the trees of the avenue, where,
in spite of the waning of September, it was duskily
green.  Three or four peasants, in festal attire, were
strolling about.  On a bench at the beginning of the
avenue, sat a man with two women.  As I advanced
with my companions he rose, after a sudden stare,
and approached me with a smile, in which (to be
Johnsonian for a moment) certitude was mitigated by
modesty and eagerness was embellished with respect.
He came toward me with a salutation that I had seen
before, and I am happy to say that after an instant I
ceased to be guilty of the brutality of not knowing
where.  There was only one place in the world where
people smile like that, - only one place where the art
of salutation has that perfect grace.  This excellent
creature used to crook his arm, in Venice, when I
stepped into my gondola; and I now laid my hand on
that member with the familiarity of glad recognition;
for it was only surprise that had kept me even for a
moment from accepting the genial Francesco as an
ornament of the landscape of Touraine.  What on
earth - the phrase is the right one - was a Venetian
gondolier doing at Chenonceaux?  He had been
brought from Venice, gondola and all, by the mistress
of the charming house, to paddle about on the Cher.
Our meeting was affectionate, though there was a kind
of violence in seeing him so far from home.  He was
too well dressed, too well fed; he had grown stout,
and his nose had the tinge of good claret.  He re-
marked that the life of the household to which he had
the honor to belong was that of a _casa regia;_ which
must have been a great change for poor Checco, whose
habits in Venice were not regal.  However, he was
the sympathetic Checco still; and for five minutes
after I left him I thought less about the little plea-
sure-house by the Cher than about the palaces of the
Adriatic.

But attention was not long in coming round to the
charming structure that presently rose before us.  The
pale yellow front of the chateau, the small scale of
which is at first a surprise, rises beyond a consider-
able court, at the entrance of which a massive and
detached round tower, with a turret on its brow (a
relic of the building that preceded the actual villa),
appears to keep guard.  This court is not enclosed -
or is enclosed, at least, only by the gardens, portions
of which are at present in a state of violent reforma-
tion.  Therefore, though Chenonceaux has no great
height, its delicate facade stands up boldly enough.
This facade, one of the most finished things in Tou-
raine, consists of two stories, surmounted by an attic
which, as so often in the buildings of the French
Renaissance, is the richest part of the house.  The
high-pitched roof contains three windows of beautiful
design, covered with embroidered caps and flowering
into crocketed spires.  The window above the door
is deeply niched; it opens upon a balcony made in
the form of a double pulpit, - one of the most charm-
ing features of the front.  Chenonceaux is not large,
as I say, but into its delicate compass is packed a
great deal of history, - history which differs from that
of Amboise and Blois in being of the private and sen-
timental kind.  The echoes of the place, faint and far
as they are to-day, are not political, but personal.
Chenonceaux dates, as a residence, from the year 1515,
when the shrewd Thomas Bohier, a public functionary
who had grown rich in handling the finances of Nor-
mandy, and had acquired the estate from a family
which, after giving it many feudal lords, had fallen
into poverty, erected the present structure on the
foundations of an old mill.  The design is attributed,
with I know not what justice, to Pierre Nepveu, _alias_
Trinqueau, the audacious architect of Chambord.  On
the death of Bohier the house passed to his son, who,
however, was forced, under cruel pressure, to surrender
it to the crown, in compensation for a so-called deficit
in the accounts of the late superintendent of the trea-
sury.  Francis I. held the place till his death; but
Henry II., on ascending the throne, presented it out of
hand to that mature charmer, the admired of two
generations, Diana of Poitiers.  Diana enjoyed it till
the death of her protector; but when this event oc-
curred, the widow of the monarch, who had been
obliged to submit in silence, for years, to the ascend-
ency of a rival, took the most pardonable of all the
revenges with which the name of Catherine de' Medici
is associated, and turned her out-of-doors.  Diana was
not in want of refuges, and Catherine went through
the form of giving her Chaumont in exchange; but
there was only one Chenonceaux.  Catherine devoted
herself to making the place more completely unique.
The feature that renders it sole of its kind is not ap-
preciated till you wander round to either side of the
house.  If a certain springing lightness is the charac-
teristic of Chenonceaux, if it bears in every line the
aspect of a place of recreation, - a place intended for
delicate, chosen pleasures, - nothing can confirm this
expression better than the strange, unexpected move-
ment with which, from behind, it carries itself across
the river.  The earlier building stands in the water;
it had inherited the foundations of the mill destroyed
by Thomas Bohier.  The first step, therefore, had been
taken upon solid piles of masonry; and the ingenious
Catherine - she was a _raffinee_ - simply proceeded to
take the others.  She continued the piles to the op-
posite bank of the Cher, and over them she threw a
long, straight gallery of two stories.  This part of the
chateau, which looks simply like a house built upon a
bridge and occupying its entire length, is of course
the great curiosity of Chenonceaux.  It forms on each
floor a charming corridor, which, within, is illuminated
from either side by the flickering river-light.  The
architecture of these galleries, seen from without, is
less elegant than that of the main building, but the
aspect of the whole thing is delightful.  I have spoken
of Chenonceaux as a "villa," using the word ad-
visedly, for the place is neither a castle nor a palace.
It is a very exceptional villa, but it has the villa-
quality, - the look of being intended for life in com-
mon.  This look is not at all contradicted by the wing
across the Cher, which only suggests intimate pleasures,
as the French say, - walks in pairs, on rainy days;
games and dances on autumn nights; together with as
much as may be of moonlighted dialogue (or silence)
in the course, of evenings more genial still, in the well-
marked recesses of windows.

It is safe to say that such things took place there
in the last century, during the kindly reign of Mon-
sieur and Madame Dupin.  This period presents itself
as the happiest in the annals of Chenonceaux.  I know
not what festive train the great Diana may have led,
and my imagination, I am afraid, is only feebly kindled
by the records of the luxurious pastimes organized on
the banks of the Cher by the terrible daughter of the
Medici, whose appreciation of the good things of life
was perfectly consistent with a failure to perceive why
others should live to enjoy, them.  The best society
that ever assembled there was collected at Chenon-
ceaux during the middle of the eighteenth century.
This was surely, in France at least, the age of good
society, the period when it was well for appreciative
people to have been born.  Such people should of
course have belonged to the fortunate few, and not to
the miserable many; for the prime condition of a
society being good is that it be not too large.  The
sixty years that preceded the French Revolution were
the golden age of fireside talk and of those pleasures
which proceed from the presence of women in whom
the social art is both instinctive and acquired.  The
women of that period were, above all, good company;
the fact is attested by a thousand documents.  Chenon-
ceaux offered a perfect setting to free conversation;
and infinite joyous discourse must have mingled with
the liquid murmur of the Cher.  Claude Dupin was
not only a great man of business, but a man of honor
and a patron of knowledge; and his wife was gracious,
clever, and wise.  They had acquired this famous pro-
perty by purchase (from one of the Bourbons; for
Chenonceaux, for two centuries after the death of
Catherine de' Medici, remained constantly in princely
hands), and it was transmitted to their son, Dupin de
Francueil, grandfather of Madame George Sand.  This
lady, in her Correspondence, lately published, describes
a visit that she paid, more than thirty years ago, to
those members of her family who were still in posses-
sion.  The owner of Chenonceaux to-day is the daughter
of an Englishman naturalized in France.  But I have
wandered far from my story, which is simply a sketch
of the surface of the place.  Seen obliquely, from either
side, in combination with its bridge and gallery, the
chateau is singular and fantastic, a striking example
of a wilful and capricious conception.  Unfortunately,
all caprices are not so graceful and successful, and I
grudge the honor of this one to the false and blood-
polluted Catherine.  (To be exact, I believe the arches
of the bridge were laid by the elderly Diana.  It was
Catherine, however, who completed the monument.)
Within, the house has been, as usual, restored.  The
staircases and ceilings, in all the old royal residences
of this part of France, are the parts that have suffered
least; many of them have still much of the life of the
old time about them.  Some of the chambers of Che-
nonceaux, however, encumbered as they are with mo-
dern detail, derive a sufficiently haunted and suggestive
look from the deep setting of their beautiful windows,
which thickens the shadows and makes dark, corners.
There is a charming little Gothic chapel, with its apse
hanging over the water, fastened to the left flank of
the house.  Some of the upper balconies, which look
along the outer face of the gallery, and either up or
down the river, are delightful protected nooks.  We
walked through the lower gallery to the other bank of
the Cher; this fine apartment appeared to be for the
moment a purgatory of ancient furniture.  It terminates
rather abruptly; it simply stops, with a blank wall.
There ought, of course, to have been a pavilion here,
though I prefer very much the old defect to any mo-
dern remedy.  The wall is not so blank, however, but
that it contains a door which opens on a rusty draw-
bridge.  This drawbridge traverses the small gap which
divides the end of the gallery from the bank of the
stream.  The house, therefore, does not literally rest
on opposite edges of the Cher, but rests on one and
just fails to rest on the other.  The pavilion would
have made that up; but after a moment we ceased to
miss this imaginary feature.  We passed the little
drawbridge, and wandered awhile beside the river.
From this opposite bank the mass of the chateau looked
more charming than ever; and the little peaceful, lazy
Cher, where two or three men were fishing in the
eventide, flowed under the clear arches and between
the solid pedestals of the part that spanned it, with
the softest, vaguest light on its bosom.  This was the
right perspective; we were looking across the river of
time.  The whole scene was deliciously mild.  The
moon came up; we passed back through the gallery
and strolled about a little longer in the gardens.  It
was very still.  I met my old gondolier in the twilight.
He showed me his gondola; but I hated, somehow, to
see it there.  I don't like, as the French say, to _meler
les genres_.  A gondola in a little flat French river?
The image was not less irritating, if less injurious, than
the spectacle of a steamer in the Grand Canal, which
had driven me away from Venice a year and a half
before.  We took our way back to the Grand Monarque,
and waited in the little inn-parlor for a late train to
Tours.  We were not impatient, for we had an ex-
cellent dinner to occupy us; and even after we had
dined we were still content to sit awhile and exchange
remarks upon, the superior civilization of France.
Where else, at a village inn, should we have fared so
well?  Where else should we have sat down to our
refreshment without condescension?  There were two
or three countries in which it would not have been
happy for us to arrive hungry, on a Sunday evening,
at so modest an hostelry.  At the little inn at Chenon-
ceaux the _cuisine_ was not only excellent, but the ser-
vice was graceful.  We were waited on by mademoiselle
and her mamma; it was so that mademoiselle alluded
to the elder lady, as she uncorked for us a bottle of
Vouvray mousseux.  We were very comfortable, very
genial; we even went so far as to say to each other
that Vouvray mousseux was a delightful wine.  From
this opinion, indeed, one of our trio differed; but this
member of the party had already exposed herself to
the charge of being too fastidious, by declining to de-
scend from the carriage at Chaumont and take that
back-stairs view of the castle.



VIII.

Without fastidiousness, it was fair to declare, on
the other hand, that the little inn at Azay-le-Rideau
was very bad.  It was terribly dirty, and it was in
charge of a fat _megere_ whom the appearance of four
trustful travellers - we were four, with an illustrious
fourth, on that occasion - roused apparently to fury.
I attached great importance to this incongruous
hostess, for she uttered the only uncivil words I heard
spoken (in connection with any business of my own)
during a tour of some six weeks in France.  Breakfast
not at Azay-le-Rideau, therefore, too trustful traveller;
or if you do so, be either very meek or very bold.
Breakfast not, save under stress of circumstance; but
let no circumstance whatever prevent you from going
to see the admirable chateau, which is almost a rival
of Chenonceaux.  The village lies close to the gates,
though after you pass these gates  you leave it well
behind.  A little avenue, as at Chenonceaux, leads to
the house, making a pretty vista as you approach the
sculptured doorway.  Azay is a most perfect and
beautiful thing; I should place it third in any list of
the great houses of this part of France in which these
houses should be ranked according to charm.  For
beauty of detail it comes after Blois and Chenon-
ceaux; but it comes before Amboise and Chambord.
On the other hand, of course, it is inferior in majesty
to either of these vast structures.  Like Chenonceaux,
it is a watery place, though it is more meagrely
moated than the little chateau on the Cher.  It consists
of a large square _corps de logis_, with a round tower
at each angle, rising out of a somewhat too slumberous
pond.  The water - the water of the Indre - sur-
rounds it, but it is only on one side that it bathes its
feet in the moat.  On one of the others there is a
little terrace, treated as a garden, and in front there
is a wide court, formed by a wing which, on the right,
comes forward.  This front, covered with sculptures,
is of the richest, stateliest effect.  The court is ap-
proachcd by a bridge over the pond, and the house
would reflect itself in this wealth of water if the water
were a trifle less opaque.  But there is a certain
stagnation - it affects more senses than one - about
the picturesque pools of Azay.  On the hither side of
the bridge is a garden, overshadowed by fine old
sycamores, - a garden shut in by greenhouses and by
a fine last-century gateway, flanked with twin lodges.
Beyond the chateau and the standing waters behind
it is a so-called _parc_, which, however, it must be con-
fessed, has little of park-like beauty.  The old houses
(many of them, that is) remain in France; but the old
timber does not remain, and the denuded aspect of
the few acres that surround the chateaux of Touraine
is pitiful to the traveller who has learned to take the
measure of such things from the manors and castles
of England.  The domain of the lordly Chaumont is
that of an English suburban villa; and in that and
in other places there is little suggestion, in the
untended aspect of walk and lawns, of the vigilant
British gardener.  The manor of Azay, as seen to-day,
dates from the early part of the sixteenth century;
and the industrious Abbe Chevalier, in his very
entertaining though slightly rose-colored book on
Touraine,* (* Promenades pittoresque en Touraine.
Tours: 1869.) speaks of it as, "perhaps the purest expres-
sion of the _belle Renaissance francaise_."  "Its height,"
he goes on, "is divided between two stories, terminat-
ing under the roof in a projecting entablature which
imitates a row of machicolations.  Carven chimneys
and tall dormer windows, covered with imagery, rise
from the roofs; turrets on brackets, of elegant shape,
hang with the greatest lightness from the angles of
the building.  The soberness of the main lines, the
harmony of the empty spaces and those that are
filled out, the prominence of the crowning parts, the
delicacy of all the details, constitute an enchanting
whole."  And then the Abbe speaks of the admirable
staircase which adorns the north front, and which,
with its extention, inside, constitutes the principal
treasure of Azay.  The staircase passes beneath one
of the richest of porticos, - a portico over which a
monumental salamander indulges in the most deco-
rative contortions.  The sculptured vaults of stone
which cover the windings of the staircase within, the
fruits, flowers, ciphers, heraldic signs, are of the
noblest effect.  The interior of the chateau is rich,
comfortable, extremely modern; but it makes no
picture that compares with its external face, about
which, with its charming proportions, its profuse yet
not extravagant sculpture, there is something very
tranquil and pure.  I took particular fancy to the
roof, high, steep, old, with its slope of bluish slate,
and the way the weather-worn chimneys seemed to
grow out of it, like living things out of a deep soil.
The only defect of the house is the blankness and
bareness of its walls, which have none of those delicate
parasites attached to them that one likes to see on the
surface of old dwellings.  It is true that this bareness
results in a kind of silvery whiteness of complexion,
which carries out the tone of the quiet pools and even
that of the scanty and shadeless park.



IX.

I hardly know what to say about the tone of
Langeais, which, though I have left it to the end of
my sketch, formed the objective point of the first ex-
cursion I made from Tours.  Langeais is rather dark
and gray; it is perhaps the simplest and most severe
of all the castles of the Loire.  I don't know why I
should have gone to see it before any other, unless it
be because I remembered the Duchesse de Langeais,
who figures in several of Balzac's novels, and found
this association very potent.  The Duchesse de Lan-
geais is a somewhat transparent fiction; but the
castle from which Balzac borrowed the title of his
heroine is an extremely solid fact.  My doubt just
above as to whether I should pronounce it excep-
tionally grey came from my having seen it under a
sky which made most things look dark.  I have, how-
ever, a very kindly memory of that moist and melan-
choly afternoon, which was much more autumnal than
many of the days that followed it.  Langeais lies
down the Loire, near the river, on the opposite side
from Tours, and to go to it you will spend half an
hour in the train.  You pass on the way the Chateau
de Luynes, which, with its round towers catching
the afternoon light, looks uncommonly well on a hill
at a distance; you pass also the ruins of the castle
of Cinq-Mars, the ancestral dwelling of the young
favorite of Louis XIII., the victim, of Richelieu, the
hero of Alfred de Vigny's novel, which is usually re-
commended to young ladies engaged in the study of
French.  Langeais is very imposing and decidedly
sombre; it marks the transition from the architecture
of defence to that of elegance.  It rises, massive and
perpendicular, out of the centre of the village to
which it gives its name, and which it entirely domi-
nates; so that, as you stand before it, in the crooked
and empty street, there is no resource for you but to
stare up at its heavy overhanging cornice and at the
huge towers surmounted with extinguishers of slate.
If you follow this street to the end, however, you
encounter in abundance the usual embellishments of
a French village: little ponds or tanks, with women
on their knees on the brink, pounding and thumping
a lump of saturated linen; brown old crones, the tone
of whose facial hide makes their nightcaps (worn by
day) look dazzling; little alleys perforating the thick-
ness of a row of cottages, and showing you behind,
as a glimpse, the vividness of a green garden.  In
the rear of the castle rises a hill which must formerly
have been occupied by some of its appurtenances,
and which indeed is still partly enclosed within its
court.  You may walk round this eminence, which,
with the small houses of the village at its base, shuts
in the castle from behind.  The enclosure is not
defiantly guarded, however; for a small, rough path,
which you presently reach, leads up to an open gate.
This gate admits you to a vague and rather limited
_parc_, which covers the crest of the hill, and through
which you may walk into the gardens of castle.
These gardens, of small extent, confront the dark
walls with their brilliant parterres, and, covering the
gradual slope of the hill, form, as it were, the fourth
side of the court.  This is the stateliest view of the
chateau, which looks to you sufficiently grim and gray
as, after asking leave of a neat young woman who
sallies out to learn your errand, you sit there on a
garden bench and take the measure of the three tall
towers attached to this inner front and forming sever-
ally the cage of a staircase.  The huge bracketed cor-
nice (one of the features of Langeais) which is merely
ornamental, as it is not machicolated, though it looks
so, is continued on the inner face as well.  The whole
thing has a fine feudal air, though it was erected on
the rains of feudalism.

The main event in the history of the castle is the
marriage of Anne of Brittany to her first husband,
Charles VIII., which took place in its great hall in
1491.  Into this great hall we were introduced by
the neat young woman, - into this great hall and
into sundry other halls, winding staircases, galleries,
chambers.  The cicerone of Langeais is in too great a
hurry; the fact is pointed out in the excellent Guide-
Joanne.  This ill-dissimulated vice, however, is to be
observed, in the country of the Loire, in every one
who carries a key.  It is true that at Langeais there
is no great occasion to indulge in the tourist's weak-
ness of dawdling; for the apartments, though they
contain many curious odds and ends of, antiquity, are
not of first-rate interest.  They are cold and musty,
indeed, with that touching smell of old furniture, as
all apartments should be through which the insatiate
American wanders in the rear of a bored domestic,
pausing to stare at a faded tapestry or to read the
name on the frame of some simpering portrait.

To return to Tours my companion and I had counted
on a train which (as is not uncommon in France)
existed only in the "Indicateur des Chemins de Fer;"
and instead of waiting for another we engaged a vehicle
to take us home.  A sorry _carriole_ or _patache_ it proved
to be, with the accessories of a lumbering white mare
and a little wizened, ancient peasant, who had put on,
in honor of the occasion, a new blouse of extraordinary
stiffness and blueness.  We hired the trap of an energetic
woman who put it "to" with her own hands; women
in Touraine and the B1esois appearing to have the
best of it in the business of letting vehicles, as well as
in many other industries.  There is, in fact, no branch
of human activity in which one is not liable, in France,
to find a woman engaged.  Women, indeed, are not
priests; but priests are, more or less; women.  They
are not in the army, it may be said; but then they _are_
the army.  They are very formidable.  In France one
must count with the women.  The drive back from
Langeais to Tours was long, slow, cold; we had an
occasional spatter of rain.  But the road passes most
of the way close to the Loire, and there was some-
thing in our jog-trot through the darkening land, beside
the flowing, river, which it was very possible to enjoy.



X.

The consequence of my leaving to the last my little
mention of Loches is that space and opportunity fail
me; and yet a brief and hurried account of that extra-
ordinary spot would after all be in best agreement with
my visit.  We snatched a fearful joy, my companion
and I, the afternoon we took the train for Loches.
The weather this time had been terribly against us:
again and again a day that promised fair became hope-
lessly foul after lunch.  At last we determined that if
we could not make this excursion in the sunshine, we
would make it with the aid of our umbrellas.  We
grasped them firmly and started for the station, where
we were detained an unconscionable time by the evolu-
tions, outside, of certain trains laden with liberated
(and exhilarated) conscripts, who, their term of service
ended, were about to be restored to civil life.  The
trains in Touraine are provoking; they serve as little
as possible for excursions.  If they convey you one
way at the right hour, it is on the condition of bring-
ing you back at the wrong; they either allow you far
too little time to examine the castle or the ruin, or
they leave you planted in front of it for periods that
outlast curiosity.  They are perverse, capricious, ex-
asperating.  It was a question of our having but an
hour or two at Loches, and we could ill afford to sacri-
fice to accidents.  One of the accidents, however, was
that the rain stopped before we got there, leaving be-
hind it a moist mildness of temperature and a cool
and lowering sky, which were in perfect agreement
with the gray old city.  Loches is certainly one of the
greatest impressions of the traveller in central France,
- the largest cluster of curious things that presents
itself to his sight.  It rises above the valley of the
Indre, the charming stream set in meadows and sedges,
which wanders through the province of Berry and
through many of the novels of Madame George Sand;
lifting from the summit of a hill, which it covers to
the base, a confusion of terraces, ramparts, towers, and
spires.  Having but little time, as I say, we scaled
the hill amain, and wandered briskly through this
labyrinth of antiquities.  The rain had decidedly
stopped, and save that we had our train on our minds,
we saw Loches to the best advantage.  We enjoyed
that sensation with which the conscientious tourist is
- or ought to be - well acquainted, and for which, at
any rate, he has a formula in his rough-and-ready
language.  We "experienced," as they say, (most odious
of verbs!) an "agreeable disappointment."  We were
surprised and delighted; we had not suspected that
Loches was so good.

I hardly know what is best there: the strange and
impressive little collegial church, with its romanesque
atrium or narthex, its doorways covered with primitive
sculpture of the richest kind, its treasure of a so-called
pagan altar, embossed with fighting warriors, its three
pyramidal domes, so unexpected, so sinister, which I
have not met elsewhere, in church architecture; or the
huge square keep, of the eleventh century, - the most
cliff-like tower I remember, whose immeasurable thick-
ness I did not penetrate; or the subterranean mysteries
of two other less striking but not less historic dungeons,
into which a terribly imperative little cicerone intro-
duced us, with the aid of downward ladders, ropes,
torches, warnings, extended hands; and, many, fearful
anecdotes, - all in impervious darkness.  These horrible
prisons of Loches, at an incredible distance below the
daylight, were a favorite resource of Louis XI., and
were for the most part, I believe, constructed by him.
One of the towers of the castle is garnished with the
hooks or supports of the celebrated iron cage in which
he confined the Cardinal La Balue, who survived so
much longer than might have been expected this extra-
ordinary mixture of seclusion and exposure.  All these
things form part of the castle of Loches, whose enorm-
ous _enceinte_ covers the whole of the top of the hill, and
abounds in dismantled gateways, in crooked passages,
in winding lanes that lead to postern doors, in long
facades that look upon terraces interdicted to the
visitor, who perceives with irritation that they com-
mand magnificent views.  These views are the property
of the sub-prefect of the department, who resides at
the Chateau de Loches, and who has also the enjoy-
ment of a garden - a garden compressed and curtailed,
as those of old castles that perch on hill-tops are apt
to be - containing a horse-chestnut tree of fabulous
size, a tree of a circumference so vast and so perfect
that the whole population of Loches might sit in con-
centric rows beneath its boughs.  The gem of the place,
however, is neither the big _marronier_, nor the collegial
church, nor the mighty dungeon, nor the hideous prisons
of Louis XI.; it is simply the tomb of Agnes Sorel, _la
belle des belles_, so many years the mistress of Charles VII.
She was buried, in 1450, in the collegial church,
whence, in the beginning of the present century, her
remains, with the monument that marks them, were
transferred to one of the towers of the castle.  She has
always, I know not with what justice, enjoyed a fairer
fame than most ladies who have occupied her position,
and this fairness is expressed in the delicate statue
that surmounts her tomb.  It represents her lying there
in lovely demureness, her hands folded with the best
modesty, a little kneeling angel at either side of her
head, and her feet, hidden in the folds of her decent
robe, resting upon a pair of couchant lambs, innocent
reminders of her name.  Agnes, however, was not
lamb-like, inasmuch as, according to popular tradition
at least, she exerted herself sharply in favor of the ex-
pulsion of the English from France.  It is one of the
suggestions of Loches that the young Charles VII.,
hard put to it as he was for a treasury and a capital,
- "le roi de Bourges," he was called at Paris, - was
yet a rather privileged mortal, to stand up as he does
before posterity between the noble Joan and the _gentille
Agnes_; deriving, however much more honor from one
of these companions than from the other.  Almost as
delicate a relic of antiquity as this fascinating tomb is
the exquisite oratory of Anne of Brittany, among the
apartments of the castle the only chamber worthy of
note.  This small room, hardly larger than a closet,
and forming part of the addition made to the edifice
by Charles VIII., is embroidered over with the curious
and remarkably decorative device of the ermine and
festooned cord.  The objects in themselves are not
especially graceful; but the constant repetition of the
figure on the walls and ceiling produces an effect of
richness, in spite of the modern whitewash with which,
if I remember rightly, they have been endued.  The
little streets of Loches wander crookedly down the hill,
and are full of charming pictorial  "bits:" an old town-
gate, passing under a mediaeval tower, which is orna-
mented by Gothic windows and the empty niches of
statues; a meagre but delicate _hotel de ville_, of the
Renaissance, nestling close beside it; a curious _chancel-
lerie_ of the middle of the sixteenth century, with
mythological figures and a Latin inscription on the
front, - both of these latter buildings being rather un-
expected features of the huddled and precipitous little
town.  Loches has a suburb on the other side of the
Indre, which we had contented ourselves with looking
down at from the heights, while we wondered whether,
even if it had not been getting late and our train were
more accommodating, we should care to take our way
across the bridge and look up that bust, in terra-cotta,
of Francis I., which is the principal ornament of the
Chateau de Sansac and the faubourg of Beaulieu.  I
think we decided that we should not; that we were
already quite well enough acquainted with the nasal
profile of that monarch.



XI.

I know not whether the exact limits of an excur-
sion, as distinguished from a journey, have ever been
fixed; at any rate, it seemed none of my business, at
Tours, to settle the question.  Therefore, though the
making of excursions had been the purpose of my
stay, I thought it vain, while I started for Bourges, to
determine to which category that little expedition
might belong.  It was not till the third day that I re-
turned to Tours; and the distance, traversed for the
most part after dark, was even greater than I had sup-
posed.  That, however, was partly the fault of a tire-
some wait at Vierzon, where I had more than enough
time to dine, very badly, at the _buffet_, and to observe
the proceedings of a family who had entered my rail-
way carriage at Tours and had conversed unreservedly,
for my benefit, all the way from that station, - a family
whom it entertained me to assign to the class of _petite
noblesse de province_.  Their noble origin was confirmed
by the way they all made _maigre_ in the refreshment
oom (it happened to be a Friday), as if it had been
possible to do anything else.  They ate two or three
omelets apiece, and ever so many little cakes, while
the positive, talkative mother watched her children as
the waiter handed about the roast fowl.  I was destined
to share the secrets of this family to the end; for
when I had taken place in the empty train that was
in waiting to convey us to Bourges, the same vigilant
woman pushed them all on top of me into my com-
partment, though the carriages on either side con-
tained no travellers at all.  It was better, I found, to
have dined (even on omelets and little cakes) at the
station at Vierzon than at the hotel at Bourges, which,
when I reached it at nine o'clock at night, did not
strike me as the prince of hotels.  The inns in the
smaller provincial towns in France are all, as the term
is, commercial, and the _commis-voyageur_ is in triumphant
possession.  I saw a great deal of him for several
weeks after this; for he was apparently the only traveller
in the southern provinces, and it was my daily fate to
sit opposite to him at tables d'hote and in railway
trains.  He may be known by two infallible signs, -
his hands are fat, and he tucks his napkin into his
shirt-collar.  In spite of these idiosyncrasies, he seemed
to me a reserved and inoffensive person, with singularly
little of the demonstrative good-humor that he has
been described as possessing.  I saw no one who re-
minded me of Balzac's "illustre Gaudissart;" and in-
deed, in the course of a month's journey through a
large part of France, I heard so little desultory con-
versation that I wondered whether a change had not
come over the spirit of the people.  They seemed to
me as silent as Americans when Americans have not
been "introduced," and infinitely less addicted to ex-
changing remarks in railway trains and at tables d'hote
the colloquial and cursory English; a fact per-
haps not worth mentioning were it not at variance
with that reputation which the French have long en-
joyed of being a pre-eminently sociable nation.  The
common report of the character of a people is, how-
ever, an indefinable product; and it is, apt to strike
the traveller who observes for himself as very wide of
the mark.  The English, who have for ages been de-
scribed (mainly by the French) as the dumb, stiff,
unapproachable race, present to-day a remarkable ap-
pearance of good-humor and garrulity, and are dis-
tinguished by their facility of intercourse.  On the
other hand, any one who has seen half a dozen
Frenchmen pass a whole day together in a railway-
carriage without breaking silence is forced to believe
that the traditional reputation of these gentlemen is
simply the survival of some primitive formula.  It was
true, doubtless, before the Revolution; but there have
been great changes since then.  The question of which
is the better taste, to talk to strangers or to hold your
tongue, is a matter apart; I incline to believe that the
French reserve is the result of a more definite con-
ception of social behavior.  I allude to it only be-
came it is at variance with the national fame, and at
the same time is compatible with a very easy view of
life in certain other directions.  On some of these
latter points the Boule d'Or at Bourges was full of
instruction; boasting, as it did, of a hall of reception
in which, amid old boots that had been brought to be
cleaned, old linen that was being sorted for the wash,
and lamps of evil odor that were awaiting replenish-
ment, a strange, familiar, promiscuous household life
went forward.  Small scullions in white caps and aprons
slept upon greasy benches; the Boots sat staring at
you while you fumbled, helpless, in a row of pigeon-
holes, for your candlestick or your key; and, amid the
coming and going of the _commis-voyageurs_, a little
sempstress bent over the under-garments of the hostess,
- the latter being a heavy, stem, silent woman, who
looked at people very hard.

It was not to be looked at in that manner that one
had come all the way from Tours; so that within ten
minutes after my arrival I sallied out into the dark-
ness to get somehow and somewhere a happier im-
pression.  However late in the evening I may arrive
at a place, I cannot go to bed without an impression.
The natural place, at Bourges, to look for one seemed
to be the cathedral; which, moreover, was the only
thing that could account for my presence _dans cette
galere_.  I turned out of a small square, in front of the
hotel, and walked up a narrow, sloping street, paved
with big, rough stones and guiltless of a foot-way.
It was a splendid starlight night; the stillness of a
sleeping _ville de province_ was over everything; I had
the whole place to myself.  I turned to my right, at
the top of the street, where presently a short, vague
lane brought me into sight of the cathedral.  I ap-
proached it obliquely, from behind; it loomed up in
the darkness above me, enormous and sublime.  It
stands on the top of the large but not lofty eminence
over which Bourges is scattered, - a very good position,
as French cathedrals go, for they are not all so nobly
situated as Chartres and Laon.  On the side on which
I approached it (the south) it is tolerably well ex-
posed, though the precinct is shabby; in front, it is
rather too much shut in.  These defects, however, it
makes up for on the north side and behind, where it
presents itself in the most admirable manner to the
garden of the Archeveche, which has been arranged
as a public walk, with the usual formal alleys of the
_jardin francais_.  I must add that I appreciated these
points only on the following day.  As I stood there in
the light of the stars, many of which had an autumnal
sharpness, while others were shooting over the heavens,
the huge, rugged vessel of the church overhung me in
very much the same way as the black hull of a ship
at sea would overhang a solitary swimmer.  It seemed
colossal, stupendous, a dark leviathan.

The next morning, which was lovely, I lost no
time in going back to it, and found, with satisfaction,
that the daylight did it no injury.  The cathedral of
Bourges is indeed magnificently huge; and if it is a
good deal wanting in lightness and grace it is perhaps
only the more imposing.  I read in the excellent hand-
book of M. Joanne that it was projected "_des_ 1172,"
but commenced only in the first years of the thirteenth
century.  "The nave" the writer adds, "was finished
_tant bien que mal, faute de ressources;_ the facade is of
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in its lower
part, and of the fourteenth in its upper."  The allusion
to the nave means the omission of the transepts.  The
west front consists of two vast but imperfect towers;
one of which (the south) is immensely buttressed, so
that its outline slopes forward, like that of a pyramid,
being the taller of the two.  If they had spires, these
towers would be prodigious; as it is, given the rest
of the church, they are wanting in elevation.  There
are five deeply recessed portals, all in a row, each
surmounted with a gable; the gable over the central
door being exceptionally high.  Above the porches,
which give the measure of its width, the front rears
itself, piles itself, on a great scale, carried up by gal-
leries, arches, windows, sculptures, and supported by
the extraordinarily thick buttresses of which I have
spoken, and which, though they embellish it with deep
shadows thrown sidewise, do not improve its style.
The portals, especially the middle one, are extremely
interesting; they are covered with curious early sculp-
tures.  The middle one, however, I must describe
alone.  It has no less than six rows of figures, - the
others have four, - some of which, notably the upper
one, are still in their places.  The arch at the top has
three tiers of elaborate imagery.  The upper of these
is divided by the figure of Christ in judgment, of great
size, stiff and terrible, with outstretched arms.  On
either side of him are ranged three or four angels,
with the instruments of the Passion.  Beneath him, in
the second frieze, stands the angel of justice, with his
scales; and on either side of him is the vision of the
last judgment.  The good prepare, with infinite titilla-
tion and complacency, to ascend to the skies; while
the bad are dragged, pushed, hurled, stuffed, crammed,
into pits and caldrons of fire.  There is a charming
detail in this section.  Beside the angel, on, the right,
where the wicked are the prey of demons, stands a
little female figure, that of a child, who, with hands
meekly folded and head gently raised, waits for the
stern angel to decide upon her fate.  In this fate, how-
ever, a dreadful, big devil also takes a keen interest;
he seems on the point of appropriating the tender
creature; he has a face like a goat and an enormous
hooked nose.  But the angel gently lays a hand upon
the shoulder of the little girl - the movement is full
of dignity - as if to say, "No; she belongs to the other
side."  The frieze below represents the general re-
surrection, with the good and the wicked emerging from
their sepulchres.  Nothing can be more quaint and
charming than the difference shown in their way of
responding to the final trump.  The good get out of
their tombs with a certain modest gayety, an alacrity
tempered by respect; one of them kneels to pray as
soon as he has disinterred himself.  You may know
the wicked, on the other hand, by their extreme shy-
ness; they crawl out slowly and fearfully; they hang
back, and seem to say, "Oh, dear!"  These elaborate
sculptures, full of ingenuous intention and of the
reality of early faith, are in a remarkable state of pre-
servation; they bear no superficial signs of restoration,
and appear scarcely to have suffered from the centu-
ries.  They are delightfully expressive; the artist had
the advantage of knowing exactly the effect he wished
to produce.

The interior of the cathedral has a great simplicity
and majesty, and, above all, a tremendous height.  The
nave is extraordinary in this respect; it dwarfs every-
thing else I know.  I should add, however, that I am,
in architecture, always of the opinion of the last
speaker.  Any great building seems to me, while I
look at it, the ultimate expression.  At any rate, during
the hour that I sat gazing along the high vista of
Bourges, the interior of the great vessel corresponded
to my vision of the evening before.  There is a tranquil
largeness, a kind of infinitude, about such an edifice:
it soothes and purifies the spirit, it illuminates the
mind.  There are two aisles, on either side, in addi-
tion to the nave, - five in all, - and, as I have said,
there are no transepts; an omission which lengthens
the vista, so that from my place near the door the
central jewelled window in the depths of the perpen-
dicular choir seemed a mile or two away.  The second,
or outward, of each pair of aisles is too low, and the
first too high; without this inequality the nave would
appear to take an even more prodigious flight.  The
double aisles pass all the way round the choir, the
windows of which are inordinately rich in magnificent
old glass.  I have seen glass as fine in other churches;
but I think I have never seen so much of it at once.

Beside the cathedral, on the north, is a curious
structure of the fourteenth or fifteenth century, which
looks like an enormous flying buttress, with its sup-
port, sustaining the north tower.  It makes a massive
arch, high in the air, and produces a romantic effect
as people pass under it to the open gardens of the
Archeveche, which extend to a considerable distance
in the rear of the church.  The structure supporting
the arch has the girth of a largeish house, and con-
tains chambers with whose uses I am unacquainted,
but to which the deep pulsations of the cathedral, the
vibration of its mighty bells, and the roll of its organ-
tones must be transmitted even through the great arm
of stone.

The archiepiscopal palace, not walled in as at Tours,
is visible as a stately habitation of the last century,
now in course of reparation in consequence of a fire.
From this side, and from the gardens of the palace,
the nave of the cathedral is visible in all its great
length and height, with its extraordinary multitude of
supports.  The gardens aforesaid, accessible through
tall iron gates, are the promenade - the Tuileries - of
the town, and, very pretty in themselves, are immensely
set off by the overhanging church.  It was warm and
sunny; the benches were empty; I sat there a long
time, in that pleasant state of mind which visits the
traveller in foreign towns, when he is not too hurried,
while he wonders where he had better go next.  The
straight, unbroken line of the roof of the cathedral
was very noble; but I could see from this point how
much finer the effect would have been if the towers,
which had dropped almost out of sight, might have
been carried still higher.  The archiepiscopal gardens
look down at one end over a sort of esplanade or
suburban avenue lying on a lower level, on which they
open, and where several detachments of soldiers
(Bourges is full of soldiers) had just been drawn up.
The civil population was also collecting, and I saw
that something was going to happen.  I learned that
a private of the Chasseurs was to be "broken" for
stealing, and every one was eager to behold the cere-
mony.  Sundry other detachments arrived on the
ground, besides many of the military who had come
as a matter of taste.  One of them described to me
the process of degradation from the ranks, and I felt
for a moment a hideous curiosity to see it, under the
influence of which I lingered a little.  But only a
little; the hateful nature of the spectacle hurried me
away, at the same time that others were hurrying for-
ward.  As I turned my back upon it I reflected that
human beings are cruel brutes, though I could not
flatter myself that the ferocity of the thing was ex-
clusively French.  In another country the concourse
would have been equally great, and the moral of it all
seemed to be that military penalties are as terrible as
military honors are gratifying.



XII.

The cathedral is not the only lion of Bourges; the
house of Jacques Coeur is an object of interest scarcely
less positive.  This remarkable man had a very strange
history, and he too was "broken," like the wretched
soldier whom I did not stay to see.  He has been re-
habilitated, however, by an age which does not fear
the imputation of paradox, and a marble statue of
him ornaments the street in front of his house.  To
interpret him according to this image - a womanish
figure in a long robe and a turban, with big bare arms
and a dramatic pose - would be to think of him as a
kind of truculent sultana.  He wore the dress of his
period, but his spirit was very modern; he was a Van-
derbilt or a Rothschild of the fifteenth century.  He
supplied the ungrateful Charles VII. with money to pay
the troops who, under the heroic Maid, drove the
English from French soil.  His house, which to-day is
used as a Palais de Justice, appears to have been re-
garded at the time it was built very much as the resi-
dence of Mr. Vanderbilt is regarded in New York to-day.
It stands on the edge of the hill on which most of the
town is planted, so that, behind, it plunges down to a
lower level, and, if you approach it on that side, as I
did, to come round to the front of it, you have to
ascend a longish flight of steps.  The back, of old,
must have formed a portion of the city wall; at any
rate, it offers to view two big towers, which Joanne
says were formerly part of the defence of Bourges.
From the lower level of which I speak - the square in
front of the post-office - the palace of Jacques Coeur
looks very big and strong and feudal; from the upper
street, in front of it, it looks very handsome and deli-
cate.  To this street it presents two stories and a con-
siderable length of facade; and it has, both within and
without, a great deal of curious and beautiful detail.
Above the portal, in the stonework, are two false win-
dows, in which two figures, a man and a woman, ap-
parently household servants, are represented, in sculp-
ture, as looking down into the street.  The effect is
homely, yet grotesque, and the figures are sufficiently
living to make one commiserate them for having been
condemned, in so dull a town, to spend several cen-
turies at the window.  They appear to be watching for
the return of their master, who left his beautiful house
one morning and never came back.

The history of Jacques Coeur, which has been
written by M. Pierre Clement, in a volume crowned
by the French Academy, is very wonderful and in-
teresting, but I have no space to go into it here.
There is no more curious example, and few more
tragical, of a great fortune crumbling from one day to
the other, or of the antique superstition that the gods
grow jealous of human success.  Merchant, million-
naire, banker, ship-owner, royal favorite, and minister
of finance, explorer of the East and monopolist of the
glittering trade between that quarter of the globe and
his own, great capitalist who had anticipated the
brilliant operations of the present time, he expiated
his prosperity by poverty, imprisonment, and torture.
The obscure points in his career have been elucidated
by M. Clement, who has drawn, moreover, a very vivid
picture of the corrupt and exhausted state of France
during the middle of the fifteenth century.  He has
shown that the spoliation of the great merchant was a
deliberately calculated act, and that the king sacrificed
him without scruple or shame to the avidity of a sin-
gularly villanous set of courtiers.  The whole story is
an extraordinary picture of high-handed rapacity, -
the crudest possible assertion of the right of the stronger.
The victim was stripped of his property, but escaped
with his life, made his way out of France, and, betak-
ing himself to Italy, offered his services to the Pope.
It is proof of the consideration that he enjoyed in
Europe, and of the variety of his accomplishments,
that Calixtus III. should have appointed him to take
command of a fleet which his Holiness was fitting out
against the Turks.  Jacques Coeur, however, was not
destined to lead it to victory.  He died shortly after
the expedition had started, in the island of Chios, in
1456.  The house of Bourges, his native place, testifies
in some degree to his wealth and splendor, though it
has in parts that want of space which is striking in
many of the buildings of the Middle Ages.  The court,
indeed, is on a large scale, ornamented with turrets
and arcades, with several beautiful windows, and with
sculptures inserted in the walls, representing the various
sources of the great fortune of the owner.  M. Pierre
Clement describes this part of the house as having
been of an "incomparable richesse," - an estimate of its
charms which seems slightly exaggerated to-day.  There
is, however, something delicate and familiar in the
bas-reliefs of which I have spoken, little scenes of
agriculture and industry, which show, that the pro-
prietor was not ashamed of calling attention to his
harvests and enterprises.  To-day we should question
the taste of such allusions, even in plastic form, in
the house of a "merchant prince" (say in the Fifth
Avenue).  Why is it, therefore, that these quaint little
panels at Bourges do not displease us?  It is perhaps
because things very ancient never, for some mysterious
reason, appear vulgar.  This fifteenth-century million-
naire, with his palace, his egotistical sculptures, may
have produced that impression on some critical spirits
of his own day.

The portress who showed me into the building was
a dear litte old woman, with the gentlest, sweetest,
saddest face - a little white, aged face, with dark,
pretty eyes - and the most considerate manner.  She
took me up into an upper hall, where there were a
couple of curious chimney-pieces and a fine old oaken
roof, the latter representing the hollow of a long boat.
There is a certain oddity in a native of Bourges - an
inland town if there ever was one, without even a river
(to call a river) to encourage nautical ambitions - hav-
ing found his end as admiral of a fleet; but this boat-
shaped roof, which is extremely graceful and is re-
peated in another apartment, would suggest that the
imagination of  Jacques Coeur was fond of riding the
waves.  Indeed, as he trafficked in Oriental products
and owned many galleons, it is probable that he was
personally as much at home in certain Mediterranean
ports as in the capital of the pastoral Berry.  If, when
he looked at the ceilings of his mansion, he saw his
boats upside down, this was only a suggestion of the
shortest way of emptying them of their treasures.  He
is presented in person above one of the great stone
chimney-pieces, in company with his wife, Macee de
Leodepart, - I like to write such an extraordinary name.
Carved in white stone, the two sit playing at chess at
an open window, through which they appear to give
their attention much more to the passers-by than to
the game.  They are also exhibited in other attitudes;
though I do not recognize them in the composition on
top of one of the fireplaces which represents the battle-
ments of a castle, with the defenders (little figures be-
tween the crenellations) hurling down missiles with a
great deal of fury and expression.  It would have been
hard to believe that the man who surrounded himself
with these friendly and humorous devices had been
guilty of such wrong-doing as to call down the heavy
hand of justice.

It is a curious fact, however, that Bourges contains
legal associations of a purer kind than the prosecution
of Jacques Coeur, which, in spite of the rehabilitations
of history, can hardly be said yet to have terminated,
inasmuch as the law-courts of the city are installed in
his quondam residence.  At a short distance from it
stands the Hotel Cujas, one of the curiosities of Bourges
and the habitation for many years of the great juris-
consult who revived in the sixteenth century the study
of the Roman law, and professed it during the close
of his life in the university of the capital of Berry.
The learned Cujas had, in spite of his sedentary pur-
suits, led a very wandering life; he died at Bourges in
the year 1590.  Sedentary pursuits is perhaps not
exactly what I should call them, having read in the
"Biographie Universelle" (sole source of my knowledge
of the renowned Cujacius) that his usual manner of
study was to spread himself on his belly on the floor.
He did not sit down, he lay down; and the "Biographie
Universelle" has (for so grave a work) an amusing pic-
ture of the short, fat, untidy scholar dragging himself
_a plat ventre_ across his room, from one pile of books
to the other.  The house in which these singular gym-
nastics took place, and which is now the headquarters
of the gendarmerie, is one of the most picturesque at
Bourges.  Dilapidated and discolored, it has a charm-
ing Renaissance front.  A high wall separates it from
the street, and on this wall, which is divided by a
large open gateway, are perched two overhanging
turrets.  The open gateway admits you to the court,
beyond which the melancholy mansion erects itself,
decorated also with turrets, with fine old windows, and
with a beautiful tone of faded red brick and rusty
stone.  It is a charming encounter for a provincial by-
street; one of those accidents in the hope of which
the traveller with a propensity for sketching (whether
on a little paper block or on the tablets of his brain)
decides to turn a corner at a venture.  A brawny gen-
darme, in his shirt-sleeves, was polishing his boots in
the court; an ancient, knotted vine, forlorn of its
clusters, hung itself over a doorway, and dropped its
shadow on the rough grain of the wall.  The place
was very sketchable.  I am sorry to say, however, that
it was almost the only "bit."  Various other curious
old houses are supposed to exist at Bourges, and I
wandered vaguely about in search of them.  But I had
little success, and I ended by becoming sceptical.
Bourges is a _ville de province_ in the full force of the
term, especially as applied invidiously.  The streets,
narrow, tortuous, and dirty, have very wide cobble-
stones; the houses for the most part are shabby, with-
out local color.  The look of things is neither modern
nor antique, - a kind of mediocrity of middle age.
There is an enormous number of blank walls, - walls
of gardens, of courts, of private houses - that avert
themselves from the street, as if in natural chagrin at
there being so little to see.  Round about is a dull,
flat, featureless country, on which the magnificent
cathedral looks down.  There is a peculiar dulness
and ugliness in a French town of this type, which, I
must immediately add, is not the most frequent one.
In Italy, everything has a charm, a color, a grace; even
desolation and _ennui_.  In England a cathedral city
may be sleepy, but it is pretty sure to be mellow.  In
the course of six weeks spent _en province_, however, I
saw few places that had not more expression than
Bourges.

I went back to the cathedral; that, after all, was
a feature.  Then I returned to my hotel, where it was
time to dine, and sat down, as usual, with the _commis-
voyageurs_, who cut their bread on their thumb and
partook of every course; and after this repast I re-
paired for a while to the cafe, which occupied a part
of the basement of the inn and opened into its court.
This cafe was a friendly, homely, sociable spot, where
it seemed the habit of the master of the establishment
to _tutoyer_ his customers, and the practice of the cus-
tomers to _tutoyer_ the waiter.  Under these circum-
stances the waiter of course felt justified in sitting
down at the same table with a gentleman who had
come in and asked him for writing materials.  He
served this gentleman with a horrible little portfolio,
covered with shiny black cloth and accompanied with
two sheets of thin paper, three wafers, and one of
those instruments of torture which pass in France for
pens, - these being the utensils invariably evoked by
such a request; and then, finding himself at leisure,
he placed himself opposite and began to write a letter
of his own.  This trifling incident reminded me afresh
that France is a democratic country.  I think I re-
ceived an admonition to the same effect from the free,
familiar way in which the game of whist was going
on just behind me.  It was attended with a great deal
of noisy pleasantry, flavored every now and then with
a dash of irritation.  There was a young man of whom
I made a note; he was such a beautiful specimen of
his class.  Sometimes he was very facetious, chatter-
ing, joking, punning, showing off; then, as the game
went on and he lost, and had to pay the _consomma-
tion_, he dropped his amiability, slanged his partner,
declared he wouldn't play any more, and went away
in a fury.  Nothing could be more perfect or more
amusing than the contrast.  The manner of the
whole affair was such as, I apprehend, one would not
have seen among our English-speaking people; both
the jauntiness of the first phase and the petulance of
the second.  To hold the balance straight, however,
I may remark that if the men were all fearful "cads,"
they were, with their cigarettes and their inconsistency,
less heavy, less brutal, than our dear English-speaking
cad; just as the bright little cafe where a robust mater-
familias, doling out sugar and darning a stocking, sat
in her place under the mirror behind the _comptoir_,
was a much more civilized spot than a British public-
house, or a "commercial room," with pipes and whiskey,
or even than an American saloon.



XIII.

It is very certain that when I left Tours for Le
Mans it was a journey and not an excursion; for I
had no intention of coming back.  The question, in-
deed, was to get away, - no easy matter in France, in
the early days of October, when the whole _jeunesse_
of the country is going back to school.  It is accom-
panied, apparently, with parents and grandparents,
and it fills the trains with little pale-faced _lyceens_,
who gaze out of the windows with a longing, lingering
air, not unnatural on the part of small members of a
race in which life is intense, who are about to be
restored to those big educative barracks that do such
violence to our American appreciation of the oppor-
tunities of boyhood.  The train stopped every five
minutes; but, fortunately, the country was charming, -
hilly and bosky, eminently good-humored, and dotted
here and there with a smart little chateau.  The old
capital of the province of the Maine, which has given
its name to a great American State, is a fairly interest-
ing town, but I confess that I found in it less than I
expected to admire.  My expectations had doubtless
been my own fault; there is no particular reason why
Le Mans should fascinate.  It stands upon a hill,
indeed, - a much better hill than the gentle swell of
Bourges.  This hill, however, is not steep in all direc-
tions; from the railway, as I arrived, it was not even
perceptible.  Since I am making comparisons, I may
remark that, on the other hand, the Boule d'Or at Le
Mans is an appreciably better inn than the Boule d'Or
at Bourges.  It looks out upon a small market-place
which has a certain amount of character and seems
to be slipping down the slope on which it lies, though
it has in the middle an ugly _halle_, or circular market-
house, to keep it in position.  At Le Mans, as at
Bourges, my first business was with the cathedral, to
which, I lost no time in directing my steps.  It suf-
fered by juxta-position to the great church I had seen
a few days before; yet it has some noble features.  It
stands on the edge of the eminence of the town, which
falls straight away on two sides of it, and makes a
striking mass, bristling behind, as you see it from
below, with rather small but singularly numerous flying
buttresses.  On my way to it I happened to walk
through the one street which contains a few ancient
and curious houses, - a very crooked and untidy lane,
of really mediaeval aspect, honored with the denomina-
tion of the Grand' Rue.  Here is the house of Queen
Berengaria, - an absurd name, as the building is of a
date some three hundred years later than the wife of
Richard Coeur de Lion, who has a sepulchral monu-
ment in the south aisle of the cathedral.  The structure
in question - very sketchable, if the sketcher could get
far enough away from it - is an elaborate little dusky
facade, overhanging the street, ornamented with panels
of stone, which are covered with delicate Renaissance
sculpture.  A fat old woman, standing in the door of
a small grocer's shop next to it, - a most gracious old
woman, with a bristling moustache and a charming
manner, - told me what the house was, and also in-
dicated to me a rotten-looking brown wooden mansion,
in the same street, nearer the cathedral, as the Maison
Scarron.  The author of the "Roman Comique," and
of a thousand facetious verses, enjoyed for some years,
in the early part of his life, a benefice in the cathedral
of Le Mans, which gave him a right to reside in one
of the canonical houses.  He was rather an odd canon,
but his history is a combination of oddities.  He wooed
the comic muse from the arm-chair of a cripple, and
in the same position - he was unable even to go down
on his knees - prosecuted that other suit which made
him the first husband of a lady of whom Louis XIV.
was to be the second.  There was little of comedy in
the future Madame de Maintenon; though, after all,
there was doubtless as much as there need have been
in the wife of a poor man who was moved to compose
for his tomb such an epitaph as this, which I quote
from the "Biographie Universelle":-

	"Celui qui cy maintenant dort,
	Fit plus de pitie que d'envie,
	Et souffrit mille fois la mort,
	Avant que de perdre la vie.
	Passant, ne fais icy de bruit,
	Et garde bien qu'il ne s'eveille,
	Car voicy la premiere nuit,
	Que le Pauvre Scarron sommeille."



There is rather a quiet, satisfactory _place_ in front
of the cathedral, with some good "bits" in it; notably
a turret at the angle of one of the towers, and a very
fine, steep-roofed dwelling, behind low walls, which it
overlooks, with a tall iron gate.  This house has two
or three little pointed towers, a big, black, precipitous
roof, and a general air of having had a history.  There
are houses which are scenes, and there are houses
which are only houses.  The trouble with the domestic
architecture of the United States is that it is not
scenic, thank Heaven! and the good fortune of an old
structure like the turreted mansion on the hillside of
Le Mans is that it is not simply a house.  It is a per-
son, as it were, as well.  It would be well, indeed, if
it might have communicated a little of its personality
to the front of the cathedral, which has none of its
own.  Shabby, rusty, unfinished, this front has a
romanesque portal, but nothing in the way of a tower.
One sees from without, at a glance, the peculiarity of
the church, - the disparity between the romanesque
nave, which is small and of the twelfth century, and
the immense and splendid transepts and choir, of a
period a hundred years later.  Outside, this end of
the church rises far above the nave, which looks merely
like a long porch leading to it, with a small and curious
romanesque porch in its own south flank.  The transepts,
shallow but very lofty, display to the spectators in the
_place_ the reach of their two clere-story windows, which
occupy, above, the whole expanse of the wall.  The
south transept terminates in a sort of tower, which is
the only one of which the cathedral can boast.  Within,
the effect of the choir is superb; it is a church in it-
self, with the nave simply for a point of view.  As I
stood there, I read in my Murray that it has the stamp
of the date of the perfection of pointed Gothic, and I
found nothing to object to the remark.  It suffers little
by confrontation with Bourges, and, taken in itself,
seems to me quite as fine.  A passage of double aisles
surrounds it, with the arches that divide them sup-
ported on very thick round columns, not clustered.
There are twelve chapels in this passage, and a charm-
ing little lady chapel, filled with gorgeous old glass.
The sustained height of this almost detached choir is
very noble; its lightness and grace, its soaring sym-
metry, carry the eye up to places in the air from
which it is slow to descend.  Like Tours, like Chartres,
like Bourges (apparently like all the French cathedrals,
and unlike several English ones) Le Mans is rich in
splendid glass.  The beautiful upper windows of the
choir make, far aloft, a sort of gallery of pictures,
blooming with vivid color.  It is the south transept
that contains the formless image - a clumsy stone
woman lying on her back - which purports to represent
Queen Berengaria aforesaid.

The view of the cathedral from the rear is, as usual,
very fine.  A small garden behind it masks its base;
but you descend the hill to a large _place de foire_, ad-
jacent to a fine old pubic promenade which is known
as Les Jacobins, a sort of miniature Tuileries, where I
strolled for a while in rectangular alleys, destitute of
herbage, and received a deeper impression of vanished
things.  The cathedral, on the pedestal of its hill, looks
considerably farther than the fair-ground and the
Jacobins, between the rather bare poles of whose
straightly planted trees you may admire it at a con-
venient distance.  I admired it till I thought I should
remember it (better than the event has proved), and
then I wandered away and looked at another curious
old church, Notre-Dame-de-la-Couture.  This sacred
edifice made a picture for ten minutes, but the picture
has faded now.  I reconstruct a yellowish-brown facade,
and a portal fretted with early sculptures; but the
details have gone the way of all incomplete sensations.
After you have stood awhile in the choir of the
cathedral, there is no sensation at Le Mans that goes
very far.  For some reason not now to be traced, I
had looked for more than this.  I think the reason
was to some extent simply in the name of the place;
for names, on the whole, whether they be good reasons
or not, are very active ones.  Le Mans, if I am not
mistaken, has a sturdy, feudal sound; suggests some-
thing dark and square, a vision of old ramparts and
gates.  Perhaps I had been unduly impressed by the
fact, accidentally revealed to me, that Henry II., first
of the English Plantagenets, was born there.  Of course
it is easy to assure one's self in advance, but does it
not often happen that one had rather not be assured?
There is a pleasure sometimes in running the risk of
disappointment.  I took mine, such as it was, quietly
enough, while I sat before dinner at the door of one
of the cafes in the market-place with a _bitter-et-curacao_
(invaluable pretext at such an hour!) to keep me com-
pany.  I remember that in this situation there came
over me an impression which both included and ex-
cluded all possible disappointments.  The afternoon
was warm and still; the air was admirably soft.  The
good Manceaux, in little groups and pairs, were seated
near me; my ear was soothed by the fine shades of
French enunciation, by the detached syllables of that
perfect tongue.  There was nothing in particular in
the prospect to charm; it was an average French view.
Yet I felt a charm, a kind of sympathy, a sense of the
completeness of French life and of the lightness and
brightness of the social air, together with a desire to
arrive at friendly judgments, to express a positive
interest.  I know not why this transcendental mood
should have descended upon me then and there; but
that idle half-hour in front of the cafe, in the mild
October afternoon, suffused with human sounds, is
perhaps the most definite thing I brought away from
Le Mans.



XIV.

I am shocked at finding, just after this noble de-
claration of principles that in a little note-book which
at that time I carried about with me, the celebrated
city of Angers is denominated a "sell."  I reproduce
this vulgar term with the greatest hesitation, and only
because it brings me more quickly to my point.  This
point is that Angers belongs to the disagreeable class
of old towns that have been, as the English say, "done
up."  Not the oldness, but the newness, of the place
is what strikes the sentimental tourist to-day, as he
wanders with irritation along second-rate boulevards,
looking vaguely about him for absent gables.  "Black
Angers," in short, is a victim of modern improvements,
and quite unworthy of its admirable name, - a name
which, like that of Le Mans, had always had, to my
eyes, a highly picturesque value.  It looks particularly
well on the Shakspearean page (in "King John"), where
we imagine it uttered (though such would not have
been the utterance of the period) with a fine old in-
sular accent.  Angers figures with importance in early
English history: it was the capital city of the Plantagenet
race, home of that Geoffrey of Anjou who married, as
second husband, the Empress Maud, daughter of
Henry I. and competitor of Stephen, and became father
of Henry II., first of the Plantagenet kings, born, as we
have seen, at Le Mans.  The facts create a natural
presumption that Angers will look historic; I turned
them over in my mind as I travelled in the train from
Le Mans, through a country that was really pretty, and
looked more like the usual English than like the usual
French scenery, with its fields cut up by hedges and
a considerable rotundity in its trees.  On my way
from the station to the hotel, however, it became plain
that I should lack a good pretext for passing that night
at the Cheval Blanc; I foresaw that I should have con-
tented myself before th e end of the day.  I remained
at the White Horse only long enough to discover that
it was an exceptionally good provincial inn, one of the
best that I encountered during six weeks spent in
these establishments.

"Stupidly and vulgarly rnodernized," - that is an-
other phrase from my note-book, and note-books are
not obliged to be reasonable.  "There are some narrow
and tortuous-streets, with a few curious old houses," - I
continue to quote; "there is a castle, of which the ex-
terior is most extraordinary, and there is a cathedral
of moderate interest.  It is fair to say that the
Chateau d'Angers is by itself worth a pilgrimage; the
only drawback is that you have seen it in a quarter of
an hour.  You cannot do more than look at it, and
one good look does your business.  It has no beauty,
no grace, no detail, nothing that charms or detains
you; it is simply very old and very big, - so big and
so old that this simple impression is enough, and it
takes its place in your recollections as a perfect specimen
of a superannuated stronghold.  It stands at one end
of the town, surrounded by a huge, deep moat, which
originally contained the waters of the Maine, now
divided from it by a quay.  The water-front of Angers
is poor, - wanting in color and in movement; and there
is always an effect of perversity in a town lying near a
great river and, yet not upon it.  The Loire is a few
miles off; but Angers contents itself with a meagre
affluent of that stream.  The effect was naturally much
better when the huge, dark mass of the castle, with its
seventeen prodigious towers, rose out of the protecting
flood.  These towers are of tremendous girth and soli-
dity; they are encircled with great bands, or hoops, of
white stone, and are much enlarged at the base.
Between them hang vast curtains of infinitely old-look-
ing masonry, apparently a dense conglomeration of
slate, the material of which the town was originally
built (thanks to rich quarries in the neighborhood),
and to which it owed its appellation of the Black.
There are no windows, no apertures, and to-day no
battlements nor roofs.  These accessories were removed
by Henry III., so that, in spite of its grimness and
blackness, the place has not even the interest of look-
ing like a prison; it being, as I supposed, the essence
of a prison not to be open to the sky.  The only
features of the enormous structure are the black, sombre
stretches and protrusions of wall, the effect of which,
on so large a scale, is strange and striking.  Begun by
Philip Augustus, and terminated by St. Louis, the
Chateau d'Angers has of course a great deal of history.
The luckless Fouquet, the extravagant minister of
finance of Louis XIV., whose fall from the heights of
grandeur was so sudden and complete, was confined
here in 1661, just after his arrest, which had taken
place at Nantes.  Here, also, Huguenots and Vendeans
have suffered effective captivity.

I walked round the parapet which protects the
outer edge of the moat (it is all up hill, and the moat
deepens and deepens), till I came to the entrance
which faces the town, and which is as bare and
strong as the rest.  The concierge took me into the
court; but there was nothing to see.  The place is
used as a magazine of ammunition, and the yard con-
tains a multitude of ugly buildings.  The only thing
to do is to walk round the bastions for the view; but
at the moment of my visit the weather was thick, and
the bastions began and ended with themselves.  So I
came out and took another look at the big, black ex-
terior, buttressed with white-ribbed towers, and per-
ceived that a desperate sketcher might extract a
picture from it, especially if he were to bring in, as
they say, the little black bronze statue of the good
King Rene (a weak production of David d'Angers),
which, standing within sight, ornaments the melancholy
faubourg.  He would do much better, however, with
the very striking old timbered house (I suppose of the
fifteenth century) which is called the Maison d'Adam,
and is easily the first specimen at Angers of the
domestic architecture of the past.  This admirable
house, in the centre of the town, gabled, elaborately
timbered, and much restored, is a really imposing
monument.  The basement is occupied by a linen-
draper, who flourishes under the auspicious sign of
the Mere de Famille; and above his shop the tall
front rises in five overhanging stories.  As the house
occupies the angle of a little _place_, this front is double,
and the black beams and wooden supports, displayed
over a large surface and carved and interlaced, have
a high picturesqueness.  The Maison d'Adam is quite
in the grand style, and I am sorry to say I failed to
learn what history attaches to its name.  If I spoke just
above of the cathedral as "moderate," I suppose I
should beg its pardon; for this serious charge was
probably prompted by the fact that it consists only of
a nave, without side aisles.  A little reflection now
convinces me that such a form is a distinction; and,
indeed, I find it mentioned, rather inconsistently, in
my note-book, a little further on, as "extremely simple
and grand."  The nave is spoken of in the same
volume as "big, serious, and Gothic," though the choir
and transepts are noted as very shallow.  But it is not
denied that the air of the whole thing is original and
striking; and it would therefore appear, after all, that
the cathedral of Angers, built during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, is a sufficiently honorable church;
the more that its high west front, adorned with a very
primitive Gothic portal, supports two elegant tapering
spires, between which, unfortunately, an ugly modern
pavilion has been inserted.

I remember nothing else at Angers but the curious
old Cafe Serin, where, after I had had my dinner at
the inn, I went and waited for the train which, at nine
o'clock in the evening, was to convey me, in a couple
of hours, to Nantes, - an establishment remarkable for
its great size and its air of tarnished splendor, its
brown gilding and smoky frescos, as also for the fact
that it was hidden away on the second floor of an un-
assuming house in an unilluminated street.  It hardly
seemed a place where you would drop in; but when
once you had found it, it presented itself, with the
cathedral, the castle, and the Maison d'Adam, as one
of the historical monuments of Angers.



XV.

If I spent two nights at Nantes, it was for reasons
of convenience rather than of sentiment; though, in-
deed, I spent them in a big circular room which had
a stately, lofty, last-century look, - a look that con-
soled me a little for the whole place being dirty.  The
high, old-fashioned, inn (it had a huge, windy _porte-
cochere_, and you climbed a vast black stone staircase
to get to your room) looked out on a dull square, sur-
rounded with other tall houses, and occupied on one
side by the theatre, a pompous building, decorated
with columns and statues of the muses.  Nantes be-
longs to the class of towns which are always spoken
of as "fine," and its position near the mouth of the
Loire gives it, I believe, much commercial movement.
It is a spacious, rather regular city, looking, in the
parts that I traversed, neither very fresh nor very
venerable.  It derives its principal character from the
handsome quays on the Loire, which are overhung
with tall eighteenth-century houses (very numerous,
too, in the other streets), - houses, with big _entresols_
marked by arched windows, classic pediments, balcony-
rails of fine old iron-work.  These features exist in
still better form at Bordeaux; but, putting Bordeaux
aside, Nantes is quite architectural.  The view up and
down the quays has the cool, neutral tone of color
that one finds so often in French water-side places, -
the bright grayness which is the tone of French land-
scape art.  The whole city has rather a grand, or at
least an eminently well-established air.  During a day
passed in it of course I had time to go to the Musee;
the more so that I have a weakness for provincial
museums, - a sentiment that depends but little on the
quality of the collection.  The pictures may be bad,
but the place is often curious; and, indeed, from bad
pictures, in certain moods of the mind, there is a
degree of entertainment to be derived.  If they are
tolerably old they are often touching; but they must
have a relative antiquity, for I confess I can do no-
thing with works of art of which the badness is of
receat origin.  The cool, still, empty chambers in
which indifferent collections are apt to be preserved,
the red brick tiles, the diffused light, the musty odor,
the mementos around you of dead fashions, the snuffy
custodian in a black skull cap, who pulls aside a
faded curtain to show you the lustreless gem of the
museum, - these things have a mild historical quality,
and the sallow canvases after all illustrate something.
Many of those in the museum of Nantes illustrate the
taste of a successful warrior; having been bequeathed
to the city by Napoleon's marshal, Clarke (created
Duc de Feltre).  In addition to these there is the
usual number of specimens of the contemporary French
school, culled from the annual Salons and presented
to the museum by the State.  Wherever the traveller
goes, in France, he is reminded of this very honorable
practice, - the purchase by the Government of a cer-
tain number of "pictures of the year," which are pre-
sently distributed in the provinces.  Governments suc-
ceed each other and bid for success by different
devices; but the "patronage of art" is a plank, as we
should say here, in every platform.  The works of art
are often ill-selected, - there is an official taste which
you immediately recognize, - but the custom is essen-
tially liberal, and a government which should neglect
it would be felt to be painfully common.  The only
thing in this particular Musee that I remember is a
fine portrait of a woman, by Ingres, - very flat and
Chinese, but with an interest of line and a great deal
of style.

There is a castle at Nantes which resembles in
some degree that of Angers, but has, without, much
less of the impressiveness of great size, and, within,
much more interest of detail.  The court contains the
remains of a very fine piece of late Gothic, a tall ele-
gant building of the sixteenth century.  The chateau
is naturally not wanting in history.  It was the residence
of the old Dukes of Brittany, and was brought, with
the rest of the province, by the Duchess Anne, the last
representative of that race, as her dowry, to Charles
VIII.  I read in the excellent hand-book of M. Joanne
that it has been visited by almost every one of the
kings of France, from Louis XI. downward; and also
that it has served as a place of sojourn less voluntary
on the part of various other distinguished persons,
from the horrible Merechal de Retz, who in the fifteenth
century was executed at Nantes for the murder of a
couple of hundred young children, sacrificed in abomin-
able rites, to the ardent Duchess of Berry, mother of
the Count of Chambord, who was confined there for a
few hours in 1832, just after her arrest in a neigh-
boring house.  I looked at the house in question - you
may see it from the platform in front of the chateau
- and tried to figure to myself that embarrassing scene.
The duchess, after having unsuccessfully raised the
standard of revolt (for the exiled Bourbons), in the
legitimist Bretagne, and being "wanted," as the phrase
is, by the police of Louis Philippe, had hidden herself
in a small but loyal house at Nantes, where, at the end
of five months of seclusion, she was betrayed, for gold,
to the austere M. Guizot, by one of her servants, an
Alsatian Jew named Deutz.  For many hours before
her capture she had been compressed into an inter-
stice behind a fireplace, and by the time she was
drawn forth into the light she had been ominously
scorched.  The man who showed me the castle in-
dicated also another historic spot, a house with little
_tourelles_, on the Quai de la Fosse, in which Henry IV.
is said to have signed the Edict of Nantes.  I am,
however, not in a position to answer for this pedigree.

There is another point in the history of the fine
old houses which command the Loire, of which, I sup-
pose, one may be tolerably sure; that is, their having,
placid as they stand there to-day, looked down on the
horrors of the Terror of 1793, the bloody reign of the
monster Carrier and his infamous _noyades_.  The most
hideous episode of the Revolution was enacted at
Nantes, where hundreds of men and women, tied to-
gether in couples, were set afloat upon rafts and sunk
to the bottom of the Loire.  The tall eighteenth-century
house, full of the _air noble_, in France always reminds
me of those dreadful years, - of the street-scenes of the
Revolution.  Superficially, the association is incongru-
ous, for nothing could be more formal and decorous
than the patent expression of these eligible residences.
But whenever I have a vision of prisoners bound on
tumbrels that jolt slowly to the scaffold, of heads car-
ried on pikes, of groups of heated _citoyennes_ shaking
their fists at closed coach-windows, I see in the back-
ground the well-ordered features of the architecture of
the period, - the clear gray stone, the high pilasters,
the arching lines of the _entresol_, the classic pediment,
the slate-covered attic.  There is not much architecture
at Nantes except the domestic.  The cathedral, with a
rough west front and stunted towers, makes no im-
pression as you approach it.  It is true that it does its
best to recover its reputation as soon as you have
passed the threshold.  Begun in 1434 and finished
about the end of the fifteenth century, as I discover in
Murray, it has a magnificent nave, not of great length,
but of extraordinary height and lightness.  On the
other hand, it has no choir whatever.  There is much
entertainment in France in seeing what a cathedral
will take upon itself to possess or to lack; for it is
only the smaller number that have the full complement
of features.  Some have a very fine nave and no choir;
others a very fine choir and no nave.  Some have a
rich outside and nothing within; others a very blank
face and a very glowing heart.  There are a hundred
possibilities of poverty and wealth, and they make the
most unexpected combinations.

The great treasure of Nantes is the two noble se-
pulchral monuments which occupy either transept, and
one of which has (in its nobleness) the rare distinction
of being a production of our own time.  On the south
side stands the tomb of Francis II., the last of the
Dukes of Brittany, and of his second wife, Margaret
of Foix, erected in 1507 by their daughter Anne, whom
we have encountered already at the Chateau de Nantes,
where she was born; at Langeais, where she married
her first husband; at Amboise, where she lost him; at
Blois, where she married her second, the "good"
Louis XII., who divorced an impeccable spouse to
make room for her, and where she herself died.  Trans-
ferred to the cathedral from a demolished convent,
this monument, the masterpiece of Michel Colomb,
author of the charming tomb of the children of Charles
VIII. and the aforesaid Anne, which we admired at
Saint Gatien of Tours, is one of the most brilliant
works of the French Renaissance.  It has a splendid
effect, and is in perfect preservation.  A great table of
black marble supports the reclining figures of the duke
and duchess, who lie there peacefully and majestically,
in their robes and crowns, with their heads each on a
cushion, the pair of which are supported, from behind,
by three, charming little kneeling angels; at the foot of
the quiet couple are a lion and a greyhound, with
heraldic devices.  At each of the angles of the table
is a large figure in white marble of a woman elaborately
dressed, with a symbolic meaning, and these figures,
with their contemporary faces and clothes, which give
them the air of realistic portraits, are truthful and liv-
ing, if not remarkably beautiful.  Round the sides of
the tomb are small images of the apostles.  There is a
kind of masculine completeness in the work, and a
certain robustness of taste.

In nothing were the sculptors of the Renaissance
more fortunate than in being in advance of us with
their tombs: they have left us noting to say in regard
to the great final contrast, - the contrast between the
immobility of death and the trappings and honors that
survive.  They expressed in every way in which it was
possible to express it the solemnity, of their conviction
that the Marble image was a part of the personal
greatness of the defunct, and the protection, the re-
demption, of his memory.  A modern tomb, in com-
parison, is a sceptical affair; it insists too little on the
honors.  I say this in the face of the fact that one has
only to step across the cathedral of Nantes to stand in
the presence of one of the purest and most touching
of modern tombs.  Catholic Brittany has erected in
the opposite transept a monument to one of the most
devoted of her sons, General de Lamoriciere, the de-
fender of the Pope, the vanquished of Castelfidardo.
This noble work, from the hand of Paul Dubois, one
of the most interesting of that new generation of sculp-
tors who have revived in France an art of which our
overdressed century had begun to despair, has every
merit but the absence of a certain prime feeling.  It
is the echo of an earlier tune, - an echo with a beauti-
ful cadence.  Under a Renaissance canopy of white
marble, elaborately worked with arabesques and che-
rubs, in a relief so low that it gives the work a cer-
tain look of being softened and worn by time, lies the
body of the Breton soldier, with, a crucifix clasped to
his breast and a shroud thrown over his body.  At
each of the angles sits a figure in bronze, the two best
of which, representing Charity and Military Courage,
had given me extraordinary pleasure when they were
exhibited (in the clay) in the Salon of 1876.  They
are admirably cast, and they have a certain greatness:
the one, a serene, robust young mother, beautiful in
line and attitude; the other, a lean and vigilant young
man, in a helmet that overshadows his serious eyes,
resting an outstretched arm, an admirable military
member, upon the hilt of a sword.  These figures con-
tain abundant assurance that M. Paul Dubois has been
attentive to Michael Angelo, whom we have all heard
called a splendid example but a bad model.  The
visor-shadowed face of his warrior is more or less a
reminiscence of the figure on the tomb of Lorenzo de'
Medici at Florence; but it is doubtless none the worse
for that.  The interest of the work of Paul Dubois is
its peculiar seriousness, a kind of moral good faith
which is not the commonest feature of French art, and
which, united as it is in this case with exceeding
knowledge and a remarkable sense of form, produces
an impression, of deep refinement.  The whole monu-
ment is a proof of exquisitely careful study; but I am
not sure that this impression on the part of the spec-
tator is altogether a happy one.  It explains much of
its great beauty, and it also explains, perhaps, a little
of a certain weakness.  That word, however, is scarcely
in place; I only mean that M. Dubois has made a vi-
sible effort, which has been most fruitful.  Simplicity
is not always strength, and our complicated modern
genius contains treasures of intention.  This fathomless
modern element is an immense charm on the part of
M. Paul Dubois.  I am lost in admiration of the deep
aesthetic experience, the enlightenment of taste, re-
vealed by such work.  After that, I only hope that
Giuseppe Garibaldi may have a monument as fair.



XVI.

To go from Nantes to La Rochelle you travel
straight southward, across the historic _bocage_ of La
Vendee, the home of royalist bush-fighting.  The
country, which is exceedingly pretty, bristles with
copses, orchards, hedges, and with trees more spread-
ing and sturdy than the traveller is apt to deem the
feathery foliage of France.  It is true that as I pro-
ceeded it flattened out a good deal, so that for an
hour there was a vast featureless plain, which offered
me little entertainment beyond the general impression
that I was approaching the Bay of Biscay (from which,
in reality, I was yet far distant).  As we drew near
La Rochelle, however, the prospect brightened con-
siderably, and the railway kept its course beside a
charming little canal, or canalized river, bordered
with trees, and with small, neat, bright-colored, and
yet old-fashioned cottages and villas, which stood
back on the further side, behind small gardens, hedges,
painted palings, patches of turf.  The whole effect
was Dutch and delightful; and in being delightful,
though not in being Dutch, it prepared me for the
charms of La Rochelle, which from the moment I
entered it I perceived to be a fascinating little town,
a most original mixture of brightness and dulness.
Part of its brightness comes from its being extra-
ordinarily clean, - in which, after all, it _is_ Dutch; a
virtue not particularly noticeable at Bourges, Le Mans,
and Angers.  Whenever I go southward, if it be only
twenty miles, I begin to look out for the south, pre-
pared as I am to find the careless grace of those lati-
tudes even in things of which it may, be said that
they may be south of something, but are not southern.
To go from Boston to New York (in this state of
mind) is almost as soft a sensation as descending the
Italian side, of the Alps; and to go from New York to
Philadelphia is to enter a zone of tropical luxuriance
and warmth.  Given this absurd disposition, I could
not fail to flatter myself, on reaching La Rochelle,
that I was already in the Midi, and to perceive in
everything, in the language of the country, the _ca-
ractere meridional._  Really, a great many things had
a hint of it.  For that matter, it seems to me that to
arrive in the south at a bound - to wake up there, as
it were - would be a very imperfect pleasure.  The
full pleasure is to approach by stages and gradations;
to observe the successive shades of difference by
which it ceases to be the north.  These shades are
exceedingly fine, but your true south-lover has an eye
for them all.  If he perceive them at New York and
Philadelphia, - we imagine him boldly as liberated
from Boston, - how could he fail to perceive them at
La Rochelle?  The streets of  this dear little city are
lined with arcades, - good, big, straddling arcades of
stone, such as befit a land of hot summers, and which
recalled to me, not to go further, the dusky portions
of Bayonne.  It contains, moreover, a great wide
_place d'armes_, which looked for all the world like the
piazza of some dead Italian town, empty, sunny,
grass-grown, with a row of yellow houses overhanging
it, an unfrequented cafe, with a striped awning, a tall,
cold, florid, uninteresting cathedral of the eighteenth
century on one side, and on the other a shady walk,
which forms part of an old rampart.  I followed this
walk for some time, under the stunted trees, beside
the grass-covered bastions; it is very charming, wind-
ing and wandering, always with trees.  Beneath the
rampart is a tidal river, and on the other side, for a
long distance, the mossy walls of the immense garden
of a seminary.  Three hundred years ago, La Rochelle
was the great French stronghold of Protestantism; but
to-day it appears to be a'nursery of Papists.

The walk upon the rampart led me round to one
of the gatesi of the town, where I found some small
modern, fortifications and sundry red-legged soldiers,
and, beyond the fortifications, another shady walk, -
a _mail_, as the French say, as well as a _champ de
manoeuvre_, - on which latter expanse the poor little
red-legs were doing their exercise.  It was all very
quiet and very picturesque, rather in miniature; and
at once very tidy and a little out of repair.  This,
however, was but a meagre back-view of La Rochelle,
or poor side-view at best.  There are other gates than
the small fortified aperture just mentioned; one of
them, an old gray arch beneath a fine clock-tower, I
had passed through on my way from the station.
This picturesque Tour de l'Horloge separates the town
proper from the port; for beyond the old gray arch,
the place presents its bright, expressive little face to
the sea.  I had a charming walk about the harbor,
and along the stone piers and sea-walls that shut it
in.  This indeed, to take things in their order, was
after I had had my breakfast (which I took on arriv-
ing) and after I had been to the _hotel de ville_.  The
inn had a long narrow garden behind it, with some
very tall trees; and passing through this garden to a
dim and secluded _salle a manger_, buried in the heavy
shade, I had, while I sat at my repast, a feeling of
seclusion which amounted almost to a sense of in-
carceration.  I lost this sense, however, after I had
paid my bill, and went out to look for traces of the
famous siege, which is the principal title of La Rochelle
to renown.  I had come thither partly because I
thought it would be interesting to stand for a few
moments in so gallant a spot, and partly because, I
confess, I had a curiosity to see what had been the
starting-point of the Huguenot emigrants who founded
the town of New Rochelle in the State of New York,
a place in which I had passed certain memorable
hours.  It was strange to think, as I strolled through
the peaceful little port, that these quiet waters, during
the wars of religion, had swelled with a formidable
naval power.  The Rochelais had fleets and admirals,
and their stout little Protestant bottoms carried de-
fiance up and down.

To say that I found any traces of the siege would
be to misrepresent the taste for vivid whitewash by
which La Rochelle is distinguished to-day.  The only
trace is the dent in the marble top of the table on
which, in the _hotel de ville_, Jean Guiton, the mayor of
the city, brought down his dagger with an oath, when
in 1628 the vessels and regiments of Richelieu closed
about it on sea and land.  This terrible functionary
was the soul of the resistance; he held out from
February to October, in the midst of pestilence and
famine.  The whole episode has a brilliant place
among the sieges of history; it has been related a
hundred times, and I may only glance at it and pass.
I limit my ambition, in these light pages, to speaking
of those things of which I have personally received an
impression; and I have no such impression of the
defence of La Rochelle.  The hotel de ville is a
pretty little building, in the style of the Renaissance
of Francis I.; but it has left much of its interest in
the hands of the restorers.  It has been "done up"
without mercy; its natural place would be at Rochelle
the New.  A sort of battlemented curtain, flanked
with turrets, divides it from the street and contains
a low door (a low door in a high wall is always
felicitous), which admits you to an inner court, where
you discover the face of the building.  It has statues
set into it, and is raised upon a very low and very
deep arcade.  The principal function of the deferential
old portress who conducts you over the place is to call
your attention to the indented table of Jean Guiton;
but she shows you other objects of interest besides.
The interior is absolutely new and extremely sump-
tuous, abounding in tapestries, upholstery, morocco,
velvet, satin.  This is especially the case with a really
beautiful _grande salle_, where, surrdunded with the
most expensive upholstery, the mayor holds his official
receptions.  (So at least, said my worthy portress.)
The mayors of La Rochelle appear to have changed a
good deal since the days of the grim Guiton; but
these evidences of municipal splendor are interesting
for the light they throw on French manners.  Imagine
the mayor of an English or an American town of
twenty thousand inhabitants holding magisterial soirees
in the town-hall!  The said _grande salle_, which is un-
changed in form and its larger features, is, I believe,
the room in which the Rochelais debated as to whether
they should shut themselves up, and decided in the
affirmative.  The table and chair of Jean Guiton have
been restored, Iike everything else, and are very
elegant and coquettish pieces of furniture, - incongruous
relics of a season of starvation and blood.  I believe
that Protestantism is somewhat shrunken to-day at La
Rochelle, and has taken refuge mainly in. the _haute
societe_ and in a single place of worship.  There was
nothing particular to remind me of its supposed austerity
as, after leaving the hotel de ville, I walked along the
empty portions and cut out of the Tour de l'Horloge,
which I have already mentioned.  If I stopped and
looked up at this venerable monument, it was not to
ascertain the hour, for I foresaw that I should have
more time at La Rochelle than I knew what to do
with; but because its high, gray, weather-beaten face
was an obvious subject for a sketch.
The little port, which has two basins, and is ac-
cessible only to vessels of light tonnage, had a certain
gayety and as much local color as you please.  Fisher
folk of pictuesque type were strolling about, most
of them Bretons; several of the men with handsome,
simple faces, not at all brutal, and with a splendid
brownness, - the golden-brown color, on cheek and
beard, that you see on an old Venetian sail.  It was
a squally, showery day, with sudden drizzles of sun-
shine; rows of rich-toned fishing-smacks were drawn
up along the quays.  The harbor is effective to the
eye by reason of three battered old towers which, at
different points, overhang it and look infinitely weather-
washed and sea-silvered.  The most striking of these,
the Tour de la Lanterne, is a big gray mass, of the
fifteenth century, flanked with turrets and crowned
with a Gothic steeple.  I found it was called by the
people of the place the Tour des Quatre Sergents,
though I know not what connection it has with the
touching history of the four young sergeants of the
garrison of La Rochelle, who were arrested in 1821
as conspirators against the Government of the Bour-
bons, and executed, amid general indignation, in Paris
in the following year.  The quaint little walk, with
its label of Rue sur les Murs, to which one ascends
from beside the Grosse Horloge, leads to this curious
Tour de la Lanterne and passes under it.  This walk
has the top of the old town-wall, toward the sea, for
a parapet on one side, and is bordered on the other
with decent but irregular little tenements of fishermen,
where brown old women, whose caps are as white as
if they were painted, seem chiefly in possession.  In
this direction there is a very pretty stretch of shore,
out of the town, through the fortifications (which are
Vauban's, by the way); through, also, a diminutive
public garden or straggling shrubbery, which edges
the water and carries its stunted verdure as far as a
big Etablissernent des Bains.  It was too late in the
year to bathe, and the Etablissement had the bank-
rupt aspect which belongs to such places out of the
season; so I turned my back upon it, and gained, by
a circuit in the course of which there were sundry
water-side items to observe, the other side of the
cheery little port, where there is a long breakwater
and a still longer sea-wall, on which I walked awhile,
to inhale the strong, salt breath of the Bay of Biscay.
La Rochelle serves, in the months of July and August,
as a _station de bains_ for a modest provincial society;
and, putting aside the question of inns, it must be
charming on summer afternoons.



XVII.

It is an injustice to Poitiers to approach her by
night, as I did some three hours after leaving La
Rochelle; for what Poitiers has of best, as they would
say at Poitiers, is the appearance she presents to the
arriving stranger who puts his head out of the window
of the train.  I gazed into the gloom from such an
aperture before we got into the station, for I re-
membered the impression received on another occa-
sion; but I saw nothing save the universal night,
spotted here and there with an ugly railway lamp.
It was only as I departed, the following day, that I
assured myself that Poitiers still makes something of
the figure she ought on the summit of her consider-
able bill.  I have a kindness for any little group of
towers, any cluster of roofs and chimneys, that lift
themselves from an eminence over which a long road
ascends in zigzags; such a picture creates for the mo-
ment a presumption that you are in Italy, and even
leads you to believe that if you mount the winding
road you will come to an old town-wall, an expanse
of creviced brownness, and pass under a gateway sur-
mounted by the arms of a mediaeval despot.  Why
I should find it a pleasure, in France, to imagine my-
self in Italy, is more than I can say; the illusion has
never lasted long enough to be analyzed.  From the
bottom of its perch Poitiers looks large and high;
and indeed, the evening I reached it, the interminiable
climb of the omnibus of the hotel I had selected,
which I found at the station, gave me the measure of
its commanding position.  This hotel, "magnifique
construction ornee de statues," as the Guide-Joanne,
usually so reticent, takes the trouble to announce, has
an omnibus, and, I suppose, has statues, though I
didn't perceive them; but it has very little else save
immemorial accumulations of dirt.  It is magnificent,
if you will, but it is not even relatively proper; and
a dirty inn has always seemed to me the dirtiest of
human things, - it has so many opportunities to betray
itself.

Poiters covers a large space, and is as crooked
and straggling as you please; but these advantages are
not accompanied with any very salient features or any
great wealth of architecture.  Although there are few
picturesque houses, however, there are two or three
curious old churches.  Notre Dame la Grande, in the
market-place, a small romanesque structure of the
twelfth century, has a most interesting and venerable
exterior.  Composed, like all the churches of Poitiers,
of a light brown stone with a yellowish tinge, it is
covered with primitive but ingenious sculptures, and is
really an impressive monument.  Within, it has lately
been daubed over with the most hideous decorative
painting that was ever inflicted upon passive pillars
and indifferent vaults.  This battered yet coherent
little edifice has the touching look that resides in
everything supremely old: it has arrived at the age at
which such things cease to feel the years; the waves
of time have worn its edges to a kind of patient dul-
ness; there is something mild and smooth, like the
stillness, the deafness, of an octogenarian, even in its
rudeness of ornament, and it has become insensible
to differences of a century or two.  The cathedral
interested me much less than Our Lady the Great,
and I have not the spirit to go into statistics about it.
It is not statistical to say that the cathedral stands
half-way down the hill of Poitiers, in a quiet and
grass-grown _place_, with an approach of crooked lanes
and blank garden-walls, and that its most striking
dimension is the width of its facade.  This width is
extraordinary, but it fails, somehow, to give nobleness
to the edifice, which looks within (Murray makes the
remark) like a large public hall.  There are a nave
and two aisles, the latter about as high as the nave;
and there are some very fearful modern pictures,
which you may see much better than you usually see
those specimens of the old masters that lurk in glow-
ing side-chapels, there being no fine old glass to dif-
fuse a kindly gloom.  The sacristan of the cathedral
showed me something much better than all this bright
bareness; he led me a short distance out of it to the
small Temple de Saint-Jean, which is the most curious
object at Poitiers.  It is an early Christian chapel,
one of the earliest in France; originally, it would seem,
- that is, in the sixth or seventh century, - a bap-
tistery, but converted into a church while the Christian
era was still comparatively young.  The Temple de
Saint-Jean is therefore a monument even more vener-
able than Notre Dame la Grande, and that numbness
of age which I imputed to Notre Dame ought to reside
in still larger measure in its crude and colorless little
walls.  I call them crude, in spite of their having
been baked through by the centuries, only because,
although certain rude arches and carvings are let
into them, and they are surmounted at either end with
a small gable, they have (so far as I can remember)
little fascination of surface.  Notre Dame is still ex-
pressive, still pretends to be alive; but the Temple
has delivered its message, and is completely at rest.
It retains a kind of atrium, on the level of the street,
from which you descend to the original floor, now un-
covered, but buried for years under a false bottom.
A semicircular apse was, apparently at the time of its
conversion into a church, thrown out from the east
wall.  In the middle is the cavity of the old baptismal
font.  The walls and vaults are covered with traces
of extremely archaic frescos, attributed, I believe, to
the twelfth century.  These vague, gaunt, staring
fragments of figures are, to a certain extent, a reminder
of some of the early Christian churches in Rome; they
even faintly recalled to me the great mosaics of
Ravenna.  The Temple de Saint-Jean has neither the
antiquity nor the completeness of those extraordinary
monuments, nearly the most impressive in Europe;
but, as one may say, it is very well for Poitiers.

Not far from it, in a lonely corner which was ani-
mated for the moment by the vociferations of several
old, women who were selling tapers, presumably for
the occasion of a particular devotion, is the graceful
romanesque church erected in the twelfth century to
Saint Radegonde, - a lady who found means to be a
saint even in the capacity of a Merovingian queen.
It bears a general resemblance to Notre Dame la
Grande, and, as I remember it, is corrugated in some-
what the same manner with porous-looking carvings;
but I confess that what I chiefly recollect is the row
of old women sitting in front of it, each with a tray
of waxen tapers in her lap, and upbraiding me for
my neglect of the opportunity to offer such a tribute to
the saint.  I know not whether this privilege is oc-
casional or constant; within the church there was no
appearance of a festival, and I see that the name-
day of Saint Radegonde occurs in August, so that the
importunate old women sit there always, perhaps, and
deprive of its propriety the epithet I just applied to
this provincial corner.  In spite of the old women,
however, I suspect that the place is lonely; and in-
deed it is perhaps the old women that have made the
desolation.

The lion of Poitiers, in the eyes of the natives, is
doubtless the Palais de Justice, in the shadow of which
the statue-guarded hotel, just mentioned, erects itself;
and the gem of the court-house, which has a prosy
modern front, with pillars and a high flight of steps,
is the curious _salle des pas perdus_, or central hall, out
of which the different tribunals open.  This is a
feature of every French court-house, and seems the
result of a conviction that a palace of justice - the
French deal in much finer names than we - should be
in some degree palatial.  The great hall at Poitiers
has a long pedigree, as its walls date back to the
twelfth century, and its open wooden roof, as well as
the remarkable trio of chimney-pieces at the right end
of the room as you enter, to the fifteenth.  The three
tall fireplaces, side by side, with a delicate gallery
running along the top of them, constitute the originality
of this ancient chamber, and make one think of the
groups that must formerly have gathered there, - of
all the wet boot-soles, the trickling doublets, the
stiffened fingers, the rheumatic shanks, that must have
been presented to such an incomparable focus of
heat.  To-day, I am afraid, these mighty hearts are
forever cold; justice it probably administered with the
aid of a modern _calorifere_, and the walls of the palace
are perforated with regurgitating tubes.  Behind and
above the gallery that surmounts the three fireplaces
are high Gothic windows, the tracery of which masks,
in some sort, the chimneys; and in each angle of this
and of the room to the right and left of the trio of
chimneys, is all open-work spiral staircase, ascending
to - I forget where; perhaps to the roof of the edifice.
This whole side of the _salle_ is very lordly, and seems
to express an unstinted hospitality, to extend the
friendliest of all invitations, to bid the whole world
come and get warm.  It was the invention of John,
Duke of Berry and Count of Poitou, about 1395.  I
give this information on the authority of the Guide-
Joanne, from which source I gather much other curious
learning; for instance, that it was in this building,
when it had surely a very different front, that Charles VII.
was proclaimed king, in 1422; and that here Jeanne
Darc was subjected, in 1429, to the inquisition of
certain doctors and matrons.

The most charming thing at Poitiers is simply the
Promenade de Blossac, - a small public garden at one
end of the flat top of the hill.  It has a happy look
of the last century (having been arranged at that
period), and a beautiful sweep of view over the sur-
rounding country, and especially of the course of the
little river Clain, which winds about a part of the base
of the big mound of Poitiers.  The limit of this dear
little garden is formed, on the side that turns away
from the town, by the rampart erected in the fourteenth
century, and by its big semicircular bastions.  This
rampart, of great length, has a low parapet; you look
over it at the charming little vegetable-gardens with
which the base of the hill appears exclusively to be
garnished.  The whole prospect is delightful, especially
the details of the part just under the walls, at the end
of the walk.  Here the river makes a shining twist,
which a painter might have invented, and the side of
the hill is terraced into several ledges, - a sort of
tangle of small blooming patches and little pavillions
with peaked roofs and green shutters.  It is idle to
attempt to reproduce all this in words; it should be
reproduced only in water-colors.  The reader, how-
ever, will already have remarked that disparity in
these ineffectual pages, which are pervaded by the
attempt to sketch without a palette or brushes.  He will
doubtless, also, be struck with the grovelling vision
which, on such a spot as the ramparts of Poitiers,
peoples itself with carrots and cabbages rather than
with images of the Black Prince and the captive king.
I am not sure that in looking out from the Promenade
de Blossac you command the old battle-field; it is
enough that it was not far off, and that the great rout
of Frenchmen poured into the walls of Poitiers, leav-
ing on the ground a number of the fallen equal to
the little army (eight thousand) of the invader.  I did
think of the battle.  I wondered, rather helplessly,
where it had taken place; and I came away (as the
reader will see from the preceding sentence) without
finding out.  This indifference, however, was a result
rather of a general dread of military topography than
of a want of admiration of this particular victory,
which I have always supposed to be one of the most
brilliant on record.  Indeed, I should be almost
ashamed, and very much at a loss, to say what light
it was that this glorious day seemed to me to have
left forever on the horizon, and why the very name of
the place had always caused my blood gently to tingle.
It is carrying the feeling of race to quite inscrutable
lengths when a vague American permits himself an
emotion because more than five centuries ago, on
French soil, one rapacious Frenchman got the better
of another.  Edward was a Frenchman as well as
John, and French were the cries that urged each of
the hosts to the fight.  French is the beautiful motto
graven round the image of the Black Prince, as he
lies forever at rest in the choir of Canterbury: _a la
mort ne pensai-je mye_.  Nevertheless, the victory of
Poitiers declines to lose itself in these considerations;
the sense of it is a part of our heritage, the joy of it
a part of our imagination, and it filters down through
centuries and migrations till it titillates a New Yorker
who forgets in his elation that he happens at that
moment to be enjoying the hospitality of France.  It
was something done, I know not how justly, for Eng-
land; and what was done in the fourteenth century
for England was done also for New York.



XVIII.

If it was really for the sake of the Black Prince
that I had stopped at Poitiers (for my prevision of
Notre Dame la Grande and of the little temple of St.
John was of the dimmest), I ought to have stopped at
Angouleme for the sake of David and Eve Sechard,
of Lucien de Rubempre and of Madame de Bargeton,
who when she wore a _toilette etudiee_ sported a Jewish
turban ornamented with an Eastern brooch, a scarf of
gauze, a necklace of cameos, and a robe of "painted
muslin," whatever that may be; treating herself to
these luxuries out of an income of twelve thousand
francs.  The persons I have mentioned have not that
vagueness of identity which is the misfortune of his-
torical characters; they are real, supremely real, thanks
to their affiliation to the great Balzac, who had invented
an artificial reality which was as much better than the
vulgar article as mock-turtle soup is than the liquid it
emulates.  The first time I read "Les Illusions Perdues"
I should have refused to believe that I was capable of
passing the old capital of Anjou without alighting to
visit the Houmeau.  But we never know what we are
capable of till we are tested, as I reflected when I
found myself looking back at Angouleme from the
window of the train, just after we had emerged from
the long tunnel that passes under the town.  This
tunnel perforates the hill on which, like Poitiers,
Angouleme rears itself, and which gives it an eleva-
tion still greater than that of Poitiers.  You may have
a tolerable look at the cathedral without leaving the
railway-carriage; for it stands just above the tunnel,
and is exposed, much foreshortened, to the spectator
below.  There is evidently a charming walk round the
plateau of the town, commanding those pretty views
of which Balzac gives an account.  But the train
whirled me away, and these are my only impressions.
The truth is that I had no need, just at that moment,
of putting myself into communication with Balzac; for
opposite to me in the compartment were a couple of
figures almost as vivid as the actors in the "Comedie
Humaine."  One of these was a very genial and dirty
old priest, and the other was a reserved and concen-
trated young monk, - the latter (by which I mean a
monk of any kind) being a rare sight to-day in France.
This young man, indeed, was mitigatedly monastic.
He had a big brown frock and cowl, but he had also
a shirt and a pair of shoes; he had, instead of a
hempen scourge round his waist, a stout leather thong,
and he carried with him a very profane little valise.
He also read, from beginning to end, the "Figaro"
which the old priest, who had done the same, presented
to him; and he looked altogether as if, had he not
been a monk, he would have made a distinguished
officer of engineers.  When he was not reading the
"Figaro" he was conning his breviary or answering,
with rapid precision and with a deferential but dis-
couraging dryness, the frequent questions of his com-
panion, who was of quite another type.  This worthy
had a bored, good-natured, unbuttoned, expansive
look; was talkative, restless, almost disreputably human.
He was surrounded by a great deal of small luggage,
and had scattered over the carriage his books, his
papers, the fragments of his lunch, and the contents
of an extraordinary bag, which he kept beside him -
a kind of secular reliquary - and which appeared to
contain the odds and ends of a lifetime, as he took
from it successively a pair of slippers, an old padlock
(which evidently didn't belong to it), an opera-glass, a
collection of almanacs, and a large sea-shell, which he
very carefully examined.  I think that if he had not
been afraid of the young monk, who was so much
more serious than he, he would have held the shell to
his ear, like a child.  Indeed, he was a very childish
and delightful old priest, and his companion evidently
thought him most frivolous.  But I liked him the better
of the two.  He was not a country cure, but an eccle-
siastic of some rank, who had seen a good deal both
of the church and of the world; and if I too had not
been afraid of his colleague, who read the "Figaro"
as seriously as if it had been an encyclical, I should
have entered into conversation with him.

All this while I was getting on to Bordeaux, where
I permitted myself to spend three days.  I am afraid
I have next to nothing to show for them, and that
there would be little profit in lingering on this episode,
which is the less to be justified as I had in former
years examined Bordeaux attentively enough.  It con-
tains a very good hotel, - an hotel not good enough,
however, to keep you there for its own sake.  For the
rest, Bordeaux is a big, rich, handsome, imposing com-
mercial town, with long rows of fine old eighteenth-
century houses, which overlook the yellow Garonne.  I
have spoken of the quays of Nantes as fine, but those
of Bordeaux have a wider sweep and a still more
architectural air.  The appearance of such a port as
this makes the Anglo-Saxon tourist blush for the sor-
did water-fronts of Liverpool and New York, which,
with their larger activity, have so much more reason
to be stately.  Bordeaux gives a great impression of
prosperous industries, and suggests delightful ideas,
images of prune-boxes and bottled claret.  As the focus
of distribution of the best wine in the world, it is in-
deed a sacred city, - dedicated to the worship of
Bacchus in the most discreet form.  The country all
about it is covered with precious vineyards, sources of
fortune to their owners and of satisfaction to distant
consumers; and as you look over to the hills beyond
the Garonne you see them in the autumn sunshine,
fretted with the rusty richness of this or that immortal
_clos_.  But the principal picture, within the town, is that
of the vast curving quays, bordered with houses that
look like the _hotels_ of farmers-general of the last cen-
tury, and of the wide, tawny river, crowded with ship-
ping and spanned by the largest of bridges.  Some of
the types on the water-side are of the sort that arrest
a sketcher, - figures of stalwart, brown-faced Basques,
such as I had seen of old in great numbers at Biarritz,
with their loose circular caps, their white sandals, their
air of walking for a wager.  Never was a tougher, a
harder race.  They are not mariners, nor watermen,
but, putting questions of temper aside, they are the
best possible dock-porters.  "Il s'y fait un commerce
terrible," a _douanier_ said to me, as he looked up and
down the interminable docks; and such a place has
indeed much to say of the wealth, the capacity for
production, of France, - the bright, cheerful, smokeless
industry of the wonderful country which produces,
above all, the agreeable things of life, and turns even
its defeats and revolutions into gold.  The whole town
has an air of almost depressing opulence, an appear-
ance which culminates in the great _place_ which sur-
rounds the Grand-Theatre, - an establishment in the
highest style, encircled with columns, arcades, lamps,
gilded cafes.  One feels it to be a monument to the
virtue of the well-selected bottle.  If I had not for-
bidden myself to linger, I should venture to insist on
this, and, at the risk of being considered fantastic,
trace an analogy between good claret and the best
qualities of the French mind; pretend that there is a
taste of sound Bordeaux in all the happiest manifes-
tations of that fine organ, and that, correspondingly,
there is a touch of French reason, French complete-
ness, in a glass of Pontet-Canet.  The danger of such
an excursion would lie mainly in its being so open to
the reader to take the ground from under my feet by
saying that good claret doesn't exist.  To this I should
have no reply whatever.  I should be unable to tell
him where to find it.  I certainly didn't find it at
Bordeaux, where I drank a most vulgar fluid; and it
is of course notorious that a large part of mankind is
occupied in vainly looking for it.  There was a great
pretence of putting it forward at the Exhibition which
was going on at Bordeaux at the time of my visit, an
"exposition philomathique," lodged in a collection of
big temporary buildings in the Allees d'Or1eans, and
regarded by the Bordelais for the moment as the most
brilliant feature of their city.  Here were pyramids of
bottles, mountains of bottles, to say nothing of cases
and cabinets of bottles.  The contemplation of these
glittering tiers was of course not very convincing; and
indeed the whole arrangement struck me as a high
impertinence.  Good wine is not an optical pleasure,
it is an inward emotion; and if there was a chamber
of degustation on the premises, I failed to discover it.
It was not in the search for it, indeed, that I spent
half an hour in this bewildering bazaar.  Like all
"expositions," it seemed to me to be full of ugly
things, and gave one a portentous idea of the quantity
of rubbish that man carries with him on his course
through the ages.  Such an amount of luggage for a
journey after all so short!  There were no individual
objects; there was nothing but dozens and hundreds,
all machine-made and expressionless, in spite of the
repeated grimace, the conscious smartness, of "the last
new thing," that was stamped on all of them.  The
fatal facility, of the French _article_ becomes at last as
irritating as the refrain of a popular song.  The poor
"Indiens Galibis" struck me as really more interesting,
- a group of stunted savages who formed one of the
attractions of the place, and were confined in a pen
in the open air, with a rabble of people pushing and
squeezing, hanging over the barrier, to look at them.
They had no grimace, no pretension to be new, no
desire to catch your eye.  They looked at their visitors
no more than they looked at each other, and seemed
ancient, indifferent, terribly bored.



XIX.

There is much entertainment in the journey through
the wide, smiling garden of Gascony; I speak of it as
I took it in going from Bordeaux to Toulouse.  It is
the south, quite the south, and had for the present
narrator its full measure of the charm he is always
determined to find in countries that may even by
courtesy be said to appertain to the sun.  It was,
moreover, the happy and genial view of these mild
latitudes, which, Heaven knows, often have a dreari-
ness of their own; a land teeming with corn and wine,
and speaking everywhere (that is, everywhere the phyl-
loxera had not laid it waste) of wealth and plenty.
The road runs constantly near the Garonne, touching
now and then its slow, brown, rather sullen stream, a
sullenness that encloses great dangers and disasters.
The traces of the horrible floods of 1875 have dis-
appeared, and the land smiles placidly enough while
it waits for another immersion.  Toulouse, at the period
I speak of, was up to its middle (and in places above
it) in water, and looks still as if it had been thoroughly
soaked, - as if it had faded and shrivelled with a long
steeping.  The fields and copses, of course, are more
forgiving.  The railway line follows as well the charm-
ing Canal du Midi, which is as pretty as a river, bar-
ring the straightness, and here and there occupies the
foreground, beneath a screen of dense, tall trees, while
the Garonne takes a larger and more irregular course
a little way beyond it.  People who are fond of canals
- and, speaking from the pictorial standpoint, I hold
the taste to be most legitimate - will delight in this
admirable specimen of the class, which has a very in-
teresting history, not to be narrated here.  On the
other side of the road (the left), all the way, runs a
long, low line of hills, or rather one continuous hill,
or perpetual cliff, with a straight top, in the shape of
a ledge of rock, which might pass for a ruined wall.
I am afraid the reader will lose patience with my habit
of constantly referring to the landscape of Italy, as if
that were the measure of the beauty of every other.
Yet I am still more afraid that I cannot apologize for
it, and must leave it in its culpable nakedness.  It is
an idle habit; but the reader will long since have dis-
covered that this was an idle journey, and that I give
my impressions as they came to me.  It came to me,
then, that in all this view there was something trans-
alpine with a greater smartness and freshness and
much less elegance and languor.  This impression was
occasionally deepened by the appearance, on the long
eminence of which I speak, of a village, a church, or
a chateau, which seemed to look down at the plain
from over the ruined wall.  The perpetual vines, the
bright-faced flat-roofed houses, covered with tiles, the
softness and sweetness of the light and air, recalled
the prosier portions of the Lombard plain.  Toulouse
itself has a little of this Italian expression, but not
enough to give a color to its dark, dirty, crooked streets,
which are irregular without being eccentric, and which,
if it were not for the, superb church of Saint-Sernin,
would be quite destitute of monuments.

I have already alluded to the way in which the
names of certain places impose themselves on the
mind, and I must add that of Toulouse to the list of
expressive appellations.  It certainly evokes a vision,
- suggests something highly _meridional_.  But the city,
it must be confessed, is less pictorial than the word,
in spite of the Place du Capitole, in spite of the quay
of the Garonne, in spite of the curious cloister of the
old museum.  What justifies the images that are latent
in the word is not the aspect, but the history, of the
town.  The hotel to which the well-advised traveller
will repair stands in a corner of the Place du Capitole,
which is the heart and centre of Toulouse, and which
bears a vague and inexpensive resemblance to Piazza
Castello at Turin.  The Capitol, with a wide modern
face, occupies one side, and, like the palace at Turin,
looks across at a high arcade, under which the hotels,
the principal shops, and the lounging citizens are
gathered.  The shops are probably better than the
Turinese, but the people are not so good.  Stunted,
shabby, rather vitiated looking, they have none of the
personal richness of the sturdy Piedmontese; and I
will take this occasion to remark that in the course of
a journey of several weeks in the French provinces I
rarely encountered a well-dressed male.  Can it be
possible the republics are unfavorable to a certain
attention to one's boots and one's beard?  I risk this
somewhat futile inquiry because the proportion of mens ???
coats and trousers seemed to be about the same in
France and in my native land.  It was notably lower
than in England and in Italy, and even warranted
the supposition that most good provincials have their
chin shaven and their boots blacked but once a week.
I hasten to add, lest my observation should appear to
be of a sadly superficial character, that the manners
and conversation of these gentlemen bore (whenever
I had occasion to appreciate them) no relation to the
state of their chin and their boots.  They were almost
always marked by an extreme amenity.  At Toulouse
there was the strongest temptation to speak to people,
simply for the entertainment of hearing them reply
with that curious, that fascinating accent of the
Languedoc, which appears to abound in final con-
sonants, and leads the Toulousains to say _bien-g_ and
_maison-g_, like Englishmen learning French.  It is as
if they talked with their teeth rather than with their
tongue.  I find in my note-book a phrase in regard to
Toulouse which is perhaps a little ill-natured, but
which I will transcribe as it stands: "The oddity is
that the place should be both animated and dull.  A
big, brown-skinned population, clattering about in a
flat, tortuous town, which produces nothing whatever
that I can discover.  Except the church of Saint-
Sernin and the fine old court of the Hotel d'Assezat,
Toulouse has no architecture; the houses are for the
most part of brick, of a grayish-red color, and have no
particular style.  The brick-work of the place is in fact
very poor, - inferior to that of the north Italian towns,
and quite wanting in the richness of tone which this
homely material takes on in the damp climates of the
north."  And then my note-book goes on to narrate a
little visit to the Capitol, which was soon made, as the
building was in course of repair and half the rooms
were closed.



XX.

The history of Toulouse is detestable, saturated
with blood and perfidy; and the ancient custom of
the Floral Games, grafted upon all sorts of internecine
traditions, seems, with its false pastoralism, its mock
chivalry, its display of fine feelings, to set off rather
than to mitigate these horrors.  The society was
founded in the fourteenth century, and it has held
annual meetings ever since, - meetings at which poems
in the fine old _langue d'oc_ are declaimed and a
blushing laureate is chosen.  This business takes place
in the Capitol, before the chief magistrate of the town,
who is known as the _capitoul_, and of all the pretty
women as well, - a class very numerous at Toulouse.
It was impossible to have a finer person than that of
the portress who pretended to show me the apart-
ments in which the Floral Games are held; a big,
brown, expansive woman, still in the prime of life,
with a speaking eye, an extraordinary assurance, and
a pair of magenta stockings, which were inserted into
the neatest and most polished little black sabots,
and which, as she clattered up the stairs before me,
lavishly displaying them, made her look like the
heroine of an _opera-bouffe_.  Her talk was all in _n_'s,
_g_'s, and _d_'s, and in mute _e_'s strongly accented, as
_autre_, _theatre_, _splendide_, - the last being an epithet
she applied to everything the Capitol contained, and
especially to a horrible picture representing the famous
Clemence Isaure, the reputed foundress of the poetical
contest, presiding on one of these occasions.  I won-
dered whether Clemence Isaure had been anything
like this terrible Toulousaine of to-day, who would
have been a capital figure-head for a floral game.
The lady in whose honor the picture I have just men-
tioned was painted is a somewhat mythical personage,
and she is not to be found in the "Biographie Uni-
verselle."  She is, however, a very graceful myth; and
if she never existed, her statue does, at least, - a
shapeless effigy, transferred to the Capitol from the
so-called tomb of Clemence in the old church of La
Daurade.  The great hall in which the Floral Games
are held was encumbered with scaffoldings, and I
was unable to admire the long series of busts of the
bards who have won prizes and the portraits of all
the capitouls of Toulouse.  As a compensation I was
introduced to a big bookcase, filled with the poems
that have been crowned since the days of the trou-
badours (a portentous collection), and the big butcher's
knife with which, according to the legend, Henry,
Duke of Montmorency, who had conspired against the
great cardinal with Gaston of Orleans and Mary de ??????
Medici, was, in 1632, beheaded on this spot by the
order of Richelieu.  With these objects the interest of
the Capitol was exhausted.  The building, indeed,
has not the grandeur of its name, which is a sort
of promise that the visitor will find some sensible
embodiment of the old Roman tradition that once
flourished in this part of France.  It is inferior in
impressiveness to the other three famous Capitols of
the modern world, - that of Rome (if I may call the
present structure modern) and those of Washington
and Albany!

The only Roman remains at Toulouse are to be
found in the museum, - a very interesting establish-
ment, which I was condemned to see as imperfectly
as I had seen the Capitol.  It was being rearranged;
and the gallery of paintings, which is the least in-
teresting feature, was the only part that was not
upside-down.  The pictures are mainly of the mo-
dern French school, and I remember nothing but a
powerful, though disagreeable specimen of Henner,
who paints the human body, and paints it so well,
with a brush dipped in blackness; and, placed among
the paintings, a bronze replica of the charming young
David of Mercie.  These things have been set out in
the church of an old monastery, long since suppressed,
and the rest of the collection occupies the cloisters.
These are two in number, - a small one, which you
enter first from the street, and a very vast and ele-
gant one beyond it, which with its light Gothic arches
and slim columns (of the fourteenth century), its broad
walk its little garden, with old tombs and statues in
the centre, is by far the most picturesque, the most
sketchable, spot in Toulouse.  It must be doubly so
when the Roman busts, inscriptions, slabs and sarco-
phagi, are ranged along the walls; it must indeed (to
compare small things with great, and as the judicious
Murray remarks) bear a certain resemblance to the
Campo Santo at Pisa.  But these things are absent
now; the cloister is a litter of confusion, and its trea-
sures have been stowed away, confusedly, in sundry
inaccessible rooms.  The custodian attempted to con-
sole me by telling me that when they are exhibited
again it will be on a scientific basis, and with an
order and regularity of which they were formerly
innocent.  But I was not consoled.  I wanted simply
the spectacle, the picture, and I didn't care in the
least for the classification.  Old Roman fragments, ex-
posed to light in the open air, under a southern sky,
in a quadrangle round a garden, have an immortal
charm simply in their general effect; and the charm
is all the greater when the soil of the very place has
yielded them up.



XXI.

My real consolation was an hour I spent in Saint-
Sernin, one of the noblest churches in southern France,
and easily the first among those of Toulouse.  This
great structure, a masterpiece of twelfth-century ro-
manesque, and dedicated to Saint Saturninus, - the
Toulousains have abbreviated, - is, I think, alone worth
a journey to Toulouse.  What makes it so is the
extraordinary seriousness of its interior; no other term
occurs to me as expressing so well the character of
its clear gray nave.  As a general thing, I do not
favor the fashion of attributing moral qualities to
buildings; I shrink from talking about tender porticos
and sincere campanili; but I find I cannot get on at
all without imputing some sort of morality to Saint-
Sernin.  As it stands to-day, the church has been
completely restored by Viollet-le-Duc.  The exterior is
of brick, and has little charm save that of a tower of
four rows of arches, narrowing together as they ascend.
The nave is of great length and height, the barrel-roof
of stone, the effect of the round arches and pillars in
the triforium especially fine.  There are two low aisles
on either side.  The choir is very deep and narrow;
it seems to close together, and looks as if it were
meant for intensely earnest rites.  The transepts are
most noble, especially the arches of the second tier.
The whole church is narrow for its length, and is
singularly complete and homogeneous.  As I say all
this, I feel that I quite fail to give an impression of
its manly gravity, its strong proportions or of the lone-
some look of its renovated stones as I sat there while
the October twilight gathered.  It is a real work of
art, a high conception.  The crypt, into which I was
eventually led captive by an importunate sacristan, is
quite another affair, though indeed I suppose it may
also be spoken of as a work of art.  It is a rich museum
of relics, and contains the head of Saint Thomas
Aquinas, wrapped up in a napkin and exhibited in a
glass case.  The sacristan took a lamp and guided me
about, presenting me to one saintly remnant after an-
other.  The impression was grotesque, but sorne of
the objects were contained in curious old cases of
beaten silver and brass; these things, at least, which
looked as if they had been transmitted from the early
church, were venerable.  There was, however, a kind
of wholesale sanctity about the place which overshot
the mark; it pretends to be one of the holiest spots
in the world.  The effect is spoiled by the way the
sacristans hang about and offer to take you into it for
ten sous, - I was accosted by two and escaped from
another, - and by the familiar manner in which you
pop in and out.  This episode rather broke the charm
of Saint-Sernin, so that I took my departure and went
in search of the cathedral.  It was scarcely worth find-
ing, and struck me as an odd, dislocated fragment.
The front consists only of a portal, beside which a tall
brick tower, of a later period, has been erected.  The
nave was wrapped in dimness, with a few scattered
lamps.  I could only distinguish an immense vault,
like a high cavern, without aisles.  Here and there in
the gloom was a kneeling figure; the whole place was
mysterious and lop-sided.  The choir was curtained
off; it appeared not to correspond with the nave, - that
is, not to have the same axis.  The only other ec-
clesiastical impression I gathered at Toulouse came to
me in the church of La Daurade, of which the front,
on the quay by the Garonne, was closed with scaffold-
ings; so that one entered it from behind, where it is
completely masked by houses, through a door which
has at first no traceable connection with it.  It is a
vast, high, modernised, heavily decorated church, dimly
lighted at all times, I should suppose, and enriched
by the shades of evening at the time I looked into it.
I perceived that it consisted mainly of a large square,
beneath a dome, in the centre of which a single person
- a lady - was praying with the utmost absorption.
The manner of access to the church interposed such
an obstacle to the outer profanities that I had a sense
of intruding, and presently withdrew, carrying with me
a picture of the, vast, still interior, the gilded roof
gleaming in the twilight, and the solitary worshipper.
What was she praying for, and was she not almost
afraid to remain there alone?

For the rest, the picturesque at Toulouse consists
principally of the walk beside the Garonne, which is
spanned, to the faubourg of Saint-Cyprien, by a stout
brick bridge.  This hapless suburb, the baseness of
whose site is noticeable, lay for days under the water
at the time of the last inundations.  The Garonne
had almost mounted to the roofs of the houses, and
the place continues to present a blighted, frightened
look.  Two or three persons, with whom I had some
conversation, spoke of that time as a memory of horror.
I have not done with my Italian comparisons; I shall
never have done with them.  I am therefore free to
say that in the way in which Toulouse looks out on
the Garonne there was something that reminded me
vaguely of the way in which Pisa looks out on the
Arno.  The red-faced houses - all of brick - along the
quay have a mixture of brightness and shabbiness, as
well as the fashion of the open _loggia_ in the top-
story.  The river, with another bridge or two, might
be the Arno, and the buildings on the other side of
it - a hospital, a suppressed convent - dip their feet
into it with real southern cynicism.  I have spoken of
the old Hotel d'Assezat as the best house at Toulouse;
with the exception of the cloister of the museum, it is
the only "bit" I remember.  It has fallen from the
state of a noble residence of the sixteenth century to
that of a warehouse and a set of offices; but a certain
dignity lingers in its melancholy court, which is divided
from the street by a gateway that is still imposing,
and in which a clambering vine and a red Virginia-
creeper were suspended to the rusty walls of brick
stone.

The most interesting house at Toulouse is far from
being the most striking.  At the door of No. 50 Rue
des Filatiers, a featureless, solid structure, was found
hanging, one autumn evening, the body of the young
Marc-Antoine Calas, whose ill-inspired suicide was to
be the first act of a tragedy so horrible.  The fana-
ticism aroused in the townsfolk by this incident; the
execution by torture of Jean Calas, accused as a
Protestant of having hanged his son, who had gone
over to the Church of Rome; the ruin of the family;
the claustration of the daughters; the flight of the
widow to Switzerland; her introduction to Voltaire;
the excited zeal of that incomparable partisan, and
the passionate persistence with which, from year to
year, he pursued a reversal of judgment, till at last he
obtained it, and devoted the tribunal of Toulouse to
execration and the name of the victims to lasting
wonder and pity, - these things form part of one of
the most interesting and touching episodes of the social
history of the eighteenth century.  The story has the
fatal progression, the dark rigidity, of one of the tragic
dramas of the Greeks.  Jean Calas, advanced in life,
blameless, bewildered, protesting. his innocence, had
been broken on the wheel; and the sight of his decent
dwelling, which brought home to me all that had been
suflered there, spoiled for me, for half an hour, the
impression of Toulouse.



XXII.

I spent but a few hours at Carcassonne; but those
hours had a rounded felicity, and I cannot do better
than transcribe from my note-book the little record
made at the moment.  Vitiated as it may be by
crudity and incoherency, it has at any rate the fresh-
ness of a great emotion.  This is the best quality that
a reader may hope to extract from a narrative in
which "useful information" and technical lore even of
the most general sort are completely absent.  For
Carcassonne is moving, beyond a doubt; and the
traveller who, in the course of a little tour in France,
may have felt himself urged, in melancholy moments,
to say that on the whole the disappointments are as
numerous as the satisfactions, must admit that there
can be nothing better than this.

The country, after you leave Toulouse, continues
to be charming; the more so that it merges its flatness
in the distant Cevennes on one side, and on the other,
far away on your right, in the richer range of the
Pyrenees.  Olives and cypresses, pergolas and vines,
terraces on the roofs of houses, soft, iridescent moun-
tains, a warm yellow light, - what more could the dif-
ficult tourist want?  He left his luggage at the station,
warily determined to look at the inn before committing
himself to it.  It was so evident (even to a cursory
glance) that it might easily have been much better
that he simply took his way to the town, with the
whole of a superb afternoon before him.  When I say
the town, I mean the towns; there being two at Car-
cassonne, perfectly distinct, and each with excellent
claims to the title.  They have settled the matter be-
tween them, however, and the elder, the shrine of
pilgrimage, to which the other is but a stepping-stone,
or even, as I may say, a humble door-mat, takes the
name of the Cite.  You see nothing of the Cite from
the station; it is masked by the agglomeration of the
_ville-basse_, which is relatively (but only relatively) new.
A wonderful avenue of acacias leads to it from the
station, - leads past, rather, and conducts you to a
little high-backed bridge over the Aude, beyond which,
detached and erect, a distinct mediaeval silhouette, the
Cite presents itself.  Like a rival shop, on the in-
vidious side of a street, it has "no connection" with
the establishment across the way, although the two
places are united (if old Carcassonne may be said to be
united to anything) by a vague little rustic fau-
bourg.  Perched on its solid pedestal, the perfect de-
tachment of the Cite is what first strikes you.  To take
leave, without delay, of the _ville-basse_, I may say that
the splendid acacias I have mentioned flung a sum-
merish dusk over the place, in which a few scattered
remains of stout walls and big bastions looked vener-
able and picturesque.  A little boulevard winds round
the town, planted with trees and garnished with more
benches than I ever saw provided by a soft-hearted
municipality.  This precinct had a warm, lazy, dusty,
southern look, as if the people sat out-of-doors a great
deal, and wandered about in the stillness of summer
nights.  The figure of the elder town, at these hours,
must be ghostly enough on its neighboring hill.  Even
by day it has the air of a vignette of Gustave Dore, a
couplet of Victor Hugo.  It is almost too perfect, - as
if it were an enormous model, placed on a big green
table at a museum.  A steep, paved way, grass-grown
like all roads where vehicles never pass, stretches up
to it in the sun.  It has a double enceinte, complete
outer walls and complete inner (these, elaborately forti-
fied, are the more curious); and this congregation of
ramparts, towers, bastions, battlements, barbicans, is
as fantastic and romantic as you please.  The approach
I mention here leads to the gate that looks toward
Toulouse, - the Porte de l'Aude.  There is a second,
on the other side, called, I believe, the Porte Nar-
bonnaise, a magnificent gate, flanked with towers thick
and tall, defended by elaborate outworks; and these
two apertures alone admit you to the place, - putting
aside a small sally-port, protected by a great bastion,
on the quarter that looks toward the Pyrenees.

As a votary, always, in the first instance, of a
general impression, I walked all round the outer en-
ceinte, - a process on the very face of it entertaining.
I took to the right of the Porte de l'Aude, without
entering it, where the old moat has been filled in.
The filling-in of the moat has created a grassy level
at the foot of the big gray towers, which, rising at
frequent intervals, stretch their stiff curtain of stone
from point to point.  The curtain drops without a
fold upon the quiet grass, which was dotted here and
there with a humble native, dozing away the golden
afternoon.  The natives of the elder Carcassonne are
all humble; for the core of the Cite has shrunken and
decayed, and there is little life among the ruins.  A
few tenacious laborers, who work in the neighboring
fields or in the _ville-basse_, and sundry octogenarians
of both sexes, who are dying where they have lived,
and contribute much to the pictorial effect, - these
are the principal inhabitants.  The process of con-
verting the place from an irresponsible old town into
a conscious "specimen" has of course been attended
with eliminations; the population has, as a general
thing, been restored away.  I should lose no time in
saying that restoration is the great mark of the Cite.
M. Viollet-le-Duc has worked his will upon it, put it
into perfect order, revived the fortifications in every
detail.  I do not pretend to judge the performance,
carried out on a scale and in a spirit which really
impose themselves on the imagination.  Few archi-
tects have had such a chance, and M. Viollet-le-Duc
must have been the envy of the whole restoring fra-
ternity.  The image of a more crumbling Carcassonne
rises in the mind, and there is no doubt that forty
years ago the place was more affecting.  On the other
hand, as we see it to-day, it is a wonderful evocation;
and if there is a great deal of new in the old, there
is plenty of old in the new.  The repaired crenella-
tions, the inserted patches, of the walls of the outer
circle sufficiently express this commixture.  My walk
brought me into full view of the Pyrenees, which, now
that the sun had begun to sink and the shadows to
grow long, had a wonderful violet glow.  The platform
at the base of the walls has a greater width on this
side, and it made the scene more complete.  Two or
three old crones had crawled out of the Porte Nar-
bonnaise, to examine the advancing visitor; and a
very ancient peasant, lying there with his back against
a tower, was tending half a dozen lean sheep.  A poor
man in a very old blouse, crippled and with crutches
lying beside him, had been brought out and placed
on a stool, where he enjoyed the afternoon as best he
might.  He looked so ill and so patient that I spoke
to him; found that his legs were paralyzed and he was
quite helpless.  He had formerly been seven years in
the army, and had made the campaign of Mexico with
Bazaine.  Born in the old Cite, he had come back
there to end his days.  It seemed strange, as he sat
there, with those romantic walls behind him and the
great picture of the Pyrenees in front, to think that he
had been across the seas to the far-away new world,
had made part of a famous expedition, and was now
a cripple at the gate of the mediaeval city where he
had played as a child.  All this struck me as a great
deal of history for so modest a figure, - a poor little
figure that could only just unclose its palm for a small
silver coin.

He was not the only acquaintance I made at Car-
cassonne.  I had not pursued my circuit of the walls
much further when I encountered a person of quite
another type, of whom I asked some question which
had just then presented, itself, and who proved to be
the very genius of the spot.  He was a sociable son
of the _ville-basse_, a gentleman, and, as I afterwards
learned, an employe at the prefecture, - a person, in
short, much esteemed at Carcassonne.  (I may say all
this, as he will never read these pages.)  He had been
ill for a month, and in the company of his little dog
was taking his first airing; in his own phrase he was
_amoureux-fou de la Cite_, - he could lose no time in
coming back to it.  He talked of it, indeed, as a lover,
and, giving me for half an hour the advantage of his
company, showed me all the points of the place.  (I
speak here always of the outer enceinte; you penetrate
to the inner - which is the specialty of Carcassonne,
and the great curiosity - only by application at the
lodge of the regular custodian, a remarkable func-
tionary, who, half an hour later, when I had been in-
troduced to him by my friend the amateur, marched
me over the fortifications with a tremendous accompani-
ment of dates and technical terms.)  My companion
pointed out to me in particular the traces of different
periods in the structure of the walls.  There is a por-
tentous amount of history embedded in them, begin-
ning with Romans and Visigoths; here and there are
marks of old breaches, hastily repaired.  We passed
into the town, - into that part of it not included in the
citadel.  It is the queerest and most fragmentary little
place in the world, as everything save the fortifications
is being suffered to crumble away, in order that the
spirit of M. Viollet-le-Duc alone may pervade it, and
it may subsist simply as a magnificent shell.  As the
leases of the wretched little houses fall in, the ground
is cleared of them; and a mumbling old woman ap-
proached me in the course of my circuit, inviting me
to condole with her on the disappearance of so many
of the hovels which in the last few hundred years
(since the collapse of Carcassonne as a stronghold)
had attached themselves to the base of the walls, in
the space between the two circles.  These habitations,
constructed of materials taken from the ruins, nestled
there snugly enough.  This intermediate space had
therefore become a kind of street, which has crumbled
in turn, as the fortress has grown up again.  There
are other streets, beside, very diminutive and vague,
where you pick your way over heaps of rubbish and
become conscious of unexpected faces looking at you
out of windows as detached as the cherubic heads.
The most definite thing in the place was the little
cafe, where. the waiters, I think, must be the ghosts of
the old Visigoths; the most definite, that is, after the
little chateau and the little cathedral.  Everything in
the Cite is little; you can walk round the walls in
twenty minutes.  On the drawbridge of the chateau,
which, with a picturesque old face, flanking towers,
and a dry moat, is to-day simply a bare _caserne_,
lounged half a dozen soldiers, unusually small.  No-
thing could be more odd than to see these objects en-
closed in a receptacle which has much of the appear-
ance of an enormous toy.  The Cite and its population
vaguely reminded me of an immense Noah's ark.



XXIII.

Carcassonne dates from the Roman occupation of
Gaul.  The place commanded one of the great roads
into Spain, and in the fourth century Romans and
Franks ousted each other from such a point of vantage.
In the year 436, Theodoric, King of the Visigoths,
superseded both these parties; and it is during his oc-
cupation that the inner enceinte was raised upon the
ruins of the Roman fortifications.  Most of the Visigoth
towers that are still erect are seated upon Roman sub-
structions which appear to have been formed hastily,
probably at the moment of the Frankish invasion.
The authors of these solid defences, though occasionally
disturbed, held Carcassonne and the neighboring coun-
try, in which they had established their kingdom of
Septimania, till the year 713, when they were expelled
by the Moors of Spain, who ushered in an unillumined
period of four centuries, of which no traces remain.
These facts I derived from a source no more recondite
than a pamphlet by M. Viollet-le-Duc, - a very luminous
description of the fortifications, which you may buy
from the accomplished custodian.  The writer makes
a jump to the year 1209, when Carcassonne, then
forming part of the realm of the viscounts of Beziers
and infected by the Albigensian heresy, was besieged,
in the name of the Pope, by the terrible Simon de
Montfort and his army of crusaders.  Simon was ac-
customed to success, and the town succumbed in the
course of a fortnight.  Thirty-one years later, having
passed into the hands of the King of France, it was
again besieged by the young Raymond de Trincavel,
the last of the viscounts of Beziers; and of this siege
M. Viollet-le-Duc gives a long and minute account,
which the visitor who has a head for such things may
follow, with the brochure in hand, on the fortifications
themselves.  The young Raymond de Trincavel, baffled
and repulsed, retired at the end of twenty-four days.
Saint Louis and Philip the Bold, in the thirteenth cen-
tury, multiplied the defences of Carcassonne, which
was one of the bulwarks of their kingdom on the
Spanish quarter; and from this time forth, being re-
garded as impregnable, the place had nothing to fear.
It was not even attacked; and when, in 1355, Edward
the Black Prince marched into it, the inhabitants had
opened the gates to the conqueror before whom all
Languedoc was prostrate.  I am not one of those who,
as I said just now, have a head for such things, and
having extracted these few facts had made all the
use of M. Viollet-le-Duc's, pamphlet of which I was cap-
able.

I have mentioned that my obliging friend the
_amoureux-fou_ handed me over to the door-keeper of
the citadel.  I should add that I was at first committed
to the wife of this functionary, a stout peasant-woman,
who took a key down from a nail, conducted me to a
postern door, and ushered me into the presence of her
husband.  Having just begun his rounds with a party
of four persons, he was not many steps in advance.  I
added myself perforce to this party, which was not
brilliantly composed, except that two of its members
were gendarmes in full toggery, who announced in the
course of our tour that they had been stationed for a
year at Carcassonne, and had never before had the
curiosity to come up to the Cite.  There was something
brilliant, certainly, in that.  The _gardien_ was an extra-
ordinarily typical little Frenchman, who struck me even
more forcibly than the wonders of the inner enceinte;
and as I am bound to assume, at whatever cost to my
literary vanity, that there is not the slightest danger
of his reading these remarks, I may treat him as public
property.  With his diminutive stature and his per-
pendicular spirit, his flushed face, expressive protuber-
ant eyes, high peremptory voice, extreme volubility,
lucidity, and neatness of utterance, he reminded me of
the gentry who figure in the revolutions of his native
land.  If he was not a fierce little Jacobin, he ought
to have been, for I am sure there were many men of
his pattern on the Committee of Public Safety.  He
knew absolutely what he was about, understood the
place thoroughly, and constantly reminded his audience
of what he himself had done in the way of excavations
and reparations.  He described himself as the brother
of the architect of the work actually going forward
(that which has been done since the death of M. Viol-
let-le-Duc, I suppose he meant), and this fact was more
illustrative than all the others.  It reminded me, as
one is reminded at every turn, of the democratic con-
ditions of French life: a man of the people, with a
wife _en bonnet_, extremely intelligent, full of special
knowledge, and yet remaining essentially of the people,
and showing his intelligence with a kind of ferocity,
of defiance.  Such a personage helps one to under-
stand the red radicalism of France, the revolutions,
the barricades, the sinister passion for theories.  (I do
not, of course, take upon myself to say that the indi-
vidual I describe - who can know nothing of the
liberties I am taking with him - is actually devoted to
these ideals; I only mean that many such devotees
must have his qualities.)  In just the _nuance_ that I
have tried to indicate here, it is a terrible pattern of
man.  Permeated in a high degree by civilization, it
is yet untouched by the desire which one finds in the
Englishman, in proportion as he rises in the world, to
approximate to the figure of the gentleman.  On the
other hand, a _nettete_, a faculty of exposition, such as
the English gentleman is rarely either blessed or cursed
with.

This brilliant, this suggestive warden of Carcas-
sonne marched us about for an hour, haranguing, ex-
plaining, illustrating, as he went; it was a complete
little lecture, such as might have been delivered at
the Lowell Institute, on the manger in which a first-
rate _place forte_ used to be attacked and defended
Our peregrinations made it very clear that Carcassone
was impregnable; it is impossible to imagine, without
having seen them, such refinements of immurement,
such ingenuities of resistance.  We passed along the
battlements and _chemins de ronde_, ascended and de-
scended towers, crawled under arches, peered out of
loop-holes, lowered ourselves into dungeons, halted in
all sorts of tight places, while the purpose of some-
thing or other was described to us.  It was very
curious, very interesting; above all, it was very pic-
torial, and involved perpetual peeps into the little
crooked, crumbling, sunny, grassy, empty Cite.  In
places, as you stand upon it, the great towered and
embattled enceinte produces an illusion; it looks as
if it were still equipped and defended.  One vivid
challenge, at any rate, it flings down before you; it
calls upon you to make up your mind on the matter
of restoration.  For myself, I have no hesitation; I
prefer in every case the ruined, however ruined, to
the reconstructed, however splendid.  What is left is
more precious than what is added: the one is history,
the other is fiction; and I like the former the better of
the two, - it is so much more romantic.  One is posi-
tive, so far as it goes; the other fills up the void with
things more dead than the void itself, inasmuch as
they have never had life.  After that I am free to
say that the restoration of Carcassonne is a splendid
achievement.  The little custodian dismissed us at
last, after having, as usual, inducted us into the inevi-
table repository of photographs.  These photographs
are a great nuisance, all over the Midi.  They are
exceedingly bad, for the most part; and the worst -
those in the form of the hideous little _album-pano-
rama_ - are thrust upon you at every turn.  They
are a kind of tax that you must pay; the best way is
to pay to be let off.  It was not to be denied that
there was a relief in separating from our accomplished
guide, whose manner of imparting information re-
minded me of the energetic process by which I have
seen mineral waters bottled.  All this while the after-
noon had grown more lovely; the sunset had deepened,
the horizon of hills grown purple; the mass of the
Canigou became more delicate, yet more distinct.  The
day had so far faded that the interior of the little
cathedral was wrapped in twilight, into which the
glowing windows projected something of their color.
This church has high beauty and value, but I will
spare the reader a presentation of details which I my-
self had no opportunity to master.  It consists of a
romanesque nave, of the end of the eleventh century,
and a Gothic choir and transepts of the beginning of
the fourteenth; and, shut up in its citadel like a precious
casket in a cabinet, it seems - or seemed at that hour
- to have a sort of double sanctity.  After leaving it
and passing out of the two circles of walls, I treated
myself, in the most infatuated manner, to another walk
round the Cite.  It is certainly this general impression
that is most striking, - the impression from outside,
where the whole place detaches itself at once from
the landscape.  In the warm southern dusk it looked
more than ever like a city in a fairy-tale.  To make
the thing perfect, a white young moon, in its first
quarter, came out and hung just over the dark sil-
houette.  It was hard to come away, - to incommode
one's self for anything so vulgar as a railway-train; I
would gladly have spent the evening in revolving
round the walls of Carcassonne.  But I had in a
measure engaged to proceed to Narborme, and there
was a certain magic that name which gave me
strength, - Narbonne, the richest city in Roman Gaul.



XXIV.

At Narbonne I took up my abode at the house of
a _serrurier mecanicien_, and was very thankful for the
accommodation.  It was my misfortune to arrive at
this ancient city late at night, on the eve of market-
day; and market-day at Narbonne is a very serious
affair.  The inns, on this occasion, are stuffed with
wine-dealers; for the country roundabout, dedicated
almost exclusively to Bacchus, has hitherto escaped
the phylloxera.  This deadly enemy of the grape is
encamped over the Midi in a hundred places; blighted
vineyards and ruined proprietors being quite the order
of the day.  The signs of distress are more frequent
as you advance into Provence, many of the vines being
laid under water, in the hope of washing the plague
away.  There are healthy regions still, however, and
the vintners find plenty to do at Narbonne.  The
traffic in wine appeared to be the sole thought of the
Narbonnais; every one I spoke to had something to
say about the harvest of gold that bloomed under its
influence.  "C'est inoui, monsieur, l'argent qu'il y a
dans ce pays.  Des gens a qui la vente de leur vin
rapporte jusqu'a 500,000 francs par an."  That little
speech, addressed to me by a gentleman at the inn,
gives the note of these revelations.  It must be said
that there was little in the appearance either of the
town or of its population to suggest the possession of
such treasures.  Narbonne is a _sale petite ville_ in all
the force of the term, and my first impression on ar-
riving there was an extreme regret that I had not
remained for the night at the lovely Carcassonne.  My
journey from that delectable spot lasted a couple of
hours, and was performed in darkness, - a darkness
not so dense, however, but that I was able to make
out, as we passed it, the great figure of Beziers, whose
ancient roofs and towers, clustered on a goodly hill-
top, looked as fantastic as you please.  I know not
what appearance Beziers may present by day; but by
night it has quite the grand air.  On issuing from the
station at Narbonne, I found that the only vehicle in
waiting was a kind of bastard tramcar, a thing shaped
as if it had been meant to go upon rails; that is,
equipped with small wheels, placed beneath it, and
with a platform at either end, but destined to rattle
over the stones like the most vulgar of omnibuses.
To complete the oddity of this conveyance, it was
under the supervision, not of a conductor, but of a
conductress.  A fair young woman, with a pouch sus-
pended from her girdle, had command of the platform;
and as soon as the car was full she jolted us into the
town through clouds of the thickest dust I ever have
swallowed.  I have had occasion to speak of the activity
of women in France, - of the way they are always in
the ascendant; and here was a signal example of their
general utility.  The young lady I have mentioned
conveyed her whole company to the wretched little
Hotel de France, where it is to be hoped that some
of them found a lodging.  For myself, I was informed
that the place was crowded from cellar to attic, and
that its inmates were sleeping three or four in a room.
At Carcassonne I should have had a bad bed, but at
Narbonne, apparently, I was to have no bed at all.  I
passed an hour or two of flat suspense, while fate
settled the question of whether I should go on to
Perpignan, return to Beziers, or still discover a modest
couch at Narbonne.  I shall not have suffered in vain,
however, if my example serves to deter other travellers
from alighting unannounced at that city on a Wednes-
day evening.  The retreat to Beziers, not attempted
in time, proved impossible, and I was assured that at
Perpignan, which I should not reach till midnight, the
affluence of wine-dealers was not less than at Nar-
bonne.  I interviewed every hostess in the town, and
got no satisfaction but distracted shrugs.  Finally, at
an advanced hour, one of the servants of the Hotel
de France, where I had attempted to dine, came to
me in triumph to proclaim that he had secured for
me a charming apartment in a _maison bourgeoise_.  I
took possession of it gratefully, in spite of its having
an entrance like a stable, and being pervaded by an
odor compared with which that of a stable would
have been delicious.  As I have mentioned, my land-
lord was a locksmith, and he had strange machines
which rumbled and whirred in the rooms below my
own.  Nevertheless, I slept, and I dreamed of Car-
cassonne.  It was better to do that than to dream of
the Hotel de France.

I was obliged to cultivate relations with the cuisine
of this establishment.  Nothing could have been more
_meridional_; indeed, both the dirty little inn and Nar-
bonne at large seemed to me to have the infirmities
of the south, without its usual graces.  Narrow, noisy,
shabby, belittered and encumbered, filled with clatter
and chatter, the Hotel de France would have been
described in perfection by Alphonse Daudet.  For what
struck me above all in it was the note of the Midi,
as he has represented it, - the sound of universal talk.
The landlord sat at supper with sundry friends, in a
kind of glass cage, with a genial indifference to arriv-
ing guests; the waiters tumbled over the loose luggage
in the hall; the travellers who had been turned away
leaned gloomily against door-posts; and the landlady,
surrounded by confusion, unconscious of responsibility,
and animated only by the spirit of conversation, bandied
high-voiced compliments with the _voyageurs de com-
merce_.  At ten o'clock in the morning there was a
table d'hote for breakfast, - a wonderful repast, which
overflowed into every room and pervaded the whole
establishment.  I sat down with a hundred hungry
marketers, fat, brown, greasy men, with a good deal of
the rich soil of Languedoc adhering to their hands
and their boots.  I mention the latter articles because
they almost put them on the table.  It was very hot,
and there were swarms of flies; the viands had the
strongest odor; there was in particular a horrible mix-
ture known as _gras-double_, a light gray, glutinous,
nauseating mess, which my companions devoured in
large quantities.  A man opposite to me had the dir-
tiest fingers I ever saw; a collection of fingers which
in England would have excluded him from a farmers'
ordinary.  The conversation was mainly bucolic; though
a part of it, I remember, at the table at which I sat,
consisted of a discussion as to whether or no the maid-
servant were _sage_, - a discussion which went on under
the nose of this young lady, as she carried about the
dreadful _gras-double_, and to which she contributed
the most convincing blushes.  It was thoroughly _meri-
dional_.

In going to Narbonne I had of course counted upon
Roman remains; but when I went forth in search of
them I perceived that I had hoped too fondly.  There
is really nothing in the place to speak of; that is, on
the day of my visit there was nothing but the market,
which was in complete possession.  "This intricate,
curious, but lifeless town," Murray calls it; yet to me
it appeared overflowing with life.  Its streets are mere
crooked, dirty lanes, bordered with perfectly insignifi-
cant houses; but they were filled with the same clatter
and chatter that I had found at the hotel.  The market
was held partly in the little square of the hotel de
ville, a structure which a flattering wood-cut in the
Guide-Joanne had given me a desire to behold.  The
reality was not impressive, the old color of the front
having been completely restored away.  Such interest
as it superficially possesses it derives from a fine
mediaeval tower which rises beside it, with turrets at
the angles, - always a picturesque thing.  The rest of
the market was held in another _place_, still shabbier
than the first, which lies beyond the canal.  The Canal
du Midi flows through the town, and, spanned at this
point by a small suspension-bridge, presented a cer-
tain sketchability.  On the further side were the venders
and chafferers, - old women under awnings and big um-
brellas, rickety tables piled high with fruit, white caps
and brown faces, blouses, sabots, donkeys.  Beneath
this picture was another, - a long row of washerwomen,
on their knees on the edge of the canal, pounding
and wringing the dirty linen of Narbonne, - no great
quantity, to judge by the costume of the people.  In-
numerable rusty men, scattered all over the place,
were buying and selling wine, straddling about in
pairs, in groups, with their hands in their pockets, and
packed together at the doors of the cafes.  They were
mostly fat and brown and unshaven; they ground their
teeth as they talked; they were very _meridionaux_.

The only two lions at Narbonne are the cathedral
and the museum, the latter of which is quartered in
the hotel de ville.  The cathedral, closely shut in by
houses, and with the west front undergoing repairs, is
singular in two respects.  It consists exclusively of a
choir, which is of the end of the thirteenth century
and the beginning of the next, and of great magnifi-
cence.  There is absolutely nothing else.  This choir,
of extraordinary elevation, forms the whole church.  I
sat there a good while; there was no other visitor.  I
had taken a great dislike to poor little Narbonne,
which struck me as sordid and overheated, and this
place seemed to extend to me, as in the Middle Ages,
the privilege of sanctuary.  It is a very solemn corner.
The other peculiarity of the cathedral is that, exter-
nally, it bristles with battlements, having anciently
formed part of the defences of the _archeveche_, which
is beside it and which connects it with the hotel de
ville.  This combination of the church and the for-
tress is very curious, and during the Middle Ages was
not without its value.  The palace of the former arch-
bishops of Narbonne (the hotel de ville of to-day
forms part of it) was both an asylum and an arsenal
during the hideous wars by which the Languedoc was
ravaged in the thirteenth century.  The whole mass
of buildings is jammed together in a manner that
from certain points of view makes it far from apparent
which feature is which.  The museum occupies several
chambers at the top of the hotel de ville, and is not
an imposing collection.  It was closed, but I induced
the portress to let me in, - a silent, cadaverous person,
in a black coif, like a _beguine_, who sat knitting in one
of the windows while I went the rounds.  The number
of Roman fragments is small, and their quality is not
the finest; I must add that this impression was hastily
gathered.  There is indeed a work of art in one of
the rooms which creates a presumption in favor of the
place, - the portrait (rather a good one) of a citizen
of Narbonne, whose name I forget, who is described
as having devoted all his time and his intelligence to
collecting the objects by which the. visitor is sur-
rounded.  This excellent man was a connoisseur, and
the visitor is doubtless often an ignoramus.



XXV.

	"Cette, with its glistening houses white,
	   Curves with the curving beach away
	To where the lighthouse beacons bright,
	   Far in the bay."

That stanza of Matthew Arnold's, which I hap-
pened to remember, gave a certain importance to the
half-hour I spent in the buffet of the station at Cette
while I waited for the train to Montpellier.  I had left
Narbonne in the afternoon, and by the time I reached
Cette the darkness had descended.  I therefore missed
the sight of the glistening houses, and had to console
myself with that of the beacon in the bay, as well as
with a _bouillon_ of which I partook at the buffet afore-
said; for, since the morning, I had not ventured to
return to the table d'hote at Narbonne.  The Hotel
Nevet, at Montpellier, which I reached an hour later,
has an ancient renown all over the south of France, -
advertises itself, I believe, as _le plus vaste du midi_.  It
seemed to me the model of a good provincial inn; a
big rambling, creaking establishment, with brown,
labyrinthine corridors, a queer old open-air vestibule,
into which the diligence, in the _bon temps_, used to
penetrate, and an hospitality more expressive than
that of the new caravansaries.  It dates from the days
when Montpellier was still accounted a fine winter re-
sidence for people with weak lungs; and this rather
melancholy tradition, together with the former celebrity
of the school of medicine still existing there, but from
which the glory has departed, helps to account for its
combination of high antiquity and vast proportions.
The old hotels were usually more concentrated; but
the school of medicine passed for one of the attrac-
tions of Montpellier.  Long before Mentone was dis-
covered or Colorado invented, British invalids travelled
down through France in the post-chaise or the public
coach to spend their winters in the wonderful place
which boasted both a climate and a faculty.  The air
is mild, no doubt, but there are refinements of mild-
ness which were not then suspected, and which in a
more analytic age have carried the annual wave far
beyond Montpellier.  The place is charming, all the
same; and it served the purpose of John Locke; who
made a long stay there, between 1675 and 1679, and
became acquainted with a noble fellow-visitor, Lord
Pembroke, to whom he dedicated the famous Essay.
There are places that please, without your being able
to say wherefore, and Montpellier is one of the num-
ber.  It has some charming views, from the great pro-
menade of the Peyrou; but its position is not strikingly
fair.  Beyond this it contains a good museum and the
long facades of its school, but these are its only de-
finite treasures.  Its cathedral struck me as quite the
weakest I had seen, and I remember no other monu-
ment that made up for it.  The place has neither the
gayety of a modern nor the solemnity of an ancient
town, and it is agreeable as certain women are agree-
able who are neither beautiful nor clever.  An Italian
would remark that it is sympathetic; a German would
admit that it is _gemuthlich_.  I spent two days there,
mostly in the rain, and even under these circum-
stances I carried away a kindly impression.  I think
the Hotel Nevet had something to do with it, and the
sentiment of relief with which, in a quiet, even a
luxurious, room that looked out on a garden, I reflected
that I had washed my hands of Narbonne.  The phyl-
loxera has destroyed the vines in the country that sur-
rounds Montpellier, and at that moment I was capable
of rejoicing in the thought that I should not breakfast
with vintners.

The gem of the place is the Musee Fabre, one of
the best collections of paintings in a provincial city.
Francois Fabre, a native of Montpellier, died there in
1837, after having spent a considerable part of his
life in Italy, where he had collected a good many
valuable pictures and some very poor ones, the latter
class including several from his own hand.  He was
the hero of a remarkable episode, having succeeded
no less a person than Vittorio Alfieri in the affections
of no less a person than Louise de Stolberg, Countess
of Albany, widow of no less a person than Charles
Edward Stuart, the second pretender to the British
crown.  Surely no woman ever was associated senti-
mentally with three figures more diverse, - a disqualified
sovereign, an Italian dramatist, and a bad French
painter.  The productions of M. Fabre, who followed
in the steps of David, bear the stamp of a cold me-
diocrity; there is not much to be said even for the
portrait of the genial countess (her life has been written
by M. Saint-Rene-Taillandier, who depicts her as de-
lightful), which hangs in Florence, in the gallery of
the Uffizzi, and makes a pendant to a likeness of
Alfieri by the same author.  Stendhal, in his "Me-
moires d'un Touriste," says that this work of art
represents her as a cook who has pretty hands.  I am
delighted to have an opportunity of quoting Stendhal,
whose two volumes of the "Memoires d'un Touriste"
every traveller in France should carry in his port-
manteau.  I have had this opportunity more than once,
for I have met him at Tours, at Nantes, at Bourges;
and everywhere he is suggestive.  But he has the de-
fect that he is never pictorial, that he never by any
chance makes an image, and that his style is per-
versely colorless, for a man so fond of contemplation.
His taste is often singularly false; it is the taste of the
early years of the present century, the period that
produced clocks surmounted with sentimental "sub-
jects."  Stendhal does not admire these clocks, but
he almost does.  He admires Domenichino and Guer-
cino, and prizes the Bolognese school of painters be-
cause they "spoke to the soul."  He is a votary of the
new classic, is fond of tall, squire, regular buildings,
and thinks Nantes, for instance, full of the "air noble."
It was a pleasure to me to reflect that five-and-forty
years ago he had alighted in that city, at the very inn
in which I spent a night, and which looks down on
the Place Graslin and the theatre.  The hotel that was
the best in 1837 appears to be the best to-day.  On
the subject of Touraine, Stendhal is extremely refresh-
ing; he finds the scenery meagre and much overrated,
and proclaims his opinion with perfect frankness.  He
does, however, scant justice to the banks of the Loire;
his want of appreciation of the picturesque - want of
the sketcher's sense - causes him to miss half the
charm of a landscape which is nothing if not "quiet,"
as a painter would say, and of which the felicities
reveal themselves only to waiting eyes.  He even
despises the Indre, the river of Madame Sand.  The
"Memoires d'un Touriste" are written in the character
of a commercial traveller, and the author has nothing
to say about Chenonceaux or Chambord, or indeed
about any of the chateaux of that part of France; his
system being to talk only of the large towns, where he
may be supposed to find a market for his goods.  It
was his ambition to pass for an ironmonger.  But in
the large towns he is usually excellent company, though
as discursive as Sterne, and strangely indifferent, for a
man of imagination, to those superficial aspects of
things which the poor pages now before the reader are
mainly an attempt to render.  It is his conviction that
Alfieri, at Florence, bored the Countess of Albany ter-
ribly; and he adds that the famous Gallophobe died
of jealousy of the little painter from Montpellier.  The
Countess of Albany left her property to Fabre; and I
suppose some of the pieces in the museum of his
native town used to hang in the sunny saloons of that
fine old palace on the Arno which is still pointed out
to the stranger in Florence as the residence of Alfieri.

The institution has had other benefactors, notably
a certain M. Bruyas, who has enriched it with an extra-
ordinary number of portraits of himself.  As these,
however, are by different hands, some of them dis-
tinguished, we may suppose that it was less the model
than the artists to whom M. Bruyas wished to give
publicity. Easily first are two large specimens of
David Teniers, which are incomparable for brilliancy
and a glowing perfection of execution.  I have a weak-
ness for this singular genius, who combined the delicate
with the grovelling, and I have rarely seen richer
examples.  Scarcely less valuable is a Gerard Dow
which hangs near them, though it must rank lower as
having kept less of its freshness.  This Gerard Dow
did me good; for a master is a master, whatever he
may paint.  It represents a woman paring carrots,
while a boy before her exhibits a mouse-trap in which
he has caught a frightened victim.  The good-wife has
spread a cloth on the top of a big barrel which serves
her as a table, and on this brown, greasy napkin, of
which the texture is wonderfully rendered, lie the raw
vegetables she is preparing for domestic consumption.
Beside the barrel is a large caldron lined with copper,
with a rim of brass.  The way these things are painted
brings tears to the eyes; but they give the measure of
the Musee Fabre, where two specimens of Teniers and
a Gerard Dow are the jewels.  The Italian pictures are
of small value; but there is a work by Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds, said to be the only one in France, - an infant
Samuel in prayer, apparently a repetition of the pic-
ture in England which inspired the little plaster im-
age, disseminated in Protestant lands, that we used to
admire in our childhood.  Sir Joshua, somehow, was
an eminently Protestant painter; no one can forget
that, who in the National Gallery in London has looked
at the picture in which he represents several young
ladies as nymphs, voluminously draped, hanging gar-
lands over a statue, - a picture suffused indefinably
with the Anglican spirit, and exasperating to a mem-
ber of one of the Latin races.  It is an odd chance,
therefore, that has led him into that part of France
where Protestants have been least _bien vus_.  This is the
country of the dragonnades of Louis XIV.  and of the
pastors of the desert.  From the garden of the Peyrou,
at Montpellier, you may see the hills of the Cevennes,
to which they of the religion fled for safety, and out
of which they were hunted and harried.

I have only to add, in regard to the Musee Fabre,
that it contains the portrait of its founder, - a little,
pursy, fat-faced, elderly man, whose countenance con-
tains few indications of the power that makes distin-
guished victims.  He is, however, just such a personage
as the mind's eye sees walking on the terrace of the
Peyrou of an October afternoon in the early years of
the century; a plump figure in a chocolate-colored coat
and a _culotte_ that exhibits a good leg, - a culotte pro-
vided with a watch-fob from which a heavy seal is
suspended.  This Peyrou (to come to it at last) is a
wonderful place, especially to be found in a little pro-
vincial city.  France is certainly the country of towns
that aim at completeness; more than in other lands,
they contain stately features as a matter of course.  We
should never have ceased to hear about the Peyrou, if
fortune had placed it at a Shrewsbury or a Buffalo.  It
is true that the place enjoys a certain celebrity at
home, which it amply deserves, moreover; for nothing
could be more impressive and monumental.  It consists
of an "elevated platform," as Murray says, - an im-
mense terrace, laid out, in the highest part of the town,
as a garden, and commanding in all directions a view
which in clear weather must be of the finest.  I strolled
there in the intervals of showers, and saw only the
nearer beauties, - a great pompous arch of triumph in
honor of Louis XIV. (which is not, properly speaking,
in the garden, but faces it, straddling across the _place_
by which you approach it from the town), an equestrian
statue of that monarch set aloft in the middle of the
terrace, and a very exalted and complicated fountain,
which forms a background to the picture.  This foun-
tain gushes from a kind of hydraulic temple, or _cha-
teau d'eau_, to which you ascend by broad flights of
steps, and which is fed by a splendid aqueduct,
stretched in the most ornamental and unexpected
manner across the neighboring valley.  All this work
dates from the middle of the last century.  The com-
bination of features - the triumphal arch, or gate; the
wide, fair terrace, with its beautiful view; the statue
of the grand monarch; the big architectural fountain,
which would not surprise one at Rome, but goes sur-
prise one at Montpellier; and to complete the effect,
the extraordinary aqueduct, charmingly fore-shortened,
- all this is worthy of a capital, of a little court-city.
The whole place, with its repeated steps, its balus-
trades, its massive and plentiful stone-work, is full of
the air of the last century, - _sent bien son dix-huitieme
siecle_; none the less so, I am afraid, that, as I read in
my faithful Murray, after the revocation of the Edict
of Nantes, the block, the stake, the wheel, had been
erected here for the benefit of the desperate Camisards.



XXVI.

It was a pleasure to feel one's self in Provence
again, - the land where the silver-gray earth is im-
pregnated with the light of the sky.  To celebrate
the event, as soon as I arrived at Nimes I engaged
a caleche to convey me to the Pont du Gard.  The
day was yet young, and it was perfectly fair; it ap-
peared well, for a longish drive, to take advantage,
without delay, of such security.  After I had left the
town I became more intimate with that Provencal
charm which I had already enjoyed from the window
of the train, and which glowed in the sweet sunshine
and the white rocks, and lurked in the smoke-puffs
of the little olives.  The olive-trees in Provence are
half the landscape.  They are neither so tall, so stout,
nor so richly contorted as I have seen them beyond
the Alps; but this mild colorless bloom seems the
very texture of the country.  The road from Nimes,
for a distance of fifteen miles, is superb; broad enough
for an army, and as white and firm as a dinner-table.
It stretches away over undulations which suggest a
kind of harmony; and in the curves it makes through
the wide, free country, where there is never a hedge
or a wall, and the detail is always exquisite, there is
something majestic, almost processional.  Some twenty
minutes before I reached the little inn that marks the
termination of the drive, my vehicle met with an ac-
cident which just missed being serious, and which
engaged the attention of a gentleman, who, followed
by his groom and mounted on a strikingly handsome
horse happened to ride up at the moment.  This young
man, who, with his good looks and charming manner,
might have stepped out of a novel of Octave Feuillet,
gave me some very intelligent advice in reference to
one of my horses that had been injured, and was so
good as to accompany me to the inn, with the re-
sources of which he was acquainted, to see that his
recommendations were carried out.  The result of our
interview was that he invited me to come and look at
a small but ancient chateau in the neighborhood,
which he had the happiness - not the greatest in the
world, he intimated - to inhabit, and at which I en-
gaged to present myself after I should have spent an
hour at the Pont du Gard.  For the moment, when
we separated, I gave all my attention to that great
structure.  You are very near it before you see it; the
ravine it spans suddenly opens and exhibits the
picture.  The scene at this point grows extremely
beautiful.  The ravine is the valley of the Gardon,
which the road from Nimes has followed some time
without taking account of it, but which, exactly at the
right distance from the aqueduct, deepens and ex-
pands, and puts on those characteristics which are best
suited to give it effect.  The gorge becomes romantic,
still, and solitary, and, with its white rocks and wild
shrubbery, hangs over the clear, colored river, in whose
slow course there is here and there a deeper pool.
Over the valley, from side to side, and ever so high
in the air, stretch the three tiers of the tremendous
bridge.  They are unspeakably imposing, and nothing
could well be more Roman.  The hugeness, the soli-
dity, the unexpectedness, the monumental rectitude of
the whole thing leave you nothing to say - at the time
- and make you stand gazing.  You simply feel that
it is noble and perfect, that it has the quality of
greatness.  A road, branching from the highway, de-
scends to the level of the river and passes under one
of the arches.  This road has a wide margin of grass
and loose stones, which slopes upward into the bank
of the ravine.  You may sit here as long as you please,
staring up at the light, strong piers; the spot is ex-
tremely natural, though two or three stone benches
have been erected on it.  I remained there an hour
and got a cornplete impression; the place was per-
fectly soundless, and for the time, at least, lonely;
the splendid afternoon had begun to fade, and there
was a fascination in the object I had come to see.  It
came to pass that at the same time I discovered in it
a certain stupidity, a vague brutality.  That element
is rarely absent from great Roman work, which is
wanting in the nice adaptation of the means to the
end.  The means are always exaggerated; the end is
so much more than attained.  The Roman rigidity
was apt to overshoot the mark, and I suppose a race
which could do nothing small is as defective as a race
that can do nothing great.  Of this Roman rigidity
the Pont du Gard is an admirable example.  It would
be a great injustice, however, not to insist upon its
beauty, - a kind of manly beauty, that of an object
constructed not to please but to serve, and impressive
simply from the scale on which it carries out this
intention.  The number of arches in each tier is dif-
ferent; they are smaller and more numerous as they
ascend.  The preservation of the thing is extra-
ordinary; nothing has crumbled or collapsed; every
feature remains; and the huge blocks of stone, of a
brownish-yellow, (as if they had been baked by the
Provencal sun for eighteen centuries), pile themselves,
without mortar or cement, as evenly as the day they
were laid together.  All this to carry the water of a
couple of springs to a little provincial city!  The con-
duit on the top has retained its shape and traces of
the cement with which it was lined.  When the vague
twilight began to gather, the lonely valley seemed to
fill itself with the shadow of the Roman name, as if
the mighty empire were still as erect as the supports
of the aqueduct; and it was open to a solitary tourist,
sitting there sentimental, to believe that no people has
ever been, or will ever be, as great as that, measured,
as we measure the greatness of an individual, by the
push they gave to what they undertook.  The Pont du
Gard is one of the three or four deepest impressions
they have left; it speaks of them in a manner with
which they might have been satisfied.

I feel as if it were scarcely discreet to indicate the
whereabouts of the chateau of the obliging young
man I had met on the way from Nimes; I must con-
tent myself with saying that it nestled in an en-
chanting valley, - _dans le fond_, as they say in France,
- and that I took my course thither on foot, after
leaving the Pont du Gard.  I find it noted in my
journal as "an adorable little corner."  The principal
feature of the place is a couple of very ancient towers,
brownish-yellow in hue, and mantled in scarlet Vir-
ginia-creeper.  One of these towers, reputed to be
of Saracenic origin, is isolated, and is only the more
effective; the other is incorporated in the house,
which is delightfully fragmentary and irregular.  It
had got to be late by this time, and the lonely _castel_
looked crepuscular and mysterious.  An old house-
keeper was sent for, who showed me the rambling
interior; and then the young man took me into a
dim old drawing-room, which had no less than four
chimney-pieces, all unlighted, and gave me a refec-
tion of fruit and sweet wine.  When I praised the
wine and asked him what it was, he said simply,
"C'est du vin de ma mere!"  Throughout my little
joumey I had never yet felt myself so far from Paris;
and this was a sensation I enjoyed more than my
host, who was an involuntary exile, consoling him-
self with laying out a _manege_, which he showed me
as I walked away.  His civility was great, and I was
greatly touched by it.  On my way back to the little
inn where I had left my vehicle, I passed the Pont
du Gard, and took another look at it.  Its great arches
made windows for the evening sky, and the rocky
ravine, with its dusky cedars and shining river, was
lonelier than before.  At the inn I swallowed, or tried
to swallow,a glass of horrible wine with my coach-
man; after which, with my reconstructed team, I drove
back to Nimes in the moonlight.  It only added a
more solitary whiteness to the constant sheen of the
Provencal landscape.



XXVII.

The weather the next day was equally fair, so that
it seemed an imprudence not to make sure of Aigues-
Mortes.  Nimes itself could wait; at a pinch, I could
attend to Nimes in the rain.  It was my belief that
Aigues-Mortes was a little gem, and it is natural to
desire that gems should have an opportunity to sparkle.
This is an excursion of but a few hours, and there is
a little friendly, familiar, dawdling train that will con-
vey you, in time for a noonday breakfast, to the small
dead town where the blessed Saint-Louis twice em-
barked for the crusades.  You may get back to Nimes
for dinner; the run - or rather the walk, for the train
doesn't run - is of about an hour.  I found the little
journey charming, and looked out of the carriage win-
dow, on my right, at the distant Cevennes, covered
with tones of amber and blue, and, all around, at
vineyards red with the touch of October.  The grapes
were gone, but the plants had a color of their own.
Within a certain distance of Aigues-Mortes they give
place to wide salt-marshes, traversed by two canals;
and over this expanse the train rumbles slowly upon
a narrow causeway, failing for some time, though you
know you are near the object of your curiosity, to
bring you to sight of anything but the horizon.  Sud-
denly it appears, the towered and embattled mass,
lying so low that the crest of its defences seems to
rise straight out of the ground; and it is not till the
train stops, close before them, that you are able to
take the full measure of its walls.

Aigues-Mortes stands on the edge of a wide _etang_,
or shallow inlet of the sea, the further side of which
is divided by a narrow band of coast from the Gulf
of Lyons.  Next after Carcassonne, to which it forms
an admirable _pendant_, it is the most perfect thing of
the kind in France.  It has a rival in the person of
Avignon, but the ramparts of Avignon are much less
effective.  Like Carcassonne, it is completely sur-
rounded with its old fortifications; and if they are far
simpler in character (there is but one circle), they are
quite as well preserved.  The moat has been filled
up, and the site of  the town might be figured by a
billiard-table without pockets.  On this absolute level,
covered with coarse grass, Aigues-Mortes presents quite
the appearance of the walled town that a school-boy
draws upon his slate, or that we see in the background
of early Flemish pictures, - a simple parallelogram, of
a contour almost absurdly bare, broken at intervals by
angular towers and square holes.  Such, literally speak-
ing, is this delightful little city, which needs to be seen
to tell its full story.  It is extraordinarily pictorial,
and if it is a very small sister of Carcassonne, it has
at least the essential features of the family.  Indeed,
it is even more like an image and less like a reality
than Carcassonne; for by position and prospect it
seems even more detached from the life of the present
day.  It is true that Aigues-Mortes does a little busi-
ness; it sees certain bags of salt piled into barges
which stand in a canal beside it, and which carry their
cargo into actual places.  But nothing could well be
more drowsy and desultory than this industry as I
saw it practised, with the aid of two or three brown
peasants and under the eye of a solitary douanier,
who strolled on the little quay beneath the western
wall.  "C'est bien plaisant, c'est bien paisible," said
this worthy man, with whom I had some conversa-
tion; and pleasant and peaceful is the place indeed,
though the former of these epithets may suggest an
element of gayety in which Aigues-Mortes is deficient.
The sand, the salt, the dull sea-view, surround it with
a bright, quiet melancholy.  There are fifteen towers
and nine gates, five of which are on the southern side,
overlooking the water.  I walked all round the place
three times (it doesn't take long), but lingered most
under the southern wall, where the afternoon light
slept in the dreamiest, sweetest way.  I sat down on
an old stone, and looked away to the desolate salt-
marshes and the still, shining surface of the _etang_,
and, as I did so, reflected that this was a queer little
out-of-the-world corner to have been chosen, in the
great dominions of either monarch, for that pompous
interview which took place, in 1538, between Francis I.
and Charles V.  It was also not easy to perceive how
Louis IX., when in 1248 and 1270 he started for the
Holy Land, set his army afloat in such very undeveloped
channels.  An hour later I purchased in the town a
little pamphlet by M. Marius Topin, who undertakes
to explain this latter anomaly, and to show that there
is water enough in the port, as we may call it by
courtesy, to have sustained a fleet of crusaders.  I was
unable to trace the channel that he points out, but
was glad to believe that, as he contends, the sea has
not retreated from the town since the thirteenth century.
It was comfortable to think that things are not so
changed as that.  M. Topin indicates that the other
French ports of the Mediterranean were not then _dis-
ponsibles_, and that Aigues-Mortes was the most eligible
spot for an embarkation.

Behind the straight walls and the quiet gates the
little town has not crumbled, like the Cite of Carcas-
sonne.  It can hardly be said to be alive; but if it is
dead it has been very neatly embalmed.  The hand
of the restorer rests on it constantly; but this artist
has not, as at Carcassonne, had miracles to accomplish.
The interior is very still and empty, with small stony,
whitewashed streets, tenanted by a stray dog, a stray
cat, a stray old woman.  In the middle is a little _place_,
with two or three cafes decorated by wide awnings, -
a little _place_ of which the principal feature is a very
bad bronze statue of Saint Louis by Pradier.  It is
almost as bad as the breakfast I had at the inn that
bears the name of that pious monarch.  You may walk
round the enceinte of Aigues-Mortes, both outside and
in; but you may not, as at Carcassonne, make a por-
tion of this circuit on the _chemin de ronde_, the little
projecting footway attached to the inner face of the
battlements.  This footway, wide enough only for a
single pedestrian, is in the best order, and near each
of the gates a flight of steps leads up to it; but a
locked gate, at the top of the steps, makes access im-
possible, or at least unlawful.  Aigues-Mortes, however,
has its citadel, an immense tower, larger than any of
the others, a little detached, and standing at the north-
west angle of the town.  I called upon the _casernier_,
the custodian of the walls, - and in his absence I was
conducted through this big Tour de Constance by his
wife, a very mild, meek woman, yellow with the traces
of fever and ague, - a scourge which, as might be ex-
pected in a town whose name denotes "dead waters,"
enters freely at the nine gates.  The Tour de Con-
stance is of extraordinary girth and solidity, divided
into three superposed circular chambers, with very fine
vaults, which are lighted by embrasures of prodigious
depth, converging to windows little larger than loop-
holes.  The place served for years as a prison to many
of the Protestants of the south whom the revocation
of the Edict of Nantes had exposed to atrocious
penalties, and the annals of these dreadful chambers
during the first half of the last century were written
in tears and blood.  Some of the recorded cases of
long confinement there make one marvel afresh at
what man has inflicted and endured.  In a country in
which a policy of extermination was to be put into
practice this horrible tower was an obvious resource.
From the battlements at the top, which is surmounted
by an old disused light-house, you see the little com-
pact rectangular town, which looks hardly bigger than
a garden-patch, mapped out beneath you, and follow
the plain configuration of its defences.  You take
possession of it, and you feel that you will remember
it always.



XXVIII.

After this I was free to look about me at Nimes,
and I did so with such attention as the place appeared
to require.  At the risk of seeming too easily and too
frequently disappointed, I will say that it required
rather less than I had been prepared to give.  It is a
town of three or four fine features, rather than a town
with, as I may say, a general figure.  In general,
Nimes is poor; its only treasures are its Roman re-
mains, which are of the first order.  The new French
fashions prevail in many of its streets; the old houses
are paltry, and the good houses are new; while beside
my hotel rose a big spick-and-span church, which
had the oddest air of having been intended for
Brooklyn or Cleveland.  It is true that this church
looked out on a square completely French, - a square
of a fine modern disposition, flanked on one side by a
classical _palais de justice_ embellished with trees and
parapets, and occupied in the centre with a group of
allegorical statues, such as one encounters only in the
cities of France, the chief of these being a colossal
figure by Pradier, representing Nimes.  An English,
an American, town which should have such a monu-
ment, such a square, as this, would be a place of
great pretensions; but like so many little _villes de
province_ in the country of which I write, Nimes is
easily ornamental.  What nobler ornament can there
be than the Roman baths at the foot of Mont Cavalier,
and the delightful old garden that surrounds them?
All that quarter of Nimes has every reason to be
proud of itself; it has been revealed to the world at
large by copious photography.  A clear, abundant
stream gushes from the foot of a high hill (covered
with trees and laid out in paths), and is distributed
into basins which sufficiently refer themselves to the
period that gave them birth, - the period that has
left its stamp on that pompous Peyrou which we ad-
mired at Montpellier.  Here are the same terraces and
steps and balustrades, and a system of water-works
less impressive, perhaps, but very ingenious and charm-
ing.  The whole place is a mixture of old Rome and
of the French eighteenth century; for the remains of
the antique baths are in a measure incorporated in
the modern fountains.  In a corner of this umbrageous
precinct stands a small Roman ruin, which is known
as a temple of Diana, but was more apparently a
_nymphaeum_, and appears to have had a graceful con-
nection with the adjacent baths.  I learn from Murray
that this little temple, of the period of Augustus,
"was reduced to its present state of ruin in 1577;"
the moment at which the townspeople, threatened
with a siege by the troops of the crown, partly
demolished it, lest it should serve as a cover to the
enemy.  The remains are very fragmentary, but they
serve to show that the place was lovely.  I spent half
an hour in it on a perfect Sunday morning (it is en-
closed by a high _grille_, carefully tended, and has a
warden of its own), and with the help of my imagina-
tion tried to reconstruct a little the aspect of things
in the Gallo-Roman days.  I do wrong, perhaps, to
say that 1 _tried_; from a flight so deliberate I should
have shrunk.  But there was a certain contagion of
antiquity in the air; and among the ruins of baths
and temples, in the very spot where the aqueduct that
crosses the Gardon in the wondrous manner I had
seen discharged itself, the picture of a splendid
paganism seemed vaguely to glow.  Roman baths, -
Roman baths; those words alone were a scene.  Every-
thing was changed: I was strolling in a _jardin francais_;
the bosky slope of the Mont Cavalier (a very modest
mountain), hanging over the place, is crowned with a
shapeless tower, which is as likely to be of mediaeval
as of antique origin; and yet, as I leaned on the
parapet of one of the fountains, where a flight of
curved steps (a hemicycle, as the French say) descended
into a basin full of dark, cool recesses, where the slabs
of the Roman foundations gleam through the clear
green water, - as in this attitude I surrendered myself
to contemplation and reverie, it seemed to me that I
touched for a moment the ancient world.  Such mo-
ments are illuminating, and the light of this one mingles,
in my memory, with the dusky greenness of the Jardin
de la Fontaine.

The fountain proper - the source of all these dis-
tributed waters - is the prettiest thing in the world, a
reduced copy of Vaucluse.  It gushes up at the foot
of the Mont Cavalier, at a point where that eminence
rises with a certain cliff-like effect, and, like other
springs in the same circumstances, appears to issue
from the rock with a sort of quivering stillness.  I
trudged up the Mont Cavalier, - it is a matter of five
minutes, - and having committed this cockneyism en-
hanced it presently by another.  I ascended the stupid
Tour Magne, the mysterious structure I mentioned a
moment ago.  The only feature of this dateless tube,
except the inevitable collection of photographs to
which you are introduced by the door-keeper, is the
view you enjoy from its summit.  This view is, of
course, remarkably fine, but I am ashamed to say I
have not the smallest recollection of it; for while I
looked into the brilliant spaces of the air I seemed
still to see only what I saw in the depths of the Roman
baths, - the image, disastrously confused and vague, of
a vanished world.  This world, however, has left at
Nimes a far more considerable memento than a few
old stones covered with water-moss.  The Roman arena
is the rival of those of Verona and of Arles; at a
respectful distance it emulates the Colosseum.  It is a
small Colosseum, if I may be allowed the expression,
and is in a much better preservation than the great
circus at Rome.  This is especially true of the external
walls, with their arches, pillars, cornices.  I must add
that one should not speak of preservation, in regard
to the arena at Nimes, without speaking also of repair.
After the great ruin ceased to be despoiled, it began
to be protected, and most of its wounds have been
dressed with new material.  These matters concern
the archaeologist; and I felt here, as I felt afterwards
at Arles, that one of the profane, in the presence of
such a monument, can only admire and hold his
tongue.  The great impression, on the whole, is an
impression of wonder that so much should have sur-
vived.  What remains at Nimes, after all dilapidation
is estimated, is astounding.  I spent an hour in the
Arenes on that same sweet Sunday morning, as I
came back from the Roman baths, and saw that the
corridors, the vaults, the staircases, the external casing,
are still virtually there.  Many of these parts are
wanting in the Colosseum, whose sublimity of size,
however, can afford to dispense with detail.  The seats
at Nimes, like those at Verona, have been largely
renewed; not that this mattered much, as I lounged
on the cool surface of one of them, and admired the
mighty concavity of the place and the elliptical sky-
line, broken by uneven blocks and forming the rim of
the monstrous cup, - a cup that had been filled with
horrors.  And yet I made my reflections; I said to
myself that though a Roman arena is one of the most
impressive of the works of man, it has a touch of that
same stupidity which I ventured to discover in the
Pont du Gard.  It is brutal; it is monotonous; it is
not at all exquisite.  The Arenes at Nimes were ar-
ranged for a bull-fight, - a form of recreation that, as
I was informed, is much _dans les habitudes Nimoises_,
and very common throughout Provence, where (still
according to my information) it is the usual pastime
of a Sunday afternoon.  At Arles and Nimes it has a
characteristic setting, but in the villages the patrons
of the game make a circle of carts and barrels, on
which the spectators perch themselves.  I was sur-
prised at the prevalence, in mild Provence, of the
Iberian vice, and hardly know whether it makes the
custom more respectable that at Nimes and Arles the
thing is shabbily and imperfectly done.  The bulls
are rarely killed, and indeed often are bulls only in
the Irish sense of the term, - being domestic and
motherly cows.  Such an entertainment of course does
not supply to the arena that element of the exquisite
which I spoke of as wanting.  The exquisite at Nimes
is mainly represented by the famous Maison Carree.
The first impression you receive from this delicate
little building, as you stand before it, is that you have
already seen it many times.  Photographs, engravings,
models, medals, have placed it definitely in your eye,
so that from the sentiment with which you regard it
curiosity and surprise are almost completely, and per-
haps deplorably, absent.  Admiration remains, how-
ever, - admiration of a familiar and even slightly
patronizing kind.  The Maison Carree does not over-
whelm you; you can conceive it.  It is not one of the
great sensations of the antique art; but it is perfectly
felicitous, and, in spite of having been put to all sorts
of incongruous uses, marvellously preserved.  Its slender
columns, its delicate proportions, its charming com-
pactness, seemed to bring one nearer to the century
that built it than the great superpositions of arenas
and bridges, and give it the interest that vibrates from
one age to another when the note of taste is struck.
If anything were needed to make this little toy-temple
a happy production, the service would be rendered by
the second-rate boulevard that conducts to it, adorned
with inferior cafes and tobacco-shops.  Here, in a
respectable recess, surrounded by vulgar habitations,
and with the theatre, of a classic pretension, opposite,
stands the small "square house," so called because it
is much longer than it is broad.  I saw it first in the
evening, in the vague moonlight, which made it look
as if it were cast in bronze.  Stendhal says, justly,
that it has the shape of a playing-card, and he ex-
presses his admiration for it by the singular wish
that an "exact copy" of it should be erected in Paris.
He even goes so far as to say that in the year 1880
this tribute will have been rendered to its charms;
nothing would be more simple, to his mind, than to
"have" in that city "le Pantheon de Rome, quelques
temples de Grece."  Stendhal found it amusing to
write in the character of a _commis-voyageur_, and some-
times it occurs to his reader that he really was one.



XXIX.

On my way from Nimes to Arles, I spent three
hours at Tarascon; chiefly for the love of Alphonse
Daudet, who has written nothing more genial than
"Les Aventures Prodigieuses de Taitarin," and the
story of the "siege" of the bright, dead little town
(a mythic siege by the Prussians) in the "Conies du
Lundi."  In the introduction which, for the new
edition of his works, he has lately supplied to "Tar-
tarin," the author of this extravagant but kindly
satire gives some account of the displeasure with
which he has been visited by the ticklish Tarascon-
nais.  Daudet relates that in his attempt to shed a
humorous light upon some of the more erratic phases
of the Provencal character, he selected Tarascon at a
venture; not because the temperament of its natives
is more vainglorious than that of their neighbors, or
their rebellion against the "despotism of fact" more
marked, but simply because he had to name a par-
ticular Provencal city.  Tartarin is a hunter of lions
and charmer of women, a true "_produit du midi_," as
Daudet says, who has the most fantastic and fabulous
adventures.  He is a minimized Don Quixote, with
much less dignity, but with equal good faith; and the
story of his exploits is a little masterpiece of the
light comical.  The Tarasconnais, however, declined to
take the joke, and opened the vials of their wrath
upon the mocking child of Nimes, who would have
been better employed, they doubtless thought, in show-
ing up the infirmities of his own family.  I am bound
to add that when I passed through Tarascon they did
not appear to be in the least out of humor.  Nothing
could have been brighter, softer, more suggestive of
amiable indifference, than the picture it presented to
my mind.  It lies quietly beside the Rhone, looking
across at Beaucaire, which seems very distant and in-
dependent, and tacitly consenting to let the castle of
the good King Rene of Anjou, which projects very
boldly into the river, pass for its most interesting feature.
The other features are, primarily, a sort of vivid sleepi-
ness in the aspect of the place, as if the September
noon (it had lingered on into October) lasted longer
there than elsewhere; certain low arcades, which make
the streets look gray and exhibit empty vistas; and a
very curious and beautiful walk beside the Rhone,
denominated the Chaussee, - a long and narrow cause-
way, densely shaded by two rows of magnificent old
trees, planted in its embankment, and rendered doubly
effective, at the moment I passed over it, by a little
train of collegians, who had been taken out for mild
exercise by a pair of young priests.  Lastly, one may
say that a striking element of Tarascon, as of any town
that lies on the Rhone, is simply the Rhone itself: the
big brown flood, of uncertain temper, which has never
taken time to forget that it is a child of the mountain
and the glacier, and that such an origin carries with it
great privileges.  Later, at Avignon, I observed it in
the exercise of these privileges, chief among which was
that of frightening the good people of the old papal
city half out of their wits.

The chateau of King Rene serves to-day as the
prison of a district, and the traveller who wishes to
look into it must obtain his permission at the _Mairie
of Tarascon_.  If he have had a certain experience of
French manners, his application will be accompanied
with the forms of a considerable obsequiosity, and in
this case his request will be granted as civilly as it
has been made.  The castle has more of the air of a
severely feudal fortress than I should suppose the
period of its construction (the first half of the fifteenth
century) would have warranted; being tremendously
bare and perpendicular, and constructed for comfort
only in the sense that it was arranged for defence.  It
is a square and simple mass, composed of small yellow
stones, and perched on a pedestal of rock which easily
commands the river.  The building has the usual cir-
cular towers at the corners, and a heavy cornice at
the top, and immense stretches of sun-scorched wall,
relieved at wide intervals by small windows, heavily
cross-barred.  It has, above all, an extreme steepness
of aspect; I cannot express it otherwise.  The walls
are as sheer and inhospitable as precipices.  The castle
has kept its large moat, which is now a hollow filled
with wild plants.  To this tall fortress the good Rene
retired in the middle of the fifteenth century, finding
it apparently the most substantial thing left him in a
dominion which had included Naples and Sicily,
Lorraine and Anjou.  He had been a much-tried
monarch and the sport of a various fortune, fighting
half his life for thrones he didn't care for, and exalted
only to be quickly cast down.  Provence was the
country of his affection, and the memory of his troubles
did not prevent him from holding a joyous court at
Tarascon and at Aix.  He finished the castle at
Tarascon, which had been begun earlier in the century,
- finished it, I suppose, for consistency's sake, in the
manner in which it had originally been designed rather
than in accordance with the artistic tastes that formed
the consolation of his old age.  He was a painter, a
writer, a dramatist, a modern dilettante, addicted to
private theatricals.  There is something very attractive
in the image that he has imprinted on the page of
history.  He was both clever and kind, and many
reverses and much suffering had not imbittered him
nor quenched his faculty of enjoyment.  He was fond
of his sweet Provence, and his sweet Provence has
been grateful; it has woven a light tissue of legend
around the memory of the good King Rene.

I strolled over his dusky habitation - it must have
taken all his good-humor to light it up - at the heels
of the custodian, who showed me the usual number of
castle-properties: a deep, well-like court; a collection of
winding staircases and vaulted chambers, the embra-
sures of whose windows and the recesses of whose
doorways reveal a tremendous thickness of wall.  These
things constitute the general identity of old castles;
and when one has wandered through a good many,
with due discretion of step and protrusion of head,
one ceases very much to distinguish and remember,
and contents one's self with consigning them to the
honorable limbo of the romantic.  I must add that this
reflection did not the least deter me from crossing the
bridge which connects Tarascon with Beaucaire, in
order to examine the old fortress whose ruins adorn
the latter city.  It stands on a foundation of rock much
higher than that of Tarascon, and looks over with a
melancholy expression at its better-conditioned brother.
Its position is magnificent, and its outline very gallant.
I was well rewarded for my pilgrimage; for if the castle
of Beaucaire is only a fragment, the whole place, with
its position and its views, is an ineffaceable picture.  It
was the stronghold of the Montmorencys, and its last
tenant was that rash Duke Francois, whom Richelieu,
seizing every occasion to trample on a great noble,
caused to be beheaded at Toulouse, where we saw, in
the Capitol, the butcher's knife with which the cardinal
pruned the crown of France of its thorns.  The castle,
after the death of this victim, was virtually demolished.
Its site, which Nature to-day has taken again to herself,
has an extraordinary charm.  The mass of rock that it
formerly covered rises high above the town, and is as
precipitous as the side of the Rhone.  A tall rusty iron
gate admits you from a quiet corner of Beaucaire to a
wild tangled garden, covering the side of the hill, -
for the whole place forms the public promenade of the
townsfolk, - a garden without flowers, with little steep,
rough paths that wind under a plantation of small,
scrubby stone-pines.  Above this is the grassy platform
of the castle, enclosed on one side only (toward the
river) by a large fragment of wall and a very massive
dungeon.  There are benches placed in the lee of the
wall, and others on the edge of the platform, where
one may enjoy a view, beyond the river, of certain
peeled and scorched undulations.  A sweet desolation,
an everlasting peace, seemed to hang in the air.  A
very old man (a fragment, like the castle itself) emerged
from some crumbling corner to do me the honors, - a
very gentle, obsequious, tottering, toothless, grateful old
man.  He beguiled me into an ascent of the solitary
tower, from which you may look down on the big
sallow river and glance at diminished Tarascon, and
the barefaced, bald-headed hills behind it.  It may
appear that I insist too much upon the nudity of the
Provencal horiion, - too much, considering that I have
spoken of the prospect from the heights of Beaucaire as
lovely.  But it is an exquisite bareness; it seems to
exist for the purpose of allowing one to follow the de-
licate lines of the hills, and touch with the eyes, as it
were, the smallest inflections of the landscape.  It
makes the whole thing seem wonderfully bright and
pure.

Beaucaire used to be the scene of a famous fair,
the great fair of the south of France.  It has gone the
way of most fairs, even in France, where these delight-
ful exhibitions hold their own much better than might
be supposed.  It is still held in the month of July;
but the bourgeoises of Tarascon send to the Magasin
du Louvre for their smart dresses, and the principal
glory of the scene is its long tradition.  Even now,
however, it ought to be the prettiest of all fairs, for it
takes place in a charming wood which lies just beneath
the castle, beside the Rhone.  The booths, the barracks,
the platforms of the mountebanks, the bright-colored
crowd, diffused through this midsummer shade, and
spotted here and there with the rich Provencal sun-
shine must be of the most pictorial effect.  It is highly
probable, too, that it offers a large collection of pretty
faces; for even in the few hours that I spent at
Tarascon I discovered symptoms of the purity of
feature for which the women of the _pays d'Arles_ are
renowned.  The Arlesian head-dress, was visible in the
streets; and this delightful coiffure is so associated with
a charming facial oval, a dark mild eye, a straight
Greek nose, and a mouth worthy of all the rest, that
it conveys a presumption of beauty which gives the
wearer time either to escape or to please you.  I have
read somewhere, however, that Tarascon is supposed
to produce handsome men, as Arles is known to deal
in handsome women.  It may be that I should have
found the Tarasconnais very fine fellows, if I had en-
countered enough specimens to justify an induction.
But there were very few males in the streets, and the
place presented no appearance of activity.  Here and
there the black coif of an old woman or of a young
girl was framed by a low doorway; but for the rest, as
I have said, Tarascon was mostly involved in a siesta.
There was not a creature in the little church of Saint
Martha, which I made a point of visiting before I re-
turned to the station, and which, with its fine Romanesque
sideportal and its pointed and crocketed Gothic spire,
is as curious as it need be, in view of its tradition.  It
stands in a quiet corner where the grass grows between
the small cobble-stones, and you pass beneath a deep
archway to reach it.  The tradition relates that Saint
Martha tamed with her own hands, and attached to
her girdle, a dreadful dragon, who was known as the
Tarasque, and is reported to have given his name to
the city on whose site (amid the rocks which form the
base of the chateau) he had his cavern.  The dragon,
perhaps, is the symbol of a ravening paganism, dis-
pelled by the eloquence of a sweet evangelist.  The
bones of the interesting saint, at all events, were found,
in the eleventh century, in a cave beneath the spot on
which her altar now stands.  I know not what had be-
come of the bones of the dragon.



XXX.

There are two shabby old inns at Arles, which
compete closely for your custom.  I mean by this that
if you elect to go to the Hotel du Forum, the Hotel
du Nord, which is placed exactly beside it (at a right
angle) watches your arrival with ill-concealed dis-
approval; and if you take the chances of its neighbor,
the Hotel du Forum seems to glare at you invidiously
from all its windows and doors.  I forget which of
these establishments I selected; whichever it was, I
wished very much that, it had been the other.  The
two stand together on the Place des Hommes, a little
public square of Arles, which somehow quite misses
its effect.  As a city, indeed, Arles quite misses its
effect in every way; and if it is a charming place, as
I think it is, I can hardly tell the reason why.  The
straight-nosed Arlesiennes account for it in some degree;
and the remainder may be charged to the ruins of the
arena and the theatre.  Beyond this, I remember with
affection the ill-proportioned little Place des Hommes;
not at all monumental, and given over to puddles and
to shabby cafes.  I recall with tenderness the tortuous
and featureless streets, which looked like the streets of
a village, and were paved with villanous little sharp
stones, making all exercise penitential.  Consecrated
by association is even a tiresome walk that I took the
evening I arrived, with the purpose of obtaining a
view of the Rhone.  I had been to Arles before, years
ago, and it seemed to me that I remembered finding
on the banks of the stream some sort of picture.  I
think that on the evening of which I speak there was
a watery moon, which it seemed to me would light up
the past as well as the present.  But I found no pic-
ture, and I scarcely found the Rhone at all.  I lost
my way, and there was not a creature in the streets to
whom I could appeal.  Nothing could be more pro-
vincial than the situation of Arles at ten o'clock at
night.  At last I arrived at a kind of embankment,
where I could see the great mud-colored stream slip-
ping along in the soundless darkness.  It had come
on to rain, I know not what had happened to the
moon, and the whole place was anything but gay.  It
was not what I had looked for; what I had looked for
was in the irrecoverable past.  I groped my way back
to the inn over the infernal _cailloux_, feeling like a dis-
comfited Dogberry.  I remember now that this hotel
was the one (whichever that may be) which has the
fragment of a Gallo-Roman portico inserted into one
of its angles.  I had chosen it for the sake of this ex-
ceptional ornament.  It was damp and dark, and the
floors felt gritty to the feet; it was an establishment at
which the dreadful _gras-double_ might have appeared
at the table d'hote, as it had done at Narbonne.  Never-
theless, I was glad to get back to it; and nevertheless,
too, - and this is the moral of my simple anecdote, -
my pointless little walk (I don't speak of the pave-
ment) suffuses itself, as I look back upon it, with a
romantic tone.  And in relation to the inn, I suppose
I had better mention that I am well aware of the in-
consistency of a person who dislikes the modern cara-
vansary, and yet grumbles when he finds a hotel of
the superannuated sort.  One ought to choose, it would
seem, and make the best of either alternative.  The
two old taverns at Arles are quite unimproved; such
as they must have been in the infancy of the modern
world, when Stendhal passed that way, and the lum-
bering diligence deposited him in the Place des
Hommes, such in every detail they are to-day.  _Vieilles
auberges de France_, one ought to enjoy their gritty
floors and greasy window-panes.  Let it be put on re-
cord, therefore, that I have been, I won't say less com-
fortable, but at least less happy, at better inns.

To be really historic, I should have mentioned that
before going to look for the Rhone I had spent part
of the evening on the opposite side of the little place,
and that I indulged in this recreation for two definite
reasons.  One of these was that I had an opportunity
of conversing at a cafe with an attractive young Eng-
lishman, whom I had met in the afternoon at Tarascon,
and more remotely, in other years, in London; the
other was that there sat enthroned behind the counter
a splendid mature Arlesienne, whom my companion
and I agreed that it was a rare privilege to contem-
plate.  There is no rule of good manners or morals
which makes it improper, at a cafe, to fix one's eyes
upon the _dame de comptoir_; the lady is, in the nature
of things, a part of your _consommation_.  We were there-
fore feee to admire without restriction the handsomest
person I had ever seen give change for a five-franc
piece.  She was a large quiet woman, who would never
see forty again; of an intensely feminine type, yet
wonderfully rich and robust, and full of a certain phy-
sical nobleness.  Though she was not really old, she
was antique, and she was very grave, even a little sad.
She had the dignity of a Roman empress, and she
handled coppers as if they had been stamped with
the head of Caesar.  I have seen washerwomen in the
Trastevere who were perhaps as handsome as she; but
even the head-dress of the Roman contadina con-
tributes less to the dignity of the person born to wear
it than the sweet and stately Arlesian cap, which sits
at once aloft and on the back of the head; which is
accompanied with a wide black bow covering a con-
siderable part of the crown; and which, finally, accom-
modates itself indescribably well to the manner in
which the tresses of the front are pushed behind the
cars.

This admirable dispenser of lumps of sugar has
distracted me a little; for I am still not sufficiently
historical.  Before going to the cafe I had dined, and
before dining I had found time to go and look at the
arena.  Then it was that I discovered that Arles has
no general physiognomy, and, except the delightful
little church of Saint Trophimus, no architecture, and
that the rugosities of its dirty lanes affect the feet
like knife-blades.  It was not then, on the other hand, that
I saw the arena best.  The second day of my stay at
Arles I devoted to a pilgrimage to the strange old hill
town of Les Baux, the mediaeval Pompeii, of which I
shall give myself the pleasure of speaking.  The even-
ing of that day, however (my friend and I returned in
time for a late dinner), I wandered among the Roman
remains of the place by the light of a magnificent
moon, and gathered an impression which has lost little
of its silvery glow.  The moon of the evening before
had been aqueous and erratic; but if on the present
occasion it was guilty of any irregularity, the worst it
did was only to linger beyond its time in the heavens,
in order to let us look at things comfortably.  The
effect was admirable; it brought back the impression
of the way, in Rome itself, on evenings like that, the
moonshine rests upon broken shafts and slabs of an-
tique pavement.  As we sat in the theatre, looking at
the two lone columns that survive - part of the decora-
tion of the back of the stage - and at the fragments
of ruin around them, we might have been in the
Roman forum.  The arena at Arles, with its great
magnitude, is less complete than that of Nimes; it has
suffered even more the assaults of time and of the
children of time, and it has been less repaired.  The
seats are almost wholly wanting; but the external walls
minus the topmost tier of arches, are massively, rug-
gedly, complete; and the vaulted corridors seem as
solid as the day they were built.  The whole thing is
superbly vast, and as monumental, for place of light
amusement - what is called in America a "variety-
show" - as it entered only into the Roman mind to
make such establishments.  The _podium_ is much higher
than at Nimes, and many of the great white slabs that
faced it have been recovered and put into their places.
The proconsular box has been more or less recon-
structed, and the great converging passages of approach
to it are still majestically distinct: so that, as I sat
there in the moon-charmed stillness, leaning my elbows
on the battered parapet of the ring, it was not im-
possible - to listen to the murmurs and shudders, the
thick voice of the circus, that died away fifteen hun-
dred years ago.

The theatre has a voice as well, but it lingers on
the ear of time with a different music.  The Roman
theatre at Arles seemed to me one of the most charm-
ing and touching ruins I had ever beheld; I took a
particular fancy to it.  It is less than a skeleton, - the
arena may be called a skeleton; for it consists only of
half a dozen bones.  The traces of the row of columns
which formed the scene - the permanent back-scene -
remain; two marble pillars - I just mentioned them -
are upright, with a fragment of their entablature.  Be
fore them is the vacant space which was filled by the
stage, with the line of the prosoenium distinct, marked
by a deep groove, impressed upon slabs of stone, which
looks as if the bottom of a high screen had been in-
tended to fit into it.  The semicircle formed by the
seats - half a cup - rises opposite; some of the rows
are distinctly marked.  The floor, from the bottom of
the stage, in the shape of an arc of which the chord
is formed by the line of the orchestra, is covered by
slabs of colored marble - red, yellow, and green -
which, though terribly battered and cracked to-day,
give one an idea of the elegance of the interior.  Every-
thing shows that it was on a great scale: the large
sweep of its enclosing walls, the massive corridors that
passed behind the auditorium, and of which we can
still perfectly take the measure.  The way in which
every seat commanded the stage is a lesson to the
architects of our epoch, as also the immense size of
the place is a proof of extraordinary power of voice
on the part of the Roman actors.  It was after we had
spent half an hour in the moonshine at the arena that
we came on to this more ghostly and more exquisite
ruin.  The principal entrance was locked, but we
effected an easy _escalade_, scaled a low parapet, and
descended into the place behind file scenes.  It was
as light as day, and the solitude was complete.  The
two slim columns, as we sat on the broken benches,
stood there like a pair of silent actors.  What I called
touching, just now, was the thought that here the
human voice, the utterance of a great language, had
been supreme.  The air was full of intonations and
cadences; not of the echo of smashing blows, of riven
armor, of howling victims and roaring beasts.  The
spot is, in short, one of the sweetest legacies of the
ancient world; and there seems no profanation in the
fact that by day it is open to the good people of
Arles, who use it to pass, by no means in great num-
bers, from one part of the town to the other; treading
the old marble floor, and brushing, if need be, the
empty benches.  This familiarity does not kill the
place again; it makes it, on the contrary, live a little,
- makes the present and the past touch each other.



XXXI.

The third lion of Arles has nothing to do with the
ancient world, but only with the old one.  The church
of Saint Trophimus, whose wonderful Romanesque
porch is the principal ornament of the principal _place_,
- a _place_ otherwise distinguished by the presence of
a slim and tapering obelisk in the middle, as well as
by that of the Hotel de Ville and the museum - the
interesting church of Saint Trophimus swears a little,
as the French say, with the peculiar character of
Arles.  It is very remarkable, but I would rather it
were in another place.  Arles is delightfully pagan,
and Saint Trophimus, with its apostolic sculptures, is
rather a false note.  These sculptures are equally re-
markable for their primitive vigor and for the perfect
preservation in which they have come down to us.
The deep recess of a round-arched porch of the
twelfth century is covered with quaint figures, which
have not lost a nose or a finger.  An angular, Byzan-
tine-looking Christ sits in a diamond-shaped frame at
the summit of the arch, surrounded by little angels,
by great apostles, by winged beasts, by a hundred
sacred symbols and grotesque ornaments.  It is a
dense embroidery of sculpture, black with time, but as
uninjured as if it had been kept under glass.  One
good mark for the French Revolution!  Of the in-
terior of the church, which has a nave of the twelfth
century, and a choir three hundred years more recent,
I chiefly remember the odd feature that the Romanesque
aisles are so narrow that you literally - or almost -
squeeze through them.  You do so with some eager-
ness, for your natural purpose is to pass out to the
cloister.  This cloister, as distinguished and as per-
fect as the porch, has a great deal of charm.  Its four
sides, which are not of the same period (the earliest
and best are of the twelfth century), have an elaborate
arcade, supported on delicate pairs of columns, the
capitals of which show an extraordinary variety of
device and ornament.  At the corners of the quadrangle
these columns take the form of curious human figures.
The whole thing is a gem of lightness and preserva-
tion, and is often cited for its beauty; but - if it
doesn't sound too profane - I prefer, especially at
Arles, the ruins of the Roman theatre.  The antique
element is too precious to be mingled with anything
less rare.  This truth was very present to my mind
during a ramble of a couple of hours that I took just
before leaving the place; and the glowing beauty of
the morning gave the last touch of the impression.  I
spent half an hour at the Museum; then I took an-
other look at the Roman theatre; after which I walked
a little out of the town to the Aliscamps, the old
Elysian Fields, the meagre remnant of the old pagan
place of sepulture, which was afterwards used by the
Christians, but has been for ages deserted, and now
consists only of a melancholy avenue of cypresses,
lined with a succession of ancient sarcophagi, empty,
mossy, and mutilated.  An iron-foundry, or some hor-
rible establishment which is conditioned upon tall
chimneys and a noise of hammering and banging, has
been established near at hand; but the cypresses shut
it out well enough, and this small patch of Elysium is
a very romantic corner.

The door of the Museum stands ajar, and a vigilant
custodian, with the usual batch of photographs on
his mind, peeps out at you disapprovingly while you
linger opposite, before the charming portal of Saint
Trophimus, which you may look at for nothing.
When you succumb to the silent influence of his eye,
and go over to visit his collection, you find yourself
in a desecrated church, in which a variety of ancient
objects, disinterred in Arlesian soil, have been ar-
ranged without any pomp.  The best of these, I be-
lieve, were found in the ruins of the theatre.  Some of
the most curious of them are early Christian sar-
cophagi, exactly on the pagan model, but covered with
rude yet vigorously wrought images of the apostles,
and with illustrations of scriptural history.  Beauty
of the highest kind, either of conception or of execu-
tion, is absent from most of the Roman fragments,
which belong to the taste of a late period and a
provincial civilization.  But a gulf divides them from
the bristling little imagery of the Christian sarcophagi,
in which, at the same time, one detects a vague
emulation of the rich examples by which their authors
were surrounded.  There is a certain element of style
in all the pagan things; there is not a hint of it in
the early Christian relics, among which, according to
M. Joanne, of the Guide, are to be found more fine
sarcophagi than in any collection but that of St. John
Lateran.  In two or three of the Roman fragments
there is a noticeable distinction; principally in a
charming bust of a boy, quite perfect, with those
salient eyes that one sees in certain antique busts, and
to which the absence of vision in the marble mask
gives a look, often very touching, as of a baffled effort
to see; also in the head of a woman, found in the
ruins of the theatre, who, alas! has lost her nose, and
whose noble, simple contour, barring this deficiency,
recalls the great manner of the Venus of Milo.  There
are various rich architectural fragments which in-
dicate that that edifice was a very splendid affair.
This little Museum at Arles, in short, is the most Ro-
man thing I know of, out of Rome.



XXXII.

I find that I declared one evening, in a little
journal I was keeping at that time, that I was weary
of writing (I was probably very sleepy), but that it
was essential I should make some note of my visit to
Les Baux.  I must have gone to sleep as soon as I
had recorded this necessity, for I search my small diary
in vain for any account of that enchanting spot.  I
have nothing but my memory to consult, - a memory
which is fairly good in regard to a general impression,
but is terribly infirm in the matter of details and
items.  We knew in advance, my companion and  I
that Les Baus was a pearl of picturesqueness; for
had we not read as much in the handbook of Murray,
who has the testimony of an English nobleman as to
its attractions?  We also knew that it lay some miles
from Aries, on the crest of the Alpilles, the craggy
little mountains which, as I stood on the breezy plat-
form of Beaucaire, formed to my eye a charming, if
somewhat remote, background to Tarascon; this as-
surance having been given us by the landlady of the
inn at Arles, of whom we hired a rather lumbering
conveyance.  The weather was not promising, but it
proved a good day for the mediaeval Pompeii; a gray,
melancholy, moist, but rainless, or almost rainless
day, with nothing in the sky to flout, as the poet
says, the dejected and pulverized past.  The drive
itself was charming; for there is an inexhaustible
sweetness in the gray-green landscape of Provence.
It is never absolutely flat, and yet is never really
ambitious, and is full both of entertainment and re-
pose.  It is in constant undulation, and the bareness
of the soil lends itself easily to outline and profile.
When I say the bareness, I mean the absence of
woods and hedges.  It blooms with heath and scented
shrubs and stunted olive; and the white rock shining
through the scattered herbage has a brightness which
answers to the brightness of the sky.  Of course it
needs the sunshine, for all southern countries look a
little false under the ground glass of incipient bad
weather.  This was the case on the day of my pil-
grimage to Les Baux.  Nevertheless, I was as glad
to keep going as I was to arrive; and as I went it
seemed to me that true happiness would consist in
wandering through such a land on foot, on September
afternoons, when one might stretch one's self on the
warm ground in some shady hollow, and listen to the
hum of bees and the whistle of melancholy shepherds;
for in Provence the shepherds whistle to their flocks.
I saw two or three of them, in the course of this drive
to Les Baux, meandering about, looking behind, and
calling upon the sheep in this way to follow, which
the sheep always did, very promptly, with ovine
unanimity.  Nothing is more picturesque than to see
a slow shepherd threading his way down one of the
winding paths on a hillside, with his flock close be-
hind him, necessarily expanded, yet keeping just at
his heels, bending and twisting as it goes, and looking
rather like the tail of a dingy comet.

About four miles from Arles, as you drive north-
ward toward the Alpilles, of which Alphonse Daudet
has spoken so often, and, as he might say, so in-
timately, stand on a hill that overlooks the road
the very considerable ruins of the abbey of Mont-
majour, one of the innumerable remnants of a feudal
and ecclesiastical (as well as an architectural) past
that one encounters in the South of France; remnants
which, it must be confessed, tend to introduce a cer-
tain confusion and satiety into the passive mind of
the tourist.  Montmajour, however, is very impressive
and interesting; the only trouble with it is that,
unless you have stopped and retumed to Arles, you
see it in memory over the head of Les Baux, which
is a much more absorbing picture.  A part of the
mass of buildings (the monastery) dates only from the
last century; and the stiff architecture of that period
does not lend itself very gracefully to desolation: it
looks too much as if it had been burnt down the year
before.  The monastery was demolished during the
Revolution, and it injures a little the effect of the
very much more ancient fragments that are connected
with it.  The whole place is on a great scale; it was
a rich and splendid abbey.  The church, a vast
basilica of the eleventh century, and of the noblest
proportions, is virtually intact; I mean as regards
its essentials, for the details have completely vanished.
The huge solid shell is full of expression; it looks
as if it had been hollowed out by the sincerity of
early faith, and it opens into a cloister as impressive
as itself.  Wherever one goes, in France, one meets,
looking backward a little, the spectre of the great
Revolution; and one meets it always in the shape of
the destruction of something beautiful and precious.
To make us forgive it at all, how much it must also
have destroyed that was more hateful than itself!
Beneath the church of Montmajour is a most extra-
ordinary crypt, almost as big as the edifice above
it, and making a complete subterranean temple, sur-
rounded with a circular gallery, or deambulatory,
which expands it intervals into five square chapels.
There are other things, of which I have but a con-
fused memory: a great fortified keep; a queer little
primitive chapel, hollowed out of the rock, beneath
these later structures, and recommended to the
visitor's attention as the confessional of Saint Tro-
phimus, who shares with so many worthies the glory
of being the first apostle of the Gauls.  Then there
is a strange, small church, of the dimmest antiquity,
standing at a distance from the other buildings.  I
remember that after we had let ourselves down a
good many steepish places to visit crypts and con-
fessionals, we walked across a field to this archaic
cruciform edifice, and went thence to a point further
down the road, where our carriage was awaiting
us.  The chapel of the Holy Cross, as it is called,
is classed among the historic monuments of France;
and I read in a queer, rambling, ill-written book
which I picked up at Avignon, and in which the
author, M. Louis de Lainbel, has buried a great deal
of curious information on the subject of Provence,
under a style inspiring little confidence, that the
"delicieuse chapelle de Sainte-Croix" is a "veritable
bijou artistique."  He speaks of "a piece of lace in
stone," which runs from one end of the building to
the other, but of which I am obliged to confess that
I have no recollection.  I retain, however, a suf-
ficiently clear impression of the little superannuated
temple, with its four apses and its perceptible odor of
antiquity, - the odor of the eleventh century.

The ruins of Les Baux remain quite indistinguish-
able, even when you are directly beneath them, at
the foot of the charming little Alpilles, which mass
themselves with a kind of delicate ruggedness.  Rock
and ruin have been so welded together by the con-
fusions of time, that as you approach it from behind
- that is, from the direction of Arles - the place
presents simply a general air of cragginess.  Nothing
can be prettier than the crags of Provence; they are
beautifully modelled, as painters say, and they have
a delightful silvery color.  The road winds round the
foot of the hills on the top of which Lea Baux is
planted, and passes into another valley, from which
the approach to the town is many degrees less pre-
cipitous, and may be comfortably made in a carriage.
Of course the deeply inquiring traveller will alight as
promptly as possible; for the pleasure of climbing
into this queerest of cities on foot is not the least
part of the entertainment of going there.  Then you
appreciate its extraordinary position, its picturesque-
ness, its steepness, its desolation and decay.  It
hangs - that is, what remains of it - to the slanting
summit of the mountain.  Nothing would be more
natural than for the whole place to roll down into
the valley.  A part of it has done so - for it is not
unjust to suppose that in the process of decay the
crumbled particles have sought the lower level;
while the remainder still clings to its magnificent
perch.

If I called Les Baux a city, just, above, it was not
that I was stretching a point in favor of the small
spot which to-day contains but a few dozen inhabi-
tants.  The history of the plate is as extraordinary
as its situation.  It was not only a city, but a state;
not only a state, but an empire; and on the crest of
its little mountain called itself sovereign of a territory,
or at least of scattered towns and counties, with which
its present aspect is grotesquely out of relation.  The
lords of Les Baux, in a word, were great feudal pro-
prietors; and there-was a time during which the island
of Sardinia, to say nothing of places nearer home,
such as Arles and Marseilles, paid them homage.  The
chronicle of this old Provencal house has been written,
in a style somewhat unctuous and flowery, by M. Jules
Canonge.  I purchased the little book - a modest
pamphlet - at the establishment of the good sisters,
just beside the church, in one of the highest parts of
Les Baux.  The sisters have a school for the hardy little
Baussenques, whom I heard piping their lessons, while
I waited in the cold _parloir_ for one of the ladies to
come and speak to me.  Nothing could have been
more perfect than the manner of this excellent woman
when she arrived; yet her small religious house
seemed a very out-of-the-way corner of the world.  It
was spotlessly neat, and the rooms looked as if they
had lately been papered and painted: in this respect,
at the mediaeval Pompeii, they were rather a discord.
They were, at any rate, the newest, freshest thing at
Les Baux.  I remember going round to the church,
after I had left the good sisters, and to a little quiet
terrace, which stands in front of it, ornamented with
a few small trees and bordered with a wall, breast-
high, over which you look down steep hillsides, off
into the air and all about the neighbouring country.
I remember saying to myself that this little terrace
was one of those felicitous nooks which the tourist
of taste keeps in his mind as a picture.  The church
was small and brown and dark, with a certain rustic
richness.  All this, however, is no general description
of Les Baux.

I am unable to give any coherent account of the
place, for the simple reason that it is a mere con-
fusion of ruin.  It has not been preserved in lava like
Pompeii, and its streets and houses, its ramparts and
castle, have become fragmentary, not through the
sudden destruction, but through the gradual with-
drawal, of a population.  It is not an extinguished,
but a deserted city; more deserted far than even
Carcassonne and Aigues-Mortes, where I found so
much entertainment in the grass-grown element.  It
is of very small extent, and even in the days of its
greatness, when its lords entitled themselves counts
of Cephalonia and Neophantis, kings of Arles and
Vienne, princes of Achaia, and emperors of Constan-
tinople, - even at this flourishing period, when, as M.
Jules Canonge remarks, "they were able to depress
the balance in which the fate of peoples and kings is
weighed," the plucky little city contained at the most
no more than thirty-six hundred souls.  Yet its lords
(who, however, as I have said, were able to present
a long list of subject towns, most of them, though a
few are renowned, unknown to fame) were seneschals
and captains-general of Piedmont and Lombardy,
grand admirals of the kingdom of Naples, and its
ladies were sought in marriage by half the first
princes in Europe.  A considerable part of the little
narrative of M. Canonge is taken up with the great
alliances of the House of Baux, whose fortunes, ma-
trimonial and other, he traces from the eleventh cen-
tury down to the sixteenth.  The empty shells of a
considerable number of old houses, many of which
must have been superb, the lines of certain steep
little streets, the foundations of a castle, and ever so
many splendid views, are all that remains to-day of
these great titles.  To such a list I may add a dozen
very polite and sympathetic people, who emerged from
the interstices of the desultory little town to gaze at
the two foreigners who had driven over from Arles,
and whose horses were being baited at the modest
inn.  The resources of this establishment we did not
venture otherwise to test, in spite of the seductive
fact that the sign over the door was in the Provencal
tongue.  This little group included the baker, a rather
melancholy young man, in high boots and a cloak,
with whom and his companions we had a good deal
of conversation.  The Baussenques of to-day struck
me as a very mild and agreeable race, with a good
deal of the natural amenity which, on occasions like
this one, the traveller, who is, waiting for his horses
to be put in or his dinner to be prepared, observes
in the charming people who lend themselves to con-
versation in the hill-towns of Tuscany.  The spot
where our entertainers at Les Baux congregated was
naturally the most inhabited portion of the town; as
I say, there were at least a dozen human figures
within sight.  Presently we wandered away from them,
scaled the higher places, seated ourselves among the
ruins of the castle, and looked down from the cliff
overhanging that portion of the road which I have
mentioned as approaching Les Baux from behind.  I
was unable to trace the configuration of the castle as
plainly as the writers who have described it in the
guide-books, and I am ashamed to say that I did not
even perceive the three great figures of stone (the
three Marys, as they are called; the two Marys of
Scripture, with Martha), which constitute one of the
curiosities of the place, and of which M. Jules Canonge
speaks with almost hyperbolical admiration.  A brisk
shower, lasting some ten minutes, led us to take refuge
in a cavity, of mysterious origin, where the melancholy
baker presently discovered us, having had the _bonne
pensee_ of coming up for us with an umbrella which
certainly belonged, in former ages, to one of the Ste-
phanettes or Berangeres commemorated by M. Canonge.
His oven, I am afraid, was cold so long as our visit
lasted.  When the rain was over we wandered down
to the little disencumbered space before the inn,
through a small labyrinth of obliterated things.  They
took the form of narrow, precipitous streets, bordered
by empty houses, with gaping windows and absent
doors, through which we had glimpses of sculptured
chimney-pieces and fragments of stately arch and vault.
Some of the houses are still inhabited; but most of
them are open to the air and weather.  Some of them
have completely collapsed; others present to the street
a front which enables one to judge of the physiognomy
of Les Baux in the days of its importance.  This im-
portance had pretty well passed away in the early part
of the sixteenth century, when the place ceased to be
an independent principality.  It became - by bequest
of one of its lords, Bernardin des Baux, a great cap-
tain of his time - part of the appanage of the kings of
France, by whom it was placed under the protection
of Arles, which had formerly occupied with regard to
it a different position.  I know not whether the Arle-
sians neglected their trust; but the extinction of the
sturdy little stronghold is too complete not to have
begun long ago.  Its memories are buried under its
ponderous stones.  As we drove away from it in the
gloaming, my friend and I agreed that the two or three
hours we had spent there were among the happiest
impressions of a pair of tourists very curious in the
picturesque.  We almost forgot that we were bound to
regret that the shortened day left us no time to drive
five miles further, above a pass in the little mountains
- it had beckoned to us in the morning, when we
came in sight of it, almost irresistibly - to see the Ro-
man arch and mausoleum of Saint Remy.  To compass
this larger excursion (including the visit to Les Baux)
you must start from Arles very early in the morning;
but I can imagine no more delightful day.



XXXIII.

I had been twice at Avignon before, and yet I was
not satisfied.  I probably am satisfied now; neverthe-
less, I enjoyed my third visit.  I shall not soon forget
the first, on which a particular emotion set indelible
stamp.  I was travelling northward, in 1870, after four
months spent, for the first time, in Italy.  It was the
middle of January, and I had found myself, unexpected-
ly, forced to return to England for the rest of the
winter.  It was an insufferable disappointment; I was
wretched and broken-hearted.  Italy appeared to me
at that time so much better than anything else in the
world, that to rise from table in the middle of the
feast was a prospect of being hungry for the rest of
my days.  I had heard a great deal of praise of the
south of France; but the south of France was a poor
consolation.  In this state of mind I arrived at Avignon,
which under a bright, hard winter sun was tingling -
fairly spinning - with the _mistral_.  I find in my journal
of the other day a reference to the acuteness of my
reluctance in January, 1870.  France, after Italy, ap-
peared, in the language of the latter country, _poco sim-
patica_; and I thought it necessary, for reasons now in-
conceivable, to read the "Figaro," which was filled
with descriptions of the horrible Troppmann, the mur-
derer of the _famille_ Kink.  Troppmann, Kink, _le crime
do Pantin_, very names that figured in this episode
seemed to wave me back.  Had I abandoned the so-
norous south to associate with vocables so base?

It was very cold, the other day, at Avignon; for
though there was no mistral, it was raining as it rains
in Provence, and the dampness had a terrible chill in
it.  As I sat by my fire, late at night - for in genial
Avignon, in October, I had to have a fire - it came
back to me that eleven years before I had at that
same hour sat by a fire in that same room, and, writ-
ing to a friend to whom I was not afraid to appear
extravagant, had made a vow that at some happier
period of the future I would avenge myself on the _ci-
devant_ city of the Popes by taking it in a contrary
sense.  I suppose that I redeemed my vow on the oc-
casion of my second visit better than on my third; for
then I was on my way to Italy, and that vengeance, of
course, was complete.  The only drawback was that I
was in such a hurry to get to Ventimiglia (where the
Italian custom-house was to be the sign of my triumph),
that I scarcely took time to make it clear to myself at
Avignon that this was better than reading the "Figaro."
I hurried on almost too fast to enjoy the consciousness
of moving southward.  On this last occasion I was un-
fortunately destitute of that happy faith.  Avignon was
my southernmost limit; after which I was to turn round
and proceed back to England.  But in the interval I
had been a great deal in Italy, and that made all the
difference.

I had plenty of time to think of this, for the rain
kept me practically housed for the first twenty-four
hours.  It had been raining in, these regions for a
month, and people had begun to look askance at the
Rhone, though as yet the volume of the river was not
exorbitant.  The only excursion possible, while the
torrent descended, was a kind of horizontal dive, ac-
companied with infinite splashing, to the little _musee_
of the town, which is within a moderate walk of the
hotel.  I had a memory of it from my first visit; it
had appeared to me more pictorial than its pictures.
I found that recollection had flattered it a little, and
that it is neither better nor worse than most provincial
museums.  It has the usual musty chill in the air, the
usual grass-grown fore-court, in which a few lumpish
Roman fragments are disposed, the usual red tiles on
the floor, and the usual specimens of the more livid
schools on the walls.  I rang up the _gardien_, who ar-
rived with a bunch of keys, wiping his mouth; he un-
locked doors for me, opened shutters, and while (to
my distress, as if the things had been worth lingering
over) he shuffled about after me, he announced the
names of the pictures before which I stopped, in a
voice that reverberated through the melancholy halls,
and seemed to make the authorship shameful when it
was obscure, and grotesque when it pretended to be
great.  Then there were intervals of silence, while I
stared absent-mindedly, at hap-hazard, at some indis-
tinguishable canvas, and the only sound was the down-
pour of the rain on the skylights.  The museum of
Avignon derives a certain dignity from its Roman frag-
ments.  The town has no Roman monuments to show;
in this respect, beside its brilliant neighbors, Arles and
Nimes, it is a blank.  But a great many small objects
have been found in its soil, - pottery, glass, bronzes,
lamps, vessels and ornaments of gold and silver.  The
glass is especially chaming, - small vessels of the most
delicate shape and substance, many of them perfectly
preserved.  These diminutive, intimate things bring
one near to the old Roman life; they seem like pearls
strung upon the slender thread that swings across the
gulf of time.  A little glass cup that Roman lips have
touched says more to us than the great vessel of an
arena.  There are two small silver _casseroles_, with chi-
selled handles, in the museum of Avignon, that struck
me as among the most charming survivals of anti-
quity.

I did wrong just above, to speak of my attack on
this establishment as the only recreation I took that
first wet day; for I remember a terribly moist visit to
the former palace of the Popes, which could have
taken place only in the same tempestuous hours.  It is
true that I scarcely know why I should have gone out
to see the Papal palace in the rain, for I had been
over it twice before, and even then had not found the
interest of the place so complete as it ought to be; the
fact, nevertheless, remains that this last occasion is
much associated with an umbrella, which was not
superfluous even in some of the chambers and cor-
ridors of the gigantic pile.  It had already seemed to
me the dreariest of all historical buildings, and my
final visit confirmed the impression.  The place is as
intricate as it is vast, and as desolate as it is dirty.
The imagination has, for some reason or other, to
make more than the effort usual in such cases to re-
store and repeople it.  The fact, indeed, is simply that
the palace has been so incalculably abused and altered.
The alterations have been so numerous that, though I
have duly conned the enumerations, supplied in guide-
books, of the principal perversions, I do not pretend
to carry any of them in my head.  The huge bare
mass, without ornament, without grace, despoiled of its
battlements and defaced with sordid modern windows,
covering the Rocher des Doms, and looking down over
the Rhone and the broken bridge of Saint-Benazet
(which stops in such a sketchable manner in mid-
stream), and across at the lonely tower of Philippe le
Bel and the ruined wall of Villeneuve, makes at a dis-
tance, in spite of its poverty, a great figure, the effect
of which is carried out by the tower of the church be-
side it (crowned though the latter be, in a top-heavy
fashion, with an immense modern image of the Virgin)
and by the thick, dark foliage of the garden laid out
on a still higher portion of the eminence.  This garden
recalls, faintly and a trifle perversely, the grounds of
the Pincian at Rome.  I know not whether it is the
shadow of the Papal name, present in both places,
combined with a vague analogy between the churches,
- which, approached in each case by a flight of steps,
seemed to defend the precinct, - but each time I have
seen the Promenade des Doms it has carried my
thoughts to the wider and loftier terrace from which
you look away at the Tiber and Saint Peter's.

As you stand before the Papal palace, and espe-
cially as you enter it, you are struck with its being a
very dull monument.  History enough was enacted
here: the great schism lasted from 1305 to 1370, dur-
ing which seven Popes, all Frenchmen, carried on the
court of Avignon on principles that have not com-
mended themselves to the esteem of posterity.  But
history has been whitewashed away, and the scandals
of that period have mingled with the dust of dilapi-
dations and repairs.  The building has for many years
been occupied as a barrack for regiments of the line,
and the main characteristics of a barrack - an extreme
nudity and a very queer smell - prevail throughout its
endless compartments.  Nothing could have been more
cruelly dismal than the appearance it presented at the
time of this third visit of mine.  A regiment, changing
quarters, had departed the day before, and another
was expected to arrive (from Algeria) on the morrow.
The place had been left in the befouled and belittered
condition which marks the passage of the military after
they have broken carnp, and it would offer but a me-
lancholy welcome to the regiment that was about to
take possession.  Enormous windows had been left
carelessly open all over the building, and the rain and
wind were beating into empty rooms and passages;
making draughts which purified, perhaps, but which
scarcely cheered.  For an arrival, it was horrible.  A
handful of soldiers had remained behind.  In one of
the big vaulted rooms several of them were lying on
their wretched beds, in the dim light, in the cold, in
the damp, with the bleak, bare walls before them, and
their overcoats, spread over them, pulled up to their
noses.  I pitied them immensely, though they may
have felt less wretched than they looked.  I thought
not of the old profligacies and crimes, not of the
funnel-shaped torture-chamber (which, after exciting
the shudder of generations, has been ascertained now,
I believe, to have been a mediaeval bakehouse), not of
the tower of the _glaciere_ and the horrors perpetrated
here in the Revolution, but of the military burden of
young France.  One wonders how young France en-
dures it, and one is forced to believe that the French
conscript has, in addition to his notorious good-humor,
greater toughness than is commonly supposed by those
who consider only the more relaxing influences of
French civilization.  I hope he finds occasional com-
pensation for such moments as I saw those damp
young peasants passing on the mattresses of their
hideous barrack, without anything around to remind
them that they were in the most civilized of countries.
The only traces of former splendor now visible in
the Papal pile are the walls and vaults of two small
chapels, painted in fresco, so battered and effaced as
to be scarcely distinguishable, by Simone Memmi.  It
offers, of course, a peculiarly good field for restoration,
and I believe the government intend to take it in
hand.  I mention this fact without a sigh; for they
cannot well make it less interesting than it is at
present.



XXXIV.

Fortunately, it did not rain every day (though I
believe it was raining everywhere else in the depart-
ment); otherwise I should not have been able to go
to Villeneuve and to Vaucluse.  The afternoon, indeed,
was lovely when I walked over the interminable bridge
that spans the two arms of the Rhone, divided here
by a considerable island, and directed my course, like
a solitary horseman - on foot, to the lonely tower
which forms one of the outworks of Villeneuve-les-
Avignon.  The picturesque, half-deserted little town
lies a couple of miles further up the river.  The im-
mense round towers of its old citadel and the long
stretches of ruined wall covering the slope on which
it lies, are the most striking features of the nearer
view, as you look from Avignon across the Rhone.  I
spent a couple of hours in visiting these objects, and
there was a kind of pictorial sweetness in the episode;
but I have not many details to relate.  The isolated
tower I just mentioned has much in common with the
detached donjon of Montmajour, which I had looked
at in going to Les Baux, and to which I paid my
respects in speaking of that excursion.  Also the work
of Philippe le Bel (built in 1307), it is amazingly big
and stubborn, and formed the opposite limit of the
broken bridge, whose first arches (on the side of
Avignon) alone remain to give a measure of the oc-
casional volume of the Rhone.  Half an hour's walk
brought me to Villeneuve, which lies away from the
river, looking like a big village, half depopulated, and
occupied for the most part by dogs and cats, old
women and small children; these last, in general, re-
markably pretty, in the manner of the children of
Provence.  You pass through the place, which seems
in a singular degree vague and unconscious, and come
to the rounded hill on which the ruined abbey lifts
its yellow walls, - the Benedictine abbey of Saint-
Andre, at once a church, a monastery, and a fortress.
A large part of the crumbling enceinte disposes itself
over the hill; but for the rest, all that has preserved
any traceable cohesion is a considerable portion, of
the citadel.  The defence of the place appears to have
been intrusted largely to the huge round towers that
flank the old gate; one of which, the more complete,
the ancient warden (having first inducted me into his
own dusky little apartment, and presented me with
a great bunch of lavender) enabled me to examine in
detail.  I would almost have dispensed with the privi-
lege, for I think I have already mentioned that an ac-
quaintance with many feudal interiors has wrought a
sad confusion in my mind.  The image of the outside
always remains distinct; I keep it apart from other
images of the same sort; it makes a picture sufficiently
ineffaceable.  But the guard-rooms, winding staircases,
loop-holes, prisons, repeat themselves and intermingle;
they have a wearisome family likeness.  There are
always black passages and corners, and walls twenty
feet thick; and there is always some high place to
climb up to for the sake of a "magnificent" view.
The views, too, are apt to get muddled.  These dense
gate-towers of Philippe le Bel struck me, however, as
peculiarly wicked and grim.  Their capacity is of the
largest, and they contain over so many devilish little
dungeons, lighted by the narrowest slit in the pro-
digious wall, where it comes over one with a good
deal of vividness and still more horror that wretched
human beings ever lay there rotting in the dark.  The
dungeons of Villeneuve made a particular impression
on me, - greater than any, except those of Loches,
which must surely be the most grewsome in Europe.
I hasten to add that every dark hole at Villeneuve is
called a dungeon; and I believe it is well established
that in this manner, in almost all old castles and
towers, the sensibilities of the modern tourist are un-
scrupulously played upon.  There were plenty of black
holes in the Middle Ages that were not dungeons, but
household receptacles of various kinds; and many a
tear dropped in pity for the groaning captive has really
been addressed to the spirits of the larder and the
faggot-nook.  For all this, there are some very bad
corners in the towers of Villeneuve, so that I was not
wide of the mark when I began to think again, as I
had often thought before, of the stoutness of the human
composition in the Middle Ages, and the tranquillity
of nerve of people to whom the groaning captive and
the blackness of a "living tomb" were familiar ideas,
which did not at all interfere with their happiness or
their sanity.  Our modern nerves, our irritable sym-
pathies, our easy discomforts and fears, make one think
(in some relations) less respectfully of human nature.
Unless, indeed, it be true, as I have heard it main-
tained, that in the Middle Ages every one did go mad,
- every one _was_ mad.  The theory that this was a
period of general insanity is not altogether indefensible.

Within the old walls of its immense abbey the
town of Villeneuve has built itself a rough faubourg;
the fragments with which the soil was covered having
been, I suppose, a quarry of material.  There are no
streets; the small, shabby houses, almost hovels, straggle
at random over the uneven ground.  The only im-
portant feature is a convent of cloistered nuns, who
have a large garden (always within the walls) behind
their house, and whose doleful establishment you look
down into, or down at simply, from the battlements of
the citadel.  One or two of the nuns were passing in
and out of the house; they wore gray robes, with a
bright red cape.  I thought their situation most pro-
vincial.  I came away, and wandered a little over the
base of the hill, outside the walls.  Small white stones
cropped through the grass, over which low olive-trees
were scattered.  The afternoon had a yellow bright-
ness.  I sat down under one of the little trees, on the
grass, - the delicate gray branches were not much
above my head, - and rested, and looked at Avignon
across the Rhone.  It was very soft, very still and
pleasant, though I am not sure it was all I once should
have expected of that combination of elements: an old
city wall for a background, a canopy of olives, and,
for a couch, the soil of Provence.

When I came back to Avignon the twilight was
already thick; but I walked up to the Rocher des
Doms.  Here I again had the benefit of that amiable
moon which had already lighted up for me so many
romantic scenes.  She was full, and she rose over the
Rhone, and made it look in the distance like a silver
serpent.  I remember saying to myself at this mo-
ment, that it would be a beautiful evening to walk
round the walls of Avignon, - the remarkable walls,
which challenge comparison with those of Carcassonne
and Aigues-Mortes, and which it was my duty, as an
observer of the picturesque, to examine with some at-
tention.  Presenting themselves to that silver sheen,
they could not fail to be impressive.  So, at least, I
said to myself; but, unfortunately, I did not believe
what I said.  It is a melancholy fact that the walls of
Avignon had never impressed me at all, and I had
never taken the trouble to make the circuit.  They
are continuous and complete, but for some mysterious
reason they fail of their effect.  This is partly because
they are very low, in some places almost absurdly so;
being buried in new accumulations of soil, and by
the filling in of the moat up to their middle.  Then
they have been too well tended; they not only look at
present very new, but look as if they had never been
old.  The fact that their extent is very much greater
makes them more of a curiosity than those of Carcas-
sonne; but this is exactly, as the same time, what is
fatal to their pictorial unity.  With their thirty-seven
towers and seven gates they lose themselves too much
to make a picture that will compare with the ad-
mirable little vignette of Carcassonne.  I may mention,
now that I am speaking of the general mass of Avignon,
that nothing is more curious than the way in which,
viewed from a distance, it is all reduced to nought by
the vast bulk of the palace of the Popes.  From across
the Rhone, or from the train, as you leave the place,
this great gray block is all Avignon; it seems to occupy
the whole city, extensive, with its shrunken population,
as the city is.



XXXV.

It was the morning after this, I think (a certain
Saturday), that when I came out of the Hotel de
l'Europe, which lies in a shallow concavity just within
the city gate that opens on the Rhone, - came out to
look at the sky from the little _place_ before the inn,
and see how the weather promised for the obligatory
excursion to Vaucluse, - I found the whole town in a
terrible taking.  I say the whole town advisedly; for
every inhabitant appeared to have taken up a position
on the bank of the river, or on the uppermost parts
of the promenade of the Doms, where a view of its
course was to be obtained.  It had risen surprisingly
in the night, and the good people of Avignon had
reason to know what a rise of the Rhone might signify.
The town, in its lower portions, is quite at the mercy
of the swollen waters; and it was mentioned to me
that in 1856 the Hotel de l'Europe, in its convenient
hollow, was flooded up to within a few feet of the
ceiling of the dining-room, where the long board which
had served for so many a table d'hote floated dis-
reputably, with its legs in the air.  On the present
occasion the mountains of the Ardeche, where it had
been raining for a month, had sent down torrents
which, all that fine Friday night, by the light of the
innocent-looking moon, poured themselves into the
Rhone and its tributary, the Durance.  The river was
enormous, and continued to rise; and the sight was
beautiful and horrible.  The water in many places
was already at the base of the city walls; the quay,
with its parapet just emerging, being already covered.
The country, seen from the Plateau des Doms, re-
sembled a vast lake, with protrusions of trees, houses,
bridges, gates.  The people looked at it in silence, as
I had seen people before - on the occasion of a rise
of the Arno, at Pisa - appear to consider the prospects
of an inundation.  "Il monte; il monte toujours," -
there was not much said but that.  It was a general
holiday, and there was an air of wishing to profit, for
sociability's sake, by any interruption of the common-
place (the popular mind likes "a change," and the
element of change mitigates the sense of disaster); but
the affair was not otherwise a holiday.  Suspense and
anxiety were in the air, and it never is pleasant to be
reminded of the helplessness of man.  In the presence
of a loosened river, with its ravaging, unconquerable
volume, this impression is as strong as possible; and
as I looked at the deluge which threatened to make
an island of the Papal palace, I perceived that the
scourge of water is greater than the scourge of fire.
A blaze may be quenched, but where could the flame
be kindled that would arrest the quadrupled Rhone?
For the population of Avignon a good deal was at
stake, and I am almost ashamed to confess that in the
midst of the public alarm I considered the situation
from the point of view of the little projects of a senti-
mental tourist.  Would the prospective inundation inter-
fere with my visit to Vaucluse, or make it imprudent
to linger twenty-four hours longer at Avignon?  I must
add that the tourist was not perhaps, after all, so
sentimental.  I have spoken of the pilgrimage to the
shrine of Petrarch as obligatory, and that was, in fact,
the light in which it presented itself to me; all the
more that I had been twice at Avignon without under-
taking it.  This why I was vexed at the Rhone - if
vexed I was - for representing as impracticable an ex-
cursion which I cared nothing about.  How little I
cared was manifest from my inaction on former oc-
casions.  I had a prejudice against Vancluse, against
Petrarch, even against the incomparable Laura.  I was
sure that the place was cockneyfied and threadbare,
and I had never been able to take an interest in the
poet and the lady.  I was sure that I had known many
women as charming and as handsome as she, about
whom much less noise had been made; and I was
convinced that her singer was factitious and literary,
and that there are half a dozen stanzas in Wordsworth
that speak more to the soul than the whole collection
of his _fioriture_.  This was the crude state of mind in
which I determined to go, at any risk, to Vaucluse.
Now that I think it over, I seem to remember that I
had hoped, after all, that the submersion of the roads
would forbid it.  Since morning the clouds had gathered
again, and by noon they were so heavy that there was
every prospect of a torrent.  It appeared absurd to
choose such a time as this to visit a fountain - a
fountain which, would be indistinguishable in the
general cataract.  Nevertheless I took a vow that if
at noon the rain should not have begun to descend
upon Avignon I would repair to the head-spring of the
Sorgues.  When the critical moment arrived, the clouds
were hanging over Avignon like distended water-bags,
which only needed a prick to empty themselves.  The
prick was not given, however; all nature was too much
occupied in following the aberration of the Rhone to
think of playing tricks elsewhere.  Accordingly, I started
for the station in a spirit which, for a tourist who
sometimes had prided himself on his unfailing supply
of sentiment, was shockingly perfunctory.

	"For tasks in hours of insight willed
	May be in hours of gloom fulfilled."

I remembered these lines of Matthew Arnold (written,
apparently, in an hour of gloom), and carried out the
idea, as I went, by hoping that with the return of in-
sight I should be glad to have seen Vaucluse.  Light
has descended upon me since then, and I declare that
the excursion is in every way to be recommended.
The place makes a great impression, quite apart from
Petrarch and Laura.

There was no rain; there was only, all the after-
noon, a mild, moist wind, and a sky magnificently
black, which made a _repoussoir_ for the paler cliffs of
the fountain.  The road, by train, crosses a flat, ex-
pressionless country, toward the range of arid hills
which lie to the east of Avignon, and which spring
(says Murray) from the mass of the Mont-Ventoux.  At
Isle-sur-Sorgues, at the end of about an hour, the fore-
ground becomes much more animated and the distance
much more (or perhaps I should say much less) actual.
I descended from the train, and ascended to the top
of an omnibus which was to convey me into the re-
cesses of the hills.  It had not been among my pre-
visions that I should be indebted to a vehicle of that
kind for an opportunity to commune with the spirit of
Petrarch; and I had to borrow what consolation I
could from the fact that at least I had the omnibus to
myself.  I was the only passenger; every one else was
at Avignon, watching the Rhone.  I lost no time in
perceiving that I could not have come to Vaucluse at
a better moment.  The Sorgues was almost as full as
the Rhone, and of a color much more romantic.  Rush-
ing along its narrowed channel under an avenue of
fine _platanes_ (it is confined between solid little embank-
ments of stone), with the good-wives of the village, on
the brink, washing their linen in its contemptuous
flood, it gave promise of high entertainment further on.

The drive to Vaucluse is of about three quarters of
an hour; and though the river, as I say, was promis-
ing, the big pale hills, as the road winds into them,
did not look as if their slopes of stone and shrub were
a nestling-place for superior scenery.  It is a part of
the merit of Vaucluse, indeed, that it is as much as
possible a surprise.  The place has a right to its name,
for the valley appears impenetrable until you get fairly
into it.  One perverse twist follows another, until the
omnibus suddenly deposits you in front of the "cabinet"
of Petrarch.  After that you have only to walk along
the left bank of the river.  The cabinet of Petrarch is
to-day a hideous little _cafe_, bedizened, like a sign-
board, with extracts from the ingenious "Rime."  The
poet and his lady are, of course, the stock in trade of
the little village, which has had for several generations
the privilege of attracting young couples engaged in
their wedding-tour, and other votaries of the tender
passion.  The place has long been familiar, on festal
Sundays, to the swains of Avignon and their attendant
nymphs.  The little fish of the Sorgues are much
esteemed, and, eaten on the spot, they constitute, for
the children of the once Papal city, the classic sub-
urban dinner.  Vaucluse has been turned to account,
however, not only by sentiment, but by industry; the
banks of the stream being disfigured by a pair of
hideous mills for the manufacture of paper and of
wool.  In an enterprising and economical age the
water-power of the Sorgues was too obvious a motive;
and I must say that, as the torrent rushed past them,
the wheels of the dirty little factories appeared to turn
merrily enough.  The footpath on the left bank, of
which I just spoke, carries one, fortunately, quite out
of sight of them, and out of sound as well, inasmuch
as on the day of my visit the stream itself, which was
in tremendous force, tended more and more, as one
approached the fountain, to fill the valley with its own
echoes.  Its color was magnificent, and the whole
spectacle more like a corner of Switzerland than a
nook in Provence.  The protrusions of the mountain
shut it in, and you penetrate to the bottom of the re-
cess which they form.  The Sorgues rushes and rushes;
it is almost like Niagara after the jump of the cataract.
There are dreadful little booths beside the path, for
the sale of photographs and _immortelles_, - I don't know
what one is to do with the immortelles, - where you
are offered a brush dipped in tar to write your name
withal on the rocks.  Thousands of vulgar persons, of
both sexes, and exclusively, it appeared, of the French
nationality, had availed themselves of this implement;
for every square inch of accessible stone was scored
over with some human appellation.  It is not only we
in America, therefore, who besmirch our scenery; the
practice exists, in a more organized form (like every-
thing else in France), in the country of good taste.
You leave the little booths and stalls behind; but the
bescribbled crag, bristling with human vanity, keeps
you company even when you stand face to face with
the fountain.  This happens when you find yourself
at the foot of the enormous straight cliff out of which
the river gushes.  It rears itself to an extraordinary
height, - a huge forehead of bare stone, - looking as
if it were the half of a tremendous mound, split open
by volcanic action.  The little valley, seeing it there,
at a bend, stops suddenly, and receives in its arms
the magical spring.  I call it magical on account of
the mysterious manner in which it comes into the
world, with the huge shoulder of the mountain rising
over it, as if to protect the secret.  From under the
mountain it silently rises, without visible movement,
filling a small natural basin with the stillest blue
water.  The contrast between the stillness of this basin
and the agitation of the water directly after it has
overflowed, constitutes half the charm of Vaucluse.
The violence of the stream when once it has been set
loose on the rocks is as fascinating and indescribable
as that of other cataracts; and the rocks in the bed of
the Sorgues have been arranged by a master-hand.
The setting of the phenomenon struck me as so simple
and so fine - the vast sad cliff, covered with the after-
noon light, still and solid forever, while the liquid ele-
ment rages and roars at its base - that I had no diffi-
culty in understanding the celebrity of Vaucluse.  I
understood it, but I will not say that I understood
Petrarch.  He must have been very self-supporting, and
Madonna Laura must indeed have been much to him.

The aridity of the hills that shut in the valley is
complete, and the whole impression is best conveyed
by that very expressive French epithet _morne_.  There
are the very fragmentary ruins of a castle (of one of
the bishops of Cavaillon) on a high spur of the moun-
tain, above the river; and there is another remnant of
a feudal habitation on one of the more accessible
ledges.  Having half an hour to spare before my
omnibus was to leave (I must beg the reader's pardon
for this atrociously false note; call the vehicle a _dili-
gence_, and for some undiscoverable reason the offence
is minimized), I clambered up to this latter spot, and
sat among the rocks in the company of a few stunted
olives.  The Sorgues, beneath me, reaching the plain,
flung itself crookedly across the meadows, like an un-
rolled blue ribbon.  I tried to think of the _amant de
Laure_, for literature's sake; but I had no great success,
and the most I could, do was to say to myself that I
must try again.  Several months have elapsed since
then, and I am ashamed to confess that the trial has
not yet come off.  The only very definite conviction I
arrived at was that Vaucluse is indeed cockneyfied,
but that I should have been a fool, all the same, not
to come.



XXXVI.

I mounted into my diligence at the door of the
Hotel de Petrarque et de Laure, and we made our
way back to Isle-sur-Sorgues in the fading light.  This
village, where at six o'clock every one appeared to
have gone to bed, was fairly darkened by its high,
dense plane-trees, under which the rushing river, on
a level with its parapets, looked unnaturally, almost
wickedly blue.  It was a glimpse which has left a
picture in my mind: the little closed houses, the place
empty and soundless in the autumn dusk but for the
noise of waters, and in the middle, amid the blackness
of the shade, the gleam of the swift, strange tide.  At
the station every one was talking of the inundation
being in many places an accomplished fact, and, in
particular, of the condition of the Durance at some
point that I have forgotten.  At Avignon, an hour
later, I found the water in some of the streets.  The
sky cleared in the evening, the moon lighted up the
submerged suburbs, and the population again collected
in the high places to enjoy the spectacle.  It exhibited
a certain sameness, however, and by nine o'clock there
was considerable animation in the Place Crillon, where
there is nothing to be seen but the front of the theatre
and of several cafes - in addition, indeed, to a statue
of this celebrated brave, whose valor redeemed some
of the numerous military disasters of the reign of
Louis XV.  The next morning the lower quarters of
the town were in a pitiful state; the situation seemed
to me odious.  To express my disapproval of it, I lost
no time in taking the train for Orange, which, with its
other attractions, had the merit of not being seated on
the Rhone.  It was my destiny to move northward;
but even if I had been at liberty to follow a less un-
natural course I should not then have undertaken it,
inasmuch, as the railway between Avignon and Mar-
seilles was credibly reported to be (in places) under
water.  This was the case with almost everything but
the line itself, on the way to Orange.  The day proved
splendid, and its brilliancy only lighted up the desola-
tion.  Farmhouses and cottages were up to their middle
in the yellow liquidity; haystacks looked like dull little
islands; windows and doors gaped open, without faces;
and interruption and flight were represented in the
scene.  It was brought home to me that the _popula-
tions rurales_ have many different ways of suffering,
and my heart glowed with a grateful sense of cockney-
ism.  It was under the influence of this emotion that
I alighted at Orange, to visit a collection of eminently
civil monuments.

The collection consists of but two objects, but these
objects are so fine that I will let the word pass.  One
of them is a triumphal arch, supposedly of the period
of Marcus Aurelius; the other is a fragment, magnifi-
cent in its ruin, of a Roman theatre.  But for these
fine Roman remains and for its name, Orange is a
perfectly featureless little town; without the Rhone -
which, as I have mentioned, is several miles distant -
to help it to a physiognomy.  It seems one of the
oddest things that this obscure French borough -
obscure, I mean, in our modern era, for the Gallo-
Roman Arausio must have been, judging it by its
arches and theatre, a place of some importance -
should have given its name to the heirs apparent of
the throne of Holland,and been borne by a king of
England who had sovereign rights over it.  During
the Middle Ages it formed part of an independent
principality; but in 1531 it fell, by the marriage of
one of its princesses, who had inherited it, into the
family of Nassau.  I read in my indispensable Mur-
ray that it was made over to France by the treaty of
Utrecht.  The arch of triumph, which stands a little
way out of the town, is rather a pretty than an im-
posing vestige of the Romans.  If it had greater purity
of style, one might say of it that it belonged to the
same family of monuments as the Maison Carree at
Nimes.  It has three passages, - the middle much
higher than the others, - and a very elevated attic.
The vaults of the passages are richly sculptured, and
the whole monument is covered with friezes and
military trophies.  This sculpture is rather mixed;
much of it is broken and defaced, and the rest seemed
to me ugly, though its workmanship is praised.  The
arch is at once well preserved and much injured.  Its
general mass is there, and as Roman monuments go
it is remarkably perfect; but it has suffered, in patches,
from the extremity of restoration.  It is not, on the
whole, of absorbing interest.  It has a charm, never-
theless, which comes partly from its soft, bright yellow
color, partly from a certain elegance of shape, of ex-
pression; and on that well-washed Sunday morning,
with its brilliant tone, surrounded by its circle of thin
poplars, with the green country lying beyond it and a
low blue horizon showing through its empty portals,
it made, very sufficiently, a picture that hangs itself
to one of the lateral hooks of the memory.  I can
take down the modest composition, and place it before
me as I write.  I see the shallow, shining puddles in
the hard, fair French road; the pale blue sky, diluted
by days of rain; the disgarnished autumnal fields; the
mild sparkle of the low horizon; the solitary figure in
sabots, with a bundle under its arm, advancing along
the _chaussee_; and in the middle I see the little ochre-
colored monument, which, in spite of its antiquity,
looks bright and gay, as everything must look in
France of a fresh Sunday morning.

It is true that this was not exactly the appearance
of the Roman theatre, which lies on the other side of
the town; a fact that did not prevent me from making
my way to it in less than five minutes, through a suc-
cession of little streets concerning which I have no
observations to record.  None of the Roman remains
in the south of France are more impressive than this
stupendous fragment.  An enormous mound rises above
the place, which was formerly occupied - I quote from
Murray - first by a citadel of the Romans, then by a
castle of the princes of Nassau, razed by Louis XIV.
Facing this hill a mighty wall erects itself, thirty-six
metres high, and composed of massive blocks of dark
brown stone, simply laid one on the other; the whole
naked, rugged surface of which suggests a natural cliff
(say of the Vaucluse order) rather than an effort of
human, or even of Roman labor.  It is the biggest
thing at Orange, - it is bigger than all Orange put to-
gether, - and its permanent massiveness makes light
of the shrunken city.  The face it presents to the town
- the top of it garnished with two rows of brackets,
perforated with holes to receive the staves of the _vela-
rium_ - bears the traces of more than one tier of orna-
mental arches; though how these flat arches were
applied, or incrusted, upon the wall, I do not profess
to explain.  You pass through a diminutive postern -
which seems in proportion about as high as the en-
trance of a rabbit-hutch - into the lodge of the custo-
dian, who introduces you to the interior of the theatre.
Here the mass of the hill affronts you, which the in-
genious Romans treated simply as the material of their
auditorium.  They inserted their stone seats, in a
semicircle, in the slope of the lull, and planted their
colossal wall opposite to it.  This wall, from the inside,
is, if possible, even more imposing.  It formed the
back of the stage, the permanent scene, and its
enormous face was coated with marble.  It contains
three doors, the middle one being the highest, and
having above it, far aloft, a deep niche, apparently
intended for an imperial statue.  A few of the benches
remain on the hillside which, however, is mainly a
confusion of fragments.  There is part of a corridor
built into the hill, high up, and on the crest are the
remnants of the demolished castle.  The whole place
is a kind of wilderness of ruin; there are scarcely any
details; the great feature is the overtopping wall.  This
wall being the back of the scene, the space left be-
tween it and the chord of the semicircle (of the audi-
torium) which formed the proscenium is rather less
than one would have supposed.  In other words, the
stage was very shallow, and appears to have been ar-
ranged for a number of performers standing in a line,
like a company of soldiers.  There stands the silent
skeleton, however, as impressive by what it leaves you
to guess and wonder about as by what it tells you.
It has not the sweetness, the softness of melancholy,
of the theatre at Arles; but it is more extraordinary,
and one can imagine only tremendous tragedies being
enacted there, -

	"Presenting Thebes' or Pelops' line."

At either end of the stage, coming forward, is an
immense wing, - immense in height, I mean, as it
reaches to the top of the scenic wall; the other dimen-
sions are not remarkable.  The division to the right,
as you face the stage, is pointed out as the green-
room; its portentous attitude and the open arches at
the top give it the air of a well.  The compartment
on the left is exactly similar, save that it opens into
the traces of other chambers, said to be those of a
hippodrome adjacent to the theatre.  Various fragments
are visible which refer themselves plausibly to such an
establishment; the greater axis of the hippodrome would
appear to have been on a line with the triumphal
arch.  This is all I saw, and all there was to see, of
Orange, which had a very rustic, bucolic aspect, and
where I was not even called upon to demand break-
fast at the hotel.  The entrance of this resort might
have been that of a stable of the Roman days.



XXXVII.

I have been trying to remember whether I fasted
all the way to Macon, which I reached at an advanced
hour of the evening, and think I must have done so
except for the purchase of a box of nougat at Monte-
limart (the place is famous for the manufacture of
this confection, which, at the station, is hawked at the
windows of the train) and for a bouillon, very much
later, at Lyons.  The journey beside the Rhone -
past Valence, past Tournon, past Vienne - would
have been charming, on that luminous Sunday, but
for two disagreeable accidents.  The express from
Marseilles, which I took at Orange, was full to over-
flowing; and the only refuge I could find was an
inside angle in a carriage laden with Germans, who
had command of the windows, which they occupied
as strongly as they have been known to occupy other
strategical positions.  I scarcely know, however, why
I linger on this particular discomfort, for it was but
a single item in a considerable list of grievances, -
grievances dispersed through six weeks of constant
railway travel in France.  I have not touched upon
them at an earlier stage of this chronicle, but my re-
serve is not owing to any sweetness of association.
This form of locomotion, in the country of the ameni-
ties, is attended with a dozen discomforts; almost all
the conditions of the business are detestable.  They
force the sentimental tourist again and again to ask
himself whether, in consideration of such mortal an-
noyances, the game is worth the candle.  Fortunately,
a railway journey is a good deal like a sea voyage;
its miseries fade from the mind as soon as you arrive.
That is why I completed, to my great satisfaction,
my little tour in France.  Let this small effusion of
ill-nature be my first and last tribute to the whole
despotic _gare_: the deadly _salle d'attente_, the insuffer-
able delays over one's luggage, the porterless platform,
the overcrowded and illiberal train.  How many a
time did I permit myself the secret reflection that it
is in perfidious Albion that they order this matter
best!  How many a time did the eager British mer-
cenary, clad in velveteen and clinging to the door of
the carriage as it glides into the station, revisit my
invidious dreams!  The paternal porter and the re-
sponsive hansom are among the best gifts of the Eng-
lish genius to the world.  I hasten to add, faithful
to my habit (so insufferable to some of my friends) of
ever and again readjusting the balance after I have
given it an honest tip, that the bouillon at Lyons,
which I spoke of above, was, though by no means an
ideal bouillon, much better than any I could have
obtained at an English railway station.  After I had
imbibed it, I sat in the train (which waited a long
time at Lyons) and, by the light of one of the big
lamps on the platform, read all sorts of disagreeable
things in certain radical newspapers which I had
bought at the book-stall.  I gathered from these sheets
that Lyons was in extreme commotion.  The Rhone
and the Saone, which form a girdle for the splendid
town, were almost in the streets, as I could easily be-
lieve from what I had seen of the country after leav-
ing Orange.  The Rhone, all the way to Lyons, had
been in all sorts of places where it had no business
to be, and matters were naturally not improved by
its confluence with the charming and copious stream
which, at Macon, is said once to have given such a
happy opportunity to the egotism of the capital.  A
visitor from Paris (the anecdote is very old), being
asked on the quay of that city whether he didn't ad-
mire the Saone, replied good-naturedly that it was
very pretty, but that in Paris they spelled it with
the _ei_.  This moment of general alarm at Lyons had
been chosen by certain ingenious persons (I credit
them, perhaps, with too sure a prevision of the rise
of the rivers) for practising further upon the appre-
hensions of the public.  A bombshell filled with
dynamite had been thrown into a cafe, and various
votaries of the comparatively innocuous _petit verre_
had been wounded (I am not sure whether any one
had been killed) by the irruption.  Of course there had
been arrests and incarcerations, and the "Intransi-
geant" and the "Rappel" were filled with the echoes
of the explosion.  The tone of these organs is rarely
edifying, and it had never been less so than on this
occasion.  I wondered, as I looked through them,
whether I was losing all my radicalism; and then I
wondered whether, after all, I had any to lose.  Even
in so long await as that tiresome delay at Lyons I
failed to settle the question, any more than I made
up my mind as to the probable future of the militant
democracy, or the ultimate form of a civilization which
should have blown up everything else.  A few days
later, the waters went down it Lyons; but the de-
mocracy has not gone down.

I remember vividly the remainder of that evening
which I spent at Macon, - remember it with a chatter-
ing of the teeth.  I know not what had got into the
place; the temperature, for the last day of October,
was eccentric and incredible.  These epithets may
also be applied to the hotel itself, - an extraordinary
structure, all facade, which exposes an uncovered rear
to the gaze of nature.  There is a demonstrative,
voluble landlady, who is of course part of the facade;
but everything behind her is a trap for the winds,
with chambers, corridors, staircases, all exhibited to
the sky, as if the outer wall of the house had been
lifted off.  It would have been delightful for Florida,
but it didn't do for Burgundy, even on the eve of
November 1st, so that I suffered absurdly from the
rigor of a season that had not yet begun.  There was
something in the air; I felt it the next day, even on
the sunny quay of the Saone, where in spite of a fine
southerly exposure I extracted little warmth from the
reflection that Alphonse de Lamartine had often trod-
den the flags.  Macon struck me, somehow, as suffer-
ing from a chronic numbness, and there was nothing
exceptionally cheerful in the remarkable extension of
the river.  It was no longer a river, - it had become
a lake; and from my window, in the painted face of
the inn, I saw that the opposite bank had been moved
back, as it were, indefinitely.  Unfortunately, the various
objects with which it was furnished had not been
moved as well, the consequence of which was an
extraordinary confusion in the relations of thing.
There were always poplars to be seen, but the poplar
had become an aquatic plant.  Such phenomena,
however, at Macon attract but little attention, as the
Saone, at certain seasons of the year, is nothing if not
expansive.  The people are as used to it as they ap-
peared to be to the bronze statue of Lamartine, which
is the principal monument of the _place_, and which, re-
presenting the poet in a frogged overcoat and top-
boots, improvising in a high wind, struck me as even
less casual in its attitude than monumental sculpture
usually succeeds in being.  It is true that in its pre-
sent position I thought better of this work of art, which
is from the hand of M. Falquiere, than when I had
seen it through the factitious medium of the Salon of
1876.  I walked up the hill where the older part of
Macon lies, in search of the natal house of the _amant
d'Elvire_, the Petrarch whose Vaucluse was the bosom
of the public.  The Guide-Joanne quotes from "Les
Confidences" a description of the birthplace of the
poet, whose treatment of the locality is indeed poetical.
It tallies strangely little with the reality, either as re-
gards position or other features; and it may be said
to be, not an aid, but a direct obstacle, to a discovery
of the house.  A very humble edifice, in a small back
street, is designated by a municipal tablet, set into its
face, as the scene of Lamartine's advent into the world.
He himself speaks of a vast and lofty structure, at the
angle of a _place_, adorned with iron clamps, with a
_porte haute et large_ and many other peculiarities.  The
house with the tablet has two meagre stories above
the basement, and (at present, at least) an air of ex-
treme shabbiness; the _place_, moreover, never can have
been vast.  Lamartine was accused of writing history
incorrectly, and apparently he started wrong at first:
it had never become clear to him where he was born.
Or is the tablet wrong?  If the house is small, the
tablet is very big.



XXXVIII.

The foregoing reflections occur, in a cruder form,
as it were, in my note-book, where I find this remark
appended to them: "Don't take leave of Lamartine on
that contemptuous note; it will be easy to think of
something more sympathetic!"  Those friends of mine,
mentioned a little while since, who accuse me of always
tipping back the balance, could not desire a paragraph
more characteristic; but I wish to give no further evi-
dence of such infirmities, and will therefore hurry away
from the subject, - hurry away in the train which, very
early on a crisp, bright morning, conveyed. me, by way
of an excursion, to the ancient city of Bourg-en-Bresse.
Shining in early light, the Saone was spread, like a
smooth, white tablecloth, over a considerable part of
the flat country that I traversed.  There is no provision
made in this image for the long, transparent screens
of thin-twigged trees which rose at intervals out of
the watery plain; but as, under the circumstances,
there seemed to be no provision for them in fact, I
will let my metaphor go for what it is worth.  My
journey was (as I remember it) of about an hour and
a half; but I passed no object of interest, as the phrase
is, whatever.  The phrase hardly applies even to Bourg
itself, which is simply a town _quelconque_, as M. Zola
would say.  Small, peaceful, rustic, it stands in the
midst of the great dairy-feeding plains of Bresse, of
which fat county, sometime property of the house of
Savoy, it was the modest capital.  The blue masses
of the Jura give it a creditable horizon, but the only
nearer feature it can point to is its famous sepulchral
church.  This edifice lies at a fortunate distance from
the town, which, though inoffensive, is of too common
a stamp to consort with such a treasure.  All I ever
knew of the church of Brou I had gathered, years
ago, from Matthew Arnold's beautiful poem, which
bears its name.  I remember thinking, in those years,
that it was impossible verses could be more touching
than these; and as I stood before the object of my
pilgrimage, in the gay French light (though the place
was so dull), I recalled the spot where I had first read
them, and where I read them again and yet again,
wondering whether it would ever be my fortune to
visit the church of Brou.  The spot in question was
an armchair in a window which looked out on some
cows in a field; and whenever I glanced at the cows
it came over me - I scarcely know why - that I should
probably never behold the structure reared by the
Duchess Margaret.  Some of our visions never come
to pass; but we must be just, - others do.  "So sleep,
forever sleep, O princely pair!"  I remembered that
line of Matthew Arnold's, and the stanza about the
Duchess Margaret coming to watch the builders on
her palfry white.  Then there came to me something
in regard to the moon shining on winter nights through
the cold clere-story.  The tone of the place at that
hour was not at all lunar; it was cold and bright, but
with the chill of an autumn morning; yet this, even
with the fact of the unexpected remoteness of the
church from the Jura added to it, did not prevent me
from feeling that I looked at a monument in the pro-
duction of which - or at least in the effect of which
on the tourist mind of to-day - Matthew Arnold had
been much concerned.  By a pardonable license he
has placed it a few miles nearer to the forests of the
Jura than it stands at present.  It is very true that,
though the mountains in the sixteenth century can
hardly have been in a different position, the plain
which separates the church from them may have been
bedecked with woods.  The visitor to-day cannot help
wondering why the beautiful building, with its splendid
works of art, is dropped down in that particular spot,
which looks so accidental and arbitrary.  But there
are reasons for most things, and there were reasons
why the church of Brou should be at Brou, which is
a vague little suburb of a vague little town.

The responsibility rests, at any rate, upon the
Duchess Margaret, - Margaret of Austria, daughter of
the Emperor Maximilian and his wife Mary of Bur-
gundy, daughter of Charles the Bold.  This lady has
a high name in history, having been regent of the
Netherlands in behalf of her nephew, the Emperor
Charles V., of whose early education she had had the
care.  She married in 1501 Philibert the Handsome,
Duke of Savoy, to whom the province of Bresse be-
longed, and who died two years later.  She had been
betrothed, is a child, to Charles VIII. of France, and
was kept for some time at the French court, - that of
her prospective father-in-law, Louis XI.; but she was
eventually repudiated, in order that her _fiance_ might
marry Anne of Brittany, - an alliance so magnificently
political that we almost condone the offence to a
sensitive princess.  Margaret did not want for hus-
bands, however, inasmuch as before her marriage to
Philibert she had been united to John of Castile, son
of Ferdinand V., King of Aragon, - an episode ter-
minated, by the death of the Spanish prince, within a
year.  She was twenty-two years regent of the Nether-
lands, and died at fifty-one, in 1530.  She might have
been, had she chosen, the wife, of Henry VII. of Eng-
land.  She was one of the signers of the League of
Cambray, against the Venetian republic, and was a
most politic, accomplished, and judicious princess.
She undertook to build the church of Brou as a mau-
soleum, for her second husband and herself, in fulfil-
ment of a vow made by Margaret of Bourbon, mother
of Philibert, who died before she could redeem her
pledge, and who bequeathed the duty to her son.  He
died shortly afterwards, and his widow assumed the
pious task.  According to Murray, she intrusted the
erection of the church to "Maistre Loys von Berghem,"
and the sculpture to "Maistre Conrad."  The author
of a superstitious but carefully prepared little Notice,
which I bought at Bourg, calls the architect and
sculptor (at once) Jehan de Paris, author (sic) of the
tomb of Francis II. of Brittany, to which we gave some
attention at Nantes, and which the writer of my
pamphlet ascribes only subordinately to Michel Colomb.
The church, which is not of great size, is in the last
and most flamboyant phase of Gothic, and in admirable
preservation; the west front, before which a quaint old
sun-dial is laid out on the ground, - a circle of num-
bers marked in stone, like those on a clock face, let
into the earth, - is covered with delicate ornament.
The great feature, however (the nave is perfectly bare
and wonderfully new-looking, though the warden, a
stolid yet sharp old peasant, in a blouse, who looked
more as if his line were chaffering over turnips than
showing off works of art, told me that it has never
been touched, and that its freshness is simply the
quality of the stone), - the great feature is the ad-
mirable choir, in the midst of which the three monu-
ments have bloomed under the chisel, like exotic
plants in a conservatory.  I saw the place to small
advantage, for the stained glass of the windows, which
are fine, was under repair, and much of it was masked
with planks.

In the centre lies Philibert-le-Bel, a figure of white
marble on a great slab of black, in his robes and his
armor, with two boy-angels holding a tablet at his
head, and two more at his feet.  On either side of
him is another cherub: one guarding his helmet, the
other his stiff gauntlets.  The attitudes of these charm-
ing children, whose faces are all bent upon him in
pity, have the prettiest tenderness and respect.  The
table on which he lies is supported by elaborate
columns, adorned with niches containing little images,
and with every other imaginable elegance; and be-
neath it he is represented in that other form, so com-
mon in the tombs of the Renaissance, - a man naked
and dying, with none of the state and splendor of the
image above.  One of these figures embodies the duke
the other simply the mortal; and there is something
very strange and striking in the effect of the latter,
seen dimly and with difficulty through the intervals
of the rich supports of the upper slab.  The monu-
ment of Margaret herself is on the left, all in white
merble, tormented into a multitude of exquisite pat-
terns, the last extravagance of a Gothic which had
gone so far that nothing was left it but to return upon
itself.  Unlike her husband, who has only the high
roof of the church above him, she lies under a canopy
supported and covered by a wilderness of embroidery,
- flowers, devices, initials, arabesques, statuettes.
Watched over by cherubs, she is also in her robes
and ermine, with a greyhound sleeping at her feet
(her husband, at his, has a waking lion); and the
artist has not, it is to be presumed, represented her
as more beautiful than she was.  She looks, indeed,
like the regent of a turbulent realm.  Beneath her
couch is stretched another figure, - a less brilliant
Margaret, wrapped in her shroud, with her long hair
over her shoulders.  Round the tomb is the battered
iron railing placed there originally, with the myste-
rious motto of the duchess worked into the top, -
_fortune infortune fort une_.  The other two monuments
are protected by barriers of the same pattern.  That
of Margaret of Bourbon, Philibert's mother, stands on
the right of the choir; and I suppose its greatest dis-
tinction is that it should have been erected to a
mother-in-law.  It is but little less florid and sump-
tuous than the others; it has, however, no second re-
cumbent figure.  On the other hand, the statuettes
that surround the base of the tomb are of even more
exquisite workmanship: they represent weeping wo-
men, in long mantles and hoods, which latter hang
forward over the small face of the figure, giving the
artist a chance to carve the features within this hollow
of drapery, - an extraordinary play of skill.  There is
a high, white marble shrine of the Virgin, as extra-
ordinary as all the rest (a series of compartments, re-
presenting the various scenes of her life, with the
Assumption in the middle); and there is a magnifi-
cent series of stalls, which are simply the intricate
embroidery of the tombs translated into polished oak.
All these things are splendid, ingenious, elaborate,
precious; it is goldsmith's work on a monumental
scale, and the general effect is none the less beautiful
and solemn because it is so rich.  But the monuments
of the church of Brou are not the noblest that one
may see; the great tombs of Verona are finer, and
various other early Italian work.  These things are
not insincere, as Ruskin would say; but they are pre-
tentious, and they are not positively _naifs_.  I should
mention that the walls of the choir are embroidered
in places with Margaret's tantalizing device, which -
partly, perhaps, because it is tantalizing - is so very
decorative, as they say in London.  I know not whether
she was acquainted with this epithet; but she had
anticipated one of the fashions most characteristic of
our age.

One asks one's self how all this decoration, this
luxury of fair and chiselled marble, survived the
French Revolution.  An hour of liberty in the choir
of Brou would have been a carnival for the image-
breakers.  The well-fed Bressois are surely a good-
natured people.  I call them well-fed both on general
and on particular grounds.  Their province has the
most savory aroma, and I found an opportunity to
test its reputation.  I walked back into the town from
the church (there was really nothing to be seen by
the way), and as the hour of the midday breakfast
had struck, directed my steps to the inn.  The table
d'hote was going on, and a gracious, bustling, talkative
landlady welcomed me.  I had an excellent repast -
the best repast possible - which consisted simply of
boiled eggs and bread and butter.  It was the quality
of these simple ingredients that made the occasion
memorable.  The eggs were so good that I am ashamed
to say how many of them I consumed.  "La plus
belle fille du monde," as the French proverb says,
"ne peut donner que ce qu'elle a;" and it might
seem that an egg which has succeeded in being fresh
has done all that can reasonably be expected of it.
But there was a bloom of punctuality, so to speak,
about these eggs of Bourg, as if it had been the in-
tention of the very hens themselves that they should
be promptly served.  "Nous sommes en Bresse, et le
beurre n'est pas mauvais," the landlady said, with a
sort of dry coquetry, as she placed this article before
me.  It was the poetry of butter, and I ate a pound
or two of it; after which I came away with a strange
mixture of impressions of late Gothic sculpture and
thick _tartines_.  I came away through the town, where,
on a little green promenade, facing the hotel, is a
bronze statue of Bichat, the physiologist, who was a
Bressois.  I mention it, not on account of its merit
(though, as statues go, I don't remember that it is
bad), but because I learned from it - my ignorance,
doubtless, did me little honor - that Bichat had died
at thirty years of age, and this revelation was almost
agitating.  To have done so much in so short a life
was to be truly great.  This reflection, which looks
deplorably trite as I write it here, had the effect of
eloquence as I uttered it, for my own benefit, on the
bare little mall at Bourg.



XXXIX.

On my return to Macon I found myself fairly face
to face with the fact that my little tour was near its
end.  Dijon had been marked by fate as its farthest
limit, and Dijon was close at hand.  After that I was
to drop the tourist, and re-enter Paris as much as pos-
sible like a Parisian.  Out of Paris the Parisian never
loiters, and therefore it would be impossible for me to
stop between Dijon and the capital.  But I might be
a tourist a few hours longer by stopping somewhere
between Macon and Dijon.  The question was where
I should spend these hours.  Where better, I asked
myself (for reasons not now entirely clear to me) than
at Beaune?  On my way to this town I passed the
stretch of the Cote d'Or, which, covered with a mel-
low autumn haze, with the sunshine shimmering
through, looked indeed like a golden slope.  One
regards with a kind of awe the region in which the
famous _crus_ of Burgundy (Yougeot, Chambertin, Nuits,
Beaune) are, I was going to say, manufactured.  Adieu,
paniers; vendanges sont faites!  The vintage was
over; the shrunken russet fibres alone clung to their
ugly stick.  The horizon on the left of the road had
a charm, however, there is something picturesque
in the big, comfortable shoulders of the Cote.  That
delicate critic, M. Emile Montegut, in a charming
record of travel through this region, published some
years ago, praises Shakspeare for having talked (in
"Lear") of "waterish Burgundy."  Vinous Burgundy
would surely be more to the point.  I stopped at
Beaune in pursuit of the picturesque, but I might
almost have seen the little I discovered without stop-
ping.  It is a drowsy little Burgundian town, very
old and ripe, with crooked streets, vistas always ob-
lique, and steep, moss-covered roofs.  The principal
lion is the Hopital-Saint-Esprit, or the Hotel-Dieu,
simply, as they call it there, founded in 1443 by
Nicholas Rollin, Chancellor of Burgundy.  It is ad-
ministered by the sisterhood of the Holy Ghost, and
is one of the most venerable and stately of hospitals.
The face it presents to the street is simple, but strik-
ing, - a plain, windowless wall, surmounted by a vast
slate roof, of almost mountainous steepness.  Astride
this roof sits a tall, slate-covered spire, from which,
as I arrived, the prettiest chimes I ever heard (worse
luck to them, as I will presently explain) were ring-
ing.  Over the door is a high, quaint canopy, without
supports, with its vault painted blue and covered
with gilded stars.  (This, and indeed the whole build-
ing, have lately been restored, and its antiquity is
quite of the spick-and-span order.  But it is very
delightful.)  The treasure of the place is a precious
picture, - a Last Judgment, attributed equally to John
van Eyck and Roger van der Weyden, - given to the
hospital in the fifteenth century by Nicholas Rollin
aforesaid.

I learned, however, to my dismay, from a sympa-
thizing but inexorable concierge, that what remained
to me of the time I had to spend at Beaune, between
trains, - I had rashly wasted half an hour of it in
breakfasting at the station, - was the one hour of the
day (that of the dinner of the nuns; the picture is in
their refectory) during which the treasure could not
be shown.  The purpose of the musical chimes to
which I had so artlessly listened was to usher in this
fruitless interval.  The regulation was absolute, and
my disappointment relative, as I have been happy to
reflect since I "looked up" the picture.  Crowe and
Cavalcaselle assign it without hesitation to Roger van
der Weyden, and give a weak little drawing of it in
their "Flemish Painters."  I learn from them also -
what I was ignorant of - that Nicholas Ronin, Chan-
cellor of Burgundy and founder of the establishment
at Beaune, was the original of the worthy kneeling
before the Virgin, in the magnificent John van Eyck
of the Salon Carre.  All I could see was the court of
the hospital and two or three rooms.  The court, with
its tall roofs, its pointed gables and spires, its wooden
galleries, its ancient well, with an elaborate superstruc-
ture of wrought iron, is one of those places into which
a sketcher ought to be let loose.  It looked Flemish
or English rather than French, and a splendid tidiness
pervaded it.  The porter took me into two rooms on
the ground-floor, into which the sketcher should also
be allowed to penetrate; for they made irresistible
pictures.  One of them, of great proportions, painted
in elaborate "subjects," like a ball-room of the seven-
teenth century, was filled with the beds of patients,
all draped in curtains of dark red cloth, the tradi-
tional uniform of these, eleemosynary couches.  Among
them the sisters moved about, in their robes of white
flannel, with big white linen hoods.  The other room
was a strange, immense apartment, lately restored
with much splendor.  It was of great length and
height, had a painted and gilded barrel-roof, and one
end of it - the one I was introduced to - appeared
to serve as a chapel, as two white-robed sisters were
on their knees before an altar.  This was divided by
red curtains from the larger part; but the porter lifted
one of the curtains, and showed me that the rest
of it, a long, imposing vista, served as a ward, lined
with little red-draped beds.  "C'est l'heure de la
lecture," remarked my guide; and a group of conva-
lescents - all the patients I saw were women - were
gathered in the centre around a nun, the points of
whose white hood nodded a little above them, and
whose gentle voice came to us faintly, with a little
echo, down the high perspective.  I know not what
the good sister was reading, - a dull book, I am afraid,
- but there was so much color, and such a fine, rich
air of tradition about the whole place, that it seemed
to me I would have risked listening to her.  I turned
away, however, with that sense of defeat which is
always irritating to the appreciative tourist, and pot-
tered about Beaune rather vaguely for the rest of my
hour: looked at the statue of Gaspard Monge, the
mathematician, in the little _place_ (there is no _place_ in
France too little to contain an effigy to a glorious son);
at the fine old porch - completely despoiled at the
Revolution - of the principal church; and even at the
meagre treasures of a courageous but melancholy little
museum, which has been arranged - part of it being
the gift of a local collector - in a small hotel de ville.
I carried away from Beaune the impression of some-
thing mildly autumnal, - something rusty yet kindly,
like the taste of a sweet russet pear.



XL.

It was very well that my little tour was to termi-
nate at Dijon; for I found, rather to my chagrin, that
there was not a great deal, from the pictorial point of
view, to be done with Dijon.  It was no great matter,
for I held my proposition to have been by this time
abundantly demonstrated, - the proposition with which
I started: that if Paris is France, France is by no
means Paris.  If Dijon was a good deal of a disap-
pointment, I felt, therefore, that I could afford it.  It
was time for me to reflect, also, that for my disap-
pointments, as a general thing, I had only myself to
thank.  They had too often been the consequence of
arbitrary preconceptions, produced by influences of
which I had lost the trace.  At any rate, I will say
plumply that the ancient capital of Burgundy is want-
ing in character; it is not up to the mark.  It is old
and narrow and crooked, and it has been left pretty
well to itself: but it is not high and overhanging; it is
not, to the eye, what the Burgundian capital should
be.  It has some tortuous vistas, some mossy roofs,
some bulging fronts, some gray-faced hotels, which
look as if in former centuries - in the last, for instance,
during the time of that delightful President de Brosses,
whose Letters from Italy throw an interesting side-light
on Dijon - they had witnessed a considerable amount
of good living.  But there is nothing else.  I speak as
a man who for some reason which he doesn't remem-
ber now, did not pay a visit to the celebrated Puits
de Moise, an ancient cistern, embellished with a sculp-
tured figure of the Hebrew lawgiver.

The ancient palace of the Dukes of Burgundy, long
since converted into an hotel de ville, presents to a
wide, clean court, paved with washed-looking stones,
and to a small semicircular _place_, opposite, which
looks as if it had tried to be symmetrical and had
failed, a facade and two wings, characterized by the
stiffness, but not by the grand air, of the early part of
the eighteenth century.  It contains, however, a large
and rich museum, - a museum really worthy of a capi-
tal.  The gem of this exhibition is the great banquet-
ing-hall of the old palace, one of the few features of
the place that has not been essentially altered.  Of
great height, roofed with the old beams and cornices,
it contains, filling one end, a colossal Gothic chimney-
piece, with a fireplace large enough to roast, not an ox,
but a herd of oxen.  In the middle of this striking
hall, the walls of which. are covered with objects more
or less precious, have been placed the tombs of Philippe-
le-Hardi and Jean-sans-Peur.  These monuments, very
splendid in their general effect, have a limited interest.
The limitation comes from the fact that we see them
to-day in a transplanted and mutilated condition.
Placed originally in a church which has disappeared
from the face of the earth, demolished and dispersed
at the Revolution, they have been reconstructed and
restored out of fragments recovered and pieced to-
gether.  The piecing his been beautifully done; it is
covered with gilt and with brilliant paint; the whole
result is most artistic.  But the spell of the old mor-
tuary figures is broken, and it will never work again.
Meanwhile the monuments are immensely decorative.

I think the thing that pleased me best at Dijon
was the little old Parc, a charming public garden,
about a mile from the town, to which I walked by a
long, straight autumnal avenue.  It is a _jardin fran-
cais_ of the last century, - a dear old place, with little
blue-green perspectives and alleys and _rondpoints_, in
which everything balances.  I went there late in the
afternoon, without meeting a creature, though I had
hoped I should meet the President de Brosses.  At the
end of it was a little river that looked like a canal,
and on the further bank was an old-fashioned villa,
close to the water, with a little French garden of its
own.  On the hither side was a bench, on which I
seated myself, lingering a good while; for this was just
the sort of place I like.  It was the furthermost point
of my little tour.  I thought that over, as I sat there,
on the eve of taking the express to Paris; and as the
light faded in the Parc the vision of some of the things
I had seen became more distinct.




I


It was raining, apparently, but she didn't mind--she would put on stout
shoes and walk over to Plash. She was restless and so fidgety that it
was a pain; there were strange voices that frightened her--they threw
out the ugliest intimations--in the empty rooms at home. She would see
old Mrs. Berrington, whom she liked because she was so simple, and old
Lady Davenant, who was staying with her and who was interesting for
reasons with which simplicity had nothing to do. Then she would come
back to the children's tea--she liked even better the last half-hour in
the schoolroom, with the bread and butter, the candles and the red fire,
the little spasms of confidence of Miss Steet the nursery-governess, and
the society of Scratch and Parson (their nicknames would have made you
think they were dogs) her small, magnificent nephews, whose flesh was so
firm yet so soft and their eyes so charming when they listened to
stories. Plash was the dower-house and about a mile and a half, through
the park, from Mellows. It was not raining after all, though it had
been; there was only a grayness in the air, covering all the strong,
rich green, and a pleasant damp, earthy smell, and the walks were smooth
and hard, so that the expedition was not arduous.

The girl had been in England more than a year, but there were some
satisfactions she had not got used to yet nor ceased to enjoy, and one
of these was the accessibility, the convenience of the country. Within
the lodge-gates or without them it seemed all alike a park--it was all
so intensely 'property.' The very name of Plash, which was quaint and
old, had not lost its effect upon her, nor had it become indifferent to
her that the place was a dower-house--the little red-walled, ivied
asylum to which old Mrs. Berrington had retired when, on his father's
death, her son came into the estates. Laura Wing thought very ill of the
custom of the expropriation of the widow in the evening of her days,
when honour and abundance should attend her more than ever; but her
condemnation of this wrong forgot itself when so many of the
consequences looked right--barring a little dampness: which was the fate
sooner or later of most of her unfavourable judgments of English
institutions. Iniquities in such a country somehow always made pictures;
and there had been dower-houses in the novels, mainly of fashionable
life, on which her later childhood was fed. The iniquity did not as a
general thing prevent these retreats from being occupied by old ladies
with wonderful reminiscences and rare voices, whose reverses had not
deprived them of a great deal of becoming hereditary lace. In the park,
half-way, suddenly, Laura stopped, with a pain--a moral pang--that
almost took away her breath; she looked at the misty glades and the
dear old beeches (so familiar they were now and loved as much as if she
owned them); they seemed in their unlighted December bareness conscious
of all the trouble, and they made her conscious of all the change. A
year ago she knew nothing, and now she knew almost everything; and the
worst of her knowledge (or at least the worst of the fears she had
raised upon it) had come to her in that beautiful place, where
everything was so full of peace and purity, of the air of happy
submission to immemorial law. The place was the same but her eyes were
different: they had seen such sad, bad things in so short a time. Yes,
the time was short and everything was strange. Laura Wing was too uneasy
even to sigh, and as she walked on she lightened her tread almost as if
she were going on tiptoe.

At Plash the house seemed to shine in the wet air--the tone of the
mottled red walls and the limited but perfect lawn to be the work of an
artist's brush. Lady Davenant was in the drawing-room, in a low chair by
one of the windows, reading the second volume of a novel. There was the
same look of crisp chintz, of fresh flowers wherever flowers could be
put, of a wall-paper that was in the bad taste of years before, but had
been kept so that no more money should be spent, and was almost covered
over with amateurish drawings and superior engravings, framed in narrow
gilt with large margins. The room had its bright, durable, sociable air,
the air that Laura Wing liked in so many English things--that of being
meant for daily life, for long periods, for uses of high decency. But
more than ever to-day was it incongruous that such an habitation, with
its chintzes and its British poets, its well-worn carpets and domestic
art--the whole aspect so unmeretricious and sincere--should have to do
with lives that were not right. Of course however it had to do only
indirectly, and the wrong life was not old Mrs. Berrington's nor yet
Lady Davenant's. If Selina and Selina's doings were not an implication
of such an interior any more than it was for them an explication, this
was because she had come from so far off, was a foreign element
altogether. Yet it was there she had found her occasion, all the
influences that had altered her so (her sister had a theory that she was
metamorphosed, that when she was young she seemed born for innocence) if
not at Plash at least at Mellows, for the two places after all had ever
so much in common, and there were rooms at the great house that looked
remarkably like Mrs. Berrington's parlour.

Lady Davenant always had a head-dress of a peculiar style, original and
appropriate--a sort of white veil or cape which came in a point to the
place on her forehead where her smooth hair began to show and then
covered her shoulders. It was always exquisitely fresh and was partly
the reason why she struck the girl rather as a fine portrait than as a
living person. And yet she was full of life, old as she was, and had
been made finer, sharper and more delicate, by nearly eighty years of
it. It was the hand of a master that Laura seemed to see in her face,
the witty expression of which shone like a lamp through the ground-glass
of her good breeding; nature was always an artist, but not so much of an
artist as that. Infinite knowledge the girl attributed to her, and that
was why she liked her a little fearfully. Lady Davenant was not as a
general thing fond of the young or of invalids; but she made an
exception as regards youth for the little girl from America, the sister
of the daughter-in-law of her dearest friend. She took an interest in
Laura partly perhaps to make up for the tepidity with which she regarded
Selina. At all events she had assumed the general responsibility of
providing her with a husband. She pretended to care equally little for
persons suffering from other forms of misfortune, but she was capable of
finding excuses for them when they had been sufficiently to blame. She
expected a great deal of attention, always wore gloves in the house and
never had anything in her hand but a book. She neither embroidered nor
wrote--only read and talked. She had no special conversation for girls
but generally addressed them in the same manner that she found effective
with her contemporaries. Laura Wing regarded this as an honour, but very
often she didn't know what the old lady meant and was ashamed to ask
her. Once in a while Lady Davenant was ashamed to tell. Mrs. Berrington
had gone to a cottage to see an old woman who was ill--an old woman who
had been in her service for years, in the old days. Unlike her friend
she was fond of young people and invalids, but she was less interesting
to Laura, except that it was a sort of fascination to wonder how she
could have such abysses of placidity. She had long cheeks and kind eyes
and was devoted to birds; somehow she always made Laura think secretly
of a tablet of fine white soap--nothing else was so smooth and clean.

'And what's going on _chez vous_--who is there and what are they
doing?' Lady Davenant asked, after the first greetings.

'There isn't any one but me--and the children--and the governess.'

'What, no party--no private theatricals? How do you live?'

'Oh, it doesn't take so much to keep me going,' said Laura. 'I believe
there were some people coming on Saturday, but they have been put off,
or they can't come. Selina has gone to London.'

'And what has she gone to London for?'

'Oh, I don't know--she has so many things to do.'

'And where is Mr. Berrington?'

'He has been away somewhere; but I believe he is coming back
to-morrow--or next day.'

'Or the day after?' said Lady Davenant. 'And do they never go away
together?' she continued after a pause.

'Yes, sometimes--but they don't come back together.'

'Do you mean they quarrel on the way?'

'I don't know what they do, Lady Davenant--I don't understand,' Laura
Wing replied, with an unguarded tremor in her voice. 'I don't think they
are very happy.'

'Then they ought to be ashamed of themselves. They have got everything
so comfortable--what more do they want?'

'Yes, and the children are such dears!'

'Certainly--charming. And is she a good person, the present governess?
Does she look after them properly?'

'Yes--she seems very good--it's a blessing. But I think she's unhappy
too.'

'Bless us, what a house! Does she want some one to make love to her?'

'No, but she wants Selina to see--to appreciate,' said the young girl.

'And doesn't she appreciate--when she leaves them that way quite to the
young woman?'

'Miss Steet thinks she doesn't notice how they come on--she is never
there.'

'And has she wept and told you so? You know they are always crying,
governesses--whatever line you take. You shouldn't draw them out too
much--they are always looking for a chance. She ought to be thankful to
be let alone. You mustn't be too sympathetic--it's mostly wasted,' the
old lady went on.

'Oh, I'm not--I assure you I'm not,' said Laura Wing. 'On the contrary,
I see so much about me that I don't sympathise with.'

'Well, you mustn't be an impertinent little American either!' her
interlocutress exclaimed. Laura sat with her for half an hour and the
conversation took a turn through the affairs of Plash and through Lady
Davenant's own, which were visits in prospect and ideas suggested more
or less directly by them as well as by the books she had been reading, a
heterogeneous pile on a table near her, all of them new and clean, from
a circulating library in London. The old woman had ideas and Laura liked
them, though they often struck her as very sharp and hard, because at
Mellows she had no diet of that sort. There had never been an idea in
the house, since she came at least, and there was wonderfully little
reading. Lady Davenant still went from country-house to country-house
all winter, as she had done all her life, and when Laura asked her she
told her the places and the people she probably should find at each of
them. Such an enumeration was much less interesting to the girl than it
would have been a year before: she herself had now seen a great many
places and people and the freshness of her curiosity was gone. But she
still cared for Lady Davenant's descriptions and judgments, because they
were the thing in her life which (when she met the old woman from time
to time) most represented talk--the rare sort of talk that was not mere
chaff. That was what she had dreamed of before she came to England, but
in Selina's set the dream had not come true. In Selina's set people only
harried each other from morning till night with extravagant
accusations--it was all a kind of horse-play of false charges. When Lady
Davenant was accusatory it was within the limits of perfect
verisimilitude.

Laura waited for Mrs. Berrington to come in but she failed to appear, so
that the girl gathered her waterproof together with an intention of
departure. But she was secretly reluctant, because she had walked over
to Plash with a vague hope that some soothing hand would be laid upon
her pain. If there was no comfort at the dower-house she knew not where
to look for it, for there was certainly none at home--not even with Miss
Steet and the children. It was not Lady Davenant's leading
characteristic that she was comforting, and Laura had not aspired to be
coaxed or coddled into forgetfulness: she wanted rather to be taught a
certain fortitude--how to live and hold up one's head even while knowing
that things were very bad. A brazen indifference--it was not exactly
that that she wished to acquire; but were there not some sorts of
indifference that were philosophic and noble? Could Lady Davenant not
teach them, if she should take the trouble? The girl remembered to have
heard that there had been years before some disagreeable occurrences in
_her_ family; it was not a race in which the ladies inveterately turned
out well. Yet who to-day had the stamp of honour and credit--of a past
which was either no one's business or was part and parcel of a fair
public record--and carried it so much as a matter of course? She herself
had been a good woman and that was the only thing that told in the long
run. It was Laura's own idea to be a good woman and that this would make
it an advantage for Lady Davenant to show her how not to feel too much.
As regards feeling enough, that was a branch in which she had no need to
take lessons.

The old woman liked cutting new books, a task she never remitted to her
maid, and while her young visitor sat there she went through the greater
part of a volume with the paper-knife. She didn't proceed very
fast--there was a kind of patient, awkward fumbling of her aged hands;
but as she passed her knife into the last leaf she said abruptly--'And
how is your sister going on? She's very light!' Lady Davenant added
before Laura had time to reply.

'Oh, Lady Davenant!' the girl exclaimed, vaguely, slowly, vexed with
herself as soon as she had spoken for having uttered the words as a
protest, whereas she wished to draw her companion out. To correct this
impression she threw back her waterproof.

'Have you ever spoken to her?' the old woman asked.

'Spoken to her?'

'About her behaviour. I daresay you haven't--you Americans have such a
lot of false delicacy. I daresay Selina wouldn't speak to you if you
were in her place (excuse the supposition!) and yet she is capable----'
But Lady Davenant paused, preferring not to say of what young Mrs.
Berrington was capable. 'It's a bad house for a girl.'

'It only gives me a horror,' said Laura, pausing in turn.

'A horror of your sister? That's not what one should aim at. You ought
to get married--and the sooner the better. My dear child, I have
neglected you dreadfully.'

'I am much obliged to you, but if you think marriage looks to me happy!'
the girl exclaimed, laughing without hilarity.

'Make it happy for some one else and you will be happy enough yourself.
You ought to get out of your situation.'

Laura Wing was silent a moment, though this was not a new reflection to
her. 'Do you mean that I should leave Selina altogether? I feel as if I
should abandon her--as if I should be a coward.'

'Oh, my dear, it isn't the business of little girls to serve as
parachutes to fly-away wives! That's why if you haven't spoken to her
you needn't take the trouble at this time of day. Let her go--let her
go!'

'Let her go?' Laura repeated, staring.

Her companion gave her a sharper glance. 'Let her stay, then! Only get
out of the house. You can come to me, you know, whenever you like. I
don't know another girl I would say that to.'

'Oh, Lady Davenant,' Laura began again, but she only got as far as
this; in a moment she had covered her face with her hands--she had burst
into tears.

'Ah my dear, don't cry or I shall take back my invitation! It would
never do if you were to _larmoyer_. If I have offended you by the way I
have spoken of Selina I think you are too sensitive. We shouldn't feel
more for people than they feel for themselves. She has no tears, I'm
sure.'

'Oh, she has, she has!' cried the girl, sobbing with an odd effect as
she put forth this pretension for her sister.

'Then she's worse than I thought. I don't mind them so much when they
are merry but I hate them when they are sentimental.'

'She's so changed--so changed!' Laura Wing went on.

'Never, never, my dear: _c'est de naissance_.'

'You never knew my mother,' returned the girl; 'when I think of
mother----' The words failed her while she sobbed.

'I daresay she was very nice,' said Lady Davenant gently. 'It would take
that to account for you: such women as Selina are always easily enough
accounted for. I didn't mean it was inherited--for that sort of thing
skips about. I daresay there was some improper ancestress--except that
you Americans don't seem to have ancestresses.'

Laura gave no sign of having heard these observations; she was occupied
in brushing away her tears. 'Everything is so changed--you don't know,'
she remarked in a moment. 'Nothing could have been happier--nothing
could have been sweeter. And now to be so dependent--so helpless--so
poor!'

'Have you nothing at all?' asked Lady Davenant, with simplicity.

'Only enough to pay for my clothes.'

'That's a good deal, for a girl. You are uncommonly dressy, you know.'

'I'm sorry I seem so. That's just the way I don't want to look.'

'You Americans can't help it; you "wear" your very features and your
eyes look as if they had just been sent home. But I confess you are not
so smart as Selina.'

'Yes, isn't she splendid?' Laura exclaimed, with proud inconsequence.
'And the worse she is the better she looks.'

'Oh my child, if the bad women looked as bad as they are----! It's only
the good ones who can afford that,' the old lady murmured.

'It was the last thing I ever thought of--that I should be ashamed,'
said Laura.

'Oh, keep your shame till you have more to do with it. It's like lending
your umbrella--when you have only one.'

'If anything were to happen--publicly--I should die, I should die!' the
girl exclaimed passionately and with a motion that carried her to her
feet. This time she settled herself for departure. Lady Davenant's
admonition rather frightened than sustained her.

The old woman leaned back in her chair, looking up at her. 'It would be
very bad, I daresay. But it wouldn't prevent me from taking you in.'

Laura Wing returned her look, with eyes slightly distended, musing.
'Think of having to come to that!'

Lady Davenant burst out laughing. 'Yes, yes, you must come; you are so
original!'

'I don't mean that I don't feel your kindness,' the girl broke out,
blushing. 'But to be only protected--always protected: is that a life?'

'Most women are only too thankful and I am bound to say I think you are
_difficile_.' Lady Davenant used a good many French words, in the
old-fashioned manner and with a pronunciation not perfectly pure: when
she did so she reminded Laura Wing of Mrs. Gore's novels. 'But you shall
be better protected than even by me. _Nous verrons cela._ Only you must
stop crying--this isn't a crying country.'

'No, one must have courage here. It takes courage to marry for such a
reason.'

'Any reason is good enough that keeps a woman from being an old maid.
Besides, you will like him.'

'He must like me first,' said the girl, with a sad smile.

'There's the American again! It isn't necessary. You are too proud--you
expect too much.'

'I'm proud for what I am--that's very certain. But I don't expect
anything,' Laura Wing declared. 'That's the only form my pride takes.
Please give my love to Mrs. Berrington. I am so sorry--so sorry,' she
went on, to change the talk from the subject of her marrying. She wanted
to marry but she wanted also not to want it and, above all, not to
appear to. She lingered in the room, moving about a little; the place
was always so pleasant to her that to go away--to return to her own
barren home--had the effect of forfeiting a sort of privilege of
sanctuary. The afternoon had faded but the lamps had been brought in,
the smell of flowers was in the air and the old house of Plash seemed to
recognise the hour that suited it best. The quiet old lady in the
firelight, encompassed with the symbolic security of chintz and
water-colour, gave her a sudden vision of how blessed it would be to
jump all the middle dangers of life and have arrived at the end, safely,
sensibly, with a cap and gloves and consideration and memories. 'And,
Lady Davenant, what does _she_ think?' she asked abruptly, stopping
short and referring to Mrs. Berrington.

'Think? Bless your soul, she doesn't do that! If she did, the things she
says would be unpardonable.'

'The things she says?'

'That's what makes them so beautiful--that they are not spoiled by
preparation. You could never think of them _for_ her.' The girl smiled
at this description of the dearest friend of her interlocutress, but she
wondered a little what Lady Davenant would say to visitors about _her_
if she should accept a refuge under her roof. Her speech was after all a
flattering proof of confidence. 'She wishes it had been you--I happen to
know that,' said the old woman.

'It had been me?'

'That Lionel had taken a fancy to.'

'I wouldn't have married him,' Laura rejoined, after a moment.

'Don't say that or you will make me think it won't be easy to help you.
I shall depend upon you not to refuse anything so good.'

'I don't call him good. If he were good his wife would be better.'

'Very likely; and if you had married him _he_ would be better, and
that's more to the purpose. Lionel is as idiotic as a comic song, but
you have cleverness for two.'

'And you have it for fifty, dear Lady Davenant. Never, never--I shall
never marry a man I can't respect!' Laura Wing exclaimed.

She had come a little nearer her old friend and taken her hand; her
companion held her a moment and with the other hand pushed aside one of
the flaps of the waterproof. 'And what is it your clothing costs you?'
asked Lady Davenant, looking at the dress underneath and not giving any
heed to this declaration.

'I don't exactly know: it takes almost everything that is sent me from
America. But that is dreadfully little--only a few pounds. I am a
wonderful manager. Besides,' the girl added, 'Selina wants one to be
dressed.'

'And doesn't she pay any of your bills?'

'Why, she gives me everything--food, shelter, carriages.'

'Does she never give you money?'

'I wouldn't take it,' said the girl. 'They need everything they
have--their life is tremendously expensive.'

'That I'll warrant!' cried the old woman. 'It was a most beautiful
property, but I don't know what has become of it now. _Ce n'est pas pour
vous blesser_, but the hole you Americans _can_ make----'

Laura interrupted immediately, holding up her head; Lady Davenant had
dropped her hand and she had receded a step. 'Selina brought Lionel a
very considerable fortune and every penny of it was paid.'

'Yes, I know it was; Mrs. Berrington told me it was most satisfactory.
That's not always the case with the fortunes you young ladies are
supposed to bring!' the old lady added, smiling.

The girl looked over her head a moment. 'Why do your men marry for
money?'

'Why indeed, my dear? And before your troubles what used your father to
give you for your personal expenses?'

'He gave us everything we asked--we had no particular allowance.'

'And I daresay you asked for everything?' said Lady Davenant.

'No doubt we were very dressy, as you say.'

'No wonder he went bankrupt--for he did, didn't he?'

'He had dreadful reverses but he only sacrificed himself--he protected
others.'

'Well, I know nothing about these things and I only ask _pour me
renseigner_,' Mrs. Berrington's guest went on. 'And after their reverses
your father and mother lived I think only a short time?'

Laura Wing had covered herself again with her mantle; her eyes were now
bent upon the ground and, standing there before her companion with her
umbrella and her air of momentary submission and self-control, she might
very well have been a young person in reduced circumstances applying for
a place. 'It was short enough but it seemed--some parts of it--terribly
long and painful. My poor father--my dear father,' the girl went on. But
her voice trembled and she checked herself.

'I feel as if I were cross-questioning you, which God forbid!' said Lady
Davenant. 'But there is one thing I should really like to know. Did
Lionel and his wife, when you were poor, come freely to your
assistance?'

'They sent us money repeatedly--it was _her_ money of course. It was
almost all we had.'

'And if you have been poor and know what poverty is tell me this: has it
made you afraid to marry a poor man?'

It seemed to Lady Davenant that in answer to this her young friend
looked at her strangely; and then the old woman heard her say something
that had not quite the heroic ring she expected. 'I am afraid of so many
things to-day that I don't know where my fears end.'

'I have no patience with the highstrung way you take things. But I have
to know, you know.'

'Oh, don't try to know any more shames--any more horrors!' the girl
wailed with sudden passion, turning away.

Her companion got up, drew her round again and kissed her. 'I think you
would fidget me,' she remarked as she released her. Then, as if this
were too cheerless a leave-taking, she added in a gayer tone, as Laura
had her hand on the door: 'Mind what I tell you, my dear; let her go!'
It was to this that the girl's lesson in philosophy reduced itself, she
reflected, as she walked back to Mellows in the rain, which had now come
on, through the darkening park.




II


The children were still at tea and poor Miss Steet sat between them,
consoling herself with strong cups, crunching melancholy morsels of
toast and dropping an absent gaze on her little companions as they
exchanged small, loud remarks. She always sighed when Laura came in--it
was her way of expressing appreciation of the visit--and she was the one
person whom the girl frequently saw who seemed to her more unhappy than
herself. But Laura envied her--she thought her position had more dignity
than that of her employer's dependent sister. Miss Steet had related her
life to the children's pretty young aunt and this personage knew that
though it had had painful elements nothing so disagreeable had ever
befallen her or was likely to befall her as the odious possibility of
her sister's making a scandal. She had two sisters (Laura knew all about
them) and one of them was married to a clergyman in Staffordshire (a
very ugly part) and had seven children and four hundred a year; while
the other, the eldest, was enormously stout and filled (it was a good
deal of a squeeze) a position as matron in an orphanage at Liverpool.
Neither of them seemed destined to go into the English divorce-court,
and such a circumstance on the part of one's near relations struck
Laura as in itself almost sufficient to constitute happiness. Miss Steet
never lived in a state of nervous anxiety--everything about her was
respectable. She made the girl almost angry sometimes, by her drooping,
martyr-like air: Laura was near breaking out at her with, 'Dear me, what
have you got to complain of? Don't you earn your living like an honest
girl and are you obliged to see things going on about you that you
hate?'

But she could not say things like that to her, because she had promised
Selina, who made a great point of this, that she would never be too
familiar with her. Selina was not without her ideas of decorum--very far
from it indeed; only she erected them in such queer places. She was not
familiar with her children's governess; she was not even familiar with
the children themselves. That was why after all it was impossible to
address much of a remonstrance to Miss Steet when she sat as if she were
tied to the stake and the fagots were being lighted. If martyrs in this
situation had tea and cold meat served them they would strikingly have
resembled the provoking young woman in the schoolroom at Mellows. Laura
could not have denied that it was natural she should have liked it
better if Mrs. Berrington would _sometimes_ just look in and give a sign
that she was pleased with her system; but poor Miss Steet only knew by
the servants or by Laura whether Mrs. Berrington were at home or not:
she was for the most part not, and the governess had a way of silently
intimating (it was the manner she put her head on one side when she
looked at Scratch and Parson--of course _she_ called them Geordie and
Ferdy) that she was immensely handicapped and even that they were.
Perhaps they were, though they certainly showed it little in their
appearance and manner, and Laura was at least sure that if Selina had
been perpetually dropping in Miss Steet would have taken that discomfort
even more tragically. The sight of this young woman's either real or
fancied wrongs did not diminish her conviction that she herself would
have found courage to become a governess. She would have had to teach
very young children, for she believed she was too ignorant for higher
flights. But Selina would never have consented to that--she would have
considered it a disgrace or even worse--a _pose_. Laura had proposed to
her six months before that she should dispense with a paid governess and
suffer _her_ to take charge of the little boys: in that way she should
not feel so completely dependent--she should be doing something in
return. 'And pray what would happen when you came to dinner? Who would
look after them then?' Mrs. Berrington had demanded, with a very shocked
air. Laura had replied that perhaps it was not absolutely necessary that
she should come to dinner--she could dine early, with the children; and
that if her presence in the drawing-room should be required the children
had their nurse--and what did they have their nurse for? Selina looked
at her as if she was deplorably superficial and told her that they had
their nurse to dress them and look after their clothes--did she wish the
poor little ducks to go in rags? She had her own ideas of thoroughness
and when Laura hinted that after all at that hour the children were in
bed she declared that even when they were asleep she desired the
governess to be at hand--that was the way a mother felt who really took
an interest. Selina was wonderfully thorough; she said something about
the evening hours in the quiet schoolroom being the proper time for the
governess to 'get up' the children's lessons for the next day. Laura
Wing was conscious of her own ignorance; nevertheless she presumed to
believe that she could have taught Geordie and Ferdy the alphabet
without anticipatory nocturnal researches. She wondered what her sister
supposed Miss Steet taught them--whether she had a cheap theory that
they were in Latin and algebra.

The governess's evening hours in the quiet schoolroom would have suited
Laura well--so at least she believed; by touches of her own she would
make the place even prettier than it was already, and in the winter
nights, near the bright fire, she would get through a delightful course
of reading. There was the question of a new piano (the old one was
pretty bad--Miss Steet had a finger!) and perhaps she should have to ask
Selina for that--but it would be all. The schoolroom at Mellows was not
a charmless place and the girl often wished that she might have spent
her own early years in so dear a scene. It was a sort of panelled
parlour, in a wing, and looked out on the great cushiony lawns and a
part of the terrace where the peacocks used most to spread their tails.
There were quaint old maps on the wall, and 'collections'--birds and
shells--under glass cases, and there was a wonderful pictured screen
which old Mrs. Berrington had made when Lionel was young out of
primitive woodcuts illustrative of nursery-tales. The place was a
setting for rosy childhood, and Laura believed her sister never knew
how delightful Scratch and Parson looked there. Old Mrs. Berrington had
known in the case of Lionel--it had all been arranged for him. That was
the story told by ever so many other things in the house, which betrayed
the full perception of a comfortable, liberal, deeply domestic effect,
addressed to eternities of possession, characteristic thirty years
before of the unquestioned and unquestioning old lady whose sofas and
'corners' (she had perhaps been the first person in England to have
corners) demonstrated the most of her cleverness.

Laura Wing envied English children, the boys at least, and even her own
chubby nephews, in spite of the cloud that hung over them; but she had
already noted the incongruity that appeared to-day between Lionel
Berrington at thirty-five and the influences that had surrounded his
younger years. She did not dislike her brother-in-law, though she
admired him scantily, and she pitied him; but she marvelled at the waste
involved in some human institutions (the English country gentry for
instance) when she perceived that it had taken so much to produce so
little. The sweet old wainscoted parlour, the view of the garden that
reminded her of scenes in Shakespeare's comedies, all that was exquisite
in the home of his forefathers--what visible reference was there to
these fine things in poor Lionel's stable-stamped composition? When she
came in this evening and saw his small sons making competitive noises in
their mugs (Miss Steet checked this impropriety on her entrance) she
asked herself what _they_ would have to show twenty years later for the
frame that made them just then a picture. Would they be wonderfully ripe
and noble, the perfection of human culture? The contrast was before her
again, the sense of the same curious duplicity (in the literal meaning
of the word) that she had felt at Plash--the way the genius of such an
old house was all peace and decorum and the spirit that prevailed there,
outside of the schoolroom, was contentious and impure. She had often
been struck with it before--with that perfection of machinery which can
still at certain times make English life go on of itself with a stately
rhythm long after there is corruption within it.

She had half a purpose of asking Miss Steet to dine with her that
evening downstairs, so absurd did it seem to her that two young women
who had so much in common (enough at least for that) should sit feeding
alone at opposite ends of the big empty house, melancholy on such a
night. She would not have cared just now whether Selina did think such a
course familiar: she indulged sometimes in a kind of angry humility,
placing herself near to those who were laborious and sordid. But when
she observed how much cold meat the governess had already consumed she
felt that it would be a vain form to propose to her another repast. She
sat down with her and presently, in the firelight, the two children had
placed themselves in position for a story. They were dressed like the
mariners of England and they smelt of the ablutions to which they had
been condemned before tea and the odour of which was but partly overlaid
by that of bread and butter. Scratch wanted an old story and Parson a
new, and they exchanged from side to side a good many powerful
arguments. While they were so engaged Miss Steet narrated at her
visitor's invitation the walk she had taken with them and revealed that
she had been thinking for a long time of asking Mrs. Berrington--if she
only had an opportunity--whether she should approve of her giving them a
few elementary notions of botany. But the opportunity had not come--she
had had the idea for a long time past. She was rather fond of the study
herself; she had gone into it a little--she seemed to intimate that
there had been times when she extracted a needed comfort from it. Laura
suggested that botany might be a little dry for such young children in
winter, from text-books--that the better way would be perhaps to wait
till the spring and show them out of doors, in the garden, some of the
peculiarities of plants. To this Miss Steet rejoined that her idea had
been to teach some of the general facts slowly--it would take a long
time--and then they would be all ready for the spring. She spoke of the
spring as if it would not arrive for a terribly long time. She had hoped
to lay the question before Mrs. Berrington that week--but was it not
already Thursday? Laura said, 'Oh yes, you had better do anything with
the children that will keep them profitably occupied;' she came very
near saying anything that would occupy the governess herself.

She had rather a dread of new stories--it took the little boys so long
to get initiated and the first steps were so terribly bestrewn with
questions. Receptive silence, broken only by an occasional rectification
on the part of the listener, never descended until after the tale had
been told a dozen times. The matter was settled for 'Riquet with the
Tuft,' but on this occasion the girl's heart was not much in the
entertainment. The children stood on either side of her, leaning against
her, and she had an arm round each; their little bodies were thick and
strong and their voices had the quality of silver bells. Their mother
had certainly gone too far; but there was nevertheless a limit to the
tenderness one could feel for the neglected, compromised bairns. It was
difficult to take a sentimental view of them--they would never take such
a view of themselves. Geordie would grow up to be a master-hand at polo
and care more for that pastime than for anything in life, and Ferdy
perhaps would develop into 'the best shot in England.' Laura felt these
possibilities stirring within them; they were in the things they said to
her, in the things they said to each other. At any rate they would never
reflect upon anything in the world. They contradicted each other on a
question of ancestral history to which their attention apparently had
been drawn by their nurse, whose people had been tenants for
generations. Their grandfather had had the hounds for fifteen
years--Ferdy maintained that he had always had them. Geordie ridiculed
this idea, like a man of the world; he had had them till he went into
volunteering--then he had got up a magnificent regiment, he had spent
thousands of pounds on it. Ferdy was of the opinion that this was wasted
money--he himself intended to have a real regiment, to be a colonel in
the Guards. Geordie looked as if he thought that a superficial ambition
and could see beyond it; his own most definite view was that he would
have back the hounds. He didn't see why papa didn't have them--unless it
was because he wouldn't take the trouble.

'I know--it's because mamma is an American!' Ferdy announced, with
confidence.

'And what has that to do with it?' asked Laura.

'Mamma spends so much money--there isn't any more for anything!'

This startling speech elicited an alarmed protest from Miss Steet; she
blushed and assured Laura that she couldn't imagine where the child
could have picked up such an extraordinary idea. 'I'll look into it--you
may be sure I'll look into it,' she said; while Laura told Ferdy that he
must never, never, never, under any circumstances, either utter or
listen to a word that should be wanting in respect to his mother.

'If any one should say anything against any of my people I would give
him a good one!' Geordie shouted, with his hands in his little blue
pockets.

'I'd hit him in the eye!' cried Ferdy, with cheerful inconsequence.

'Perhaps you don't care to come to dinner at half-past seven,' the girl
said to Miss Steet; 'but I should be very glad--I'm all alone.'

'Thank you so much. All alone, really?' murmured the governess.

'Why don't you get married? then you wouldn't be alone,' Geordie
interposed, with ingenuity.

'Children, you are really too dreadful this evening!' Miss Steet
exclaimed.

'I shan't get married--I want to have the hounds,' proclaimed Geordie,
who had apparently been much struck with his brother's explanation.

'I will come down afterwards, about half-past eight, if you will allow
me,' said Miss Steet, looking conscious and responsible.

'Very well--perhaps we can have some music; we will try something
together.'

'Oh, music--_we_ don't go in for music!' said Geordie, with clear
superiority; and while he spoke Laura saw Miss Steet get up suddenly,
looking even less alleviated than usual. The door of the room had been
pushed open and Lionel Berrington stood there. He had his hat on and a
cigar in his mouth and his face was red, which was its common condition.
He took off his hat as he came into the room, but he did not stop
smoking and he turned a little redder than before. There were several
ways in which his sister-in-law often wished he had been very different,
but she had never disliked him for a certain boyish shyness that was in
him, which came out in his dealings with almost all women. The governess
of his children made him uncomfortable and Laura had already noticed
that he had the same effect upon Miss Steet. He was fond of his
children, but he saw them hardly more frequently than their mother and
they never knew whether he were at home or away. Indeed his goings and
comings were so frequent that Laura herself scarcely knew: it was an
accident that on this occasion his absence had been marked for her.
Selina had had her reasons for wishing not to go up to town while her
husband was still at Mellows, and she cherished the irritating belief
that he stayed at home on purpose to watch her--to keep her from going
away. It was her theory that she herself was perpetually at home--that
few women were more domestic, more glued to the fireside and absorbed in
the duties belonging to it; and unreasonable as she was she recognised
the fact that for her to establish this theory she must make her
husband sometimes see her at Mellows. It was not enough for her to
maintain that he would see her if he were sometimes there himself.
Therefore she disliked to be caught in the crude fact of absence--to go
away under his nose; what she preferred was to take the next train after
his own and return an hour or two before him. She managed this often
with great ability, in spite of her not being able to be sure when he
_would_ return. Of late however she had ceased to take so much trouble,
and Laura, by no desire of the girl's own, was enough in the confidence
of her impatiences and perversities to know that for her to have wished
(four days before the moment I write of) to put him on a wrong scent--or
to keep him at least off the right one--she must have had something more
dreadful than usual in her head. This was why the girl had been so
nervous and why the sense of an impending catastrophe, which had lately
gathered strength in her mind, was at present almost intolerably
pressing: she knew how little Selina could afford to be more dreadful
than usual.

Lionel startled her by turning up in that unexpected way, though she
could not have told herself when it would have been natural to expect
him. This attitude, at Mellows, was left to the servants, most of them
inscrutable and incommunicative and erect in a wisdom that was founded
upon telegrams--you couldn't speak to the butler but he pulled one out
of his pocket. It was a house of telegrams; they crossed each other a
dozen times an hour, coming and going, and Selina in particular lived in
a cloud of them. Laura had but vague ideas as to what they were all
about; once in a while, when they fell under her eyes, she either failed
to understand them or judged them to be about horses. There were an
immense number of horses, in one way and another, in Mrs. Berrington's
life. Then she had so many friends, who were always rushing about like
herself and making appointments and putting them off and wanting to know
if she were going to certain places or whether she would go if they did
or whether she would come up to town and dine and 'do a theatre.' There
were also a good many theatres in the existence of this busy lady. Laura
remembered how fond their poor father had been of telegraphing, but it
was never about the theatre: at all events she tried to give her sister
the benefit or the excuse of heredity. Selina had her own opinions,
which were superior to this--she once remarked to Laura that it was
idiotic for a woman to write--to telegraph was the only way not to get
into trouble. If doing so sufficed to keep a lady out of it Mrs.
Berrington's life should have flowed like the rivers of Eden.




III


Laura, as soon as her brother-in-law had been in the room a moment, had
a particular fear; she had seen him twice noticeably under the influence
of liquor; she had not liked it at all and now there were some of the
same signs. She was afraid the children would discover them, or at any
rate Miss Steet, and she felt the importance of not letting him stay in
the room. She thought it almost a sign that he should have come there at
all--he was so rare an apparition. He looked at her very hard, smiling
as if to say, 'No, no, I'm not--not if you think it!' She perceived with
relief in a moment that he was not very bad, and liquor disposed him
apparently to tenderness, for he indulged in an interminable kissing of
Geordie and Ferdy, during which Miss Steet turned away delicately,
looking out of the window. The little boys asked him no questions to
celebrate his return--they only announced that they were going to learn
botany, to which he replied: 'Are you, really? Why, I never did,' and
looked askance at the governess, blushing as if to express the hope that
she would let him off from carrying that subject further. To Laura and
to Miss Steet he was amiably explanatory, though his explanations were
not quite coherent. He had come back an hour before--he was going to
spend the night--he had driven over from Churton--he was thinking of
taking the last train up to town. Was Laura dining at home? Was any one
coming? He should enjoy a quiet dinner awfully.

'Certainly I'm alone,' said the girl. 'I suppose you know Selina is
away.'

'Oh yes--I know where Selina is!' And Lionel Berrington looked round,
smiling at every one present, including Scratch and Parson. He stopped
while he continued to smile and Laura wondered what he was so much
pleased at. She preferred not to ask--she was sure it was something that
wouldn't give _her_ pleasure; but after waiting a moment her
brother-in-law went on: 'Selina's in Paris, my dear; that's where Selina
is!'

'In Paris?' Laura repeated.

'Yes, in Paris, my dear--God bless her! Where else do you suppose?
Geordie my boy, where should _you_ think your mummy would naturally be?'

'Oh, I don't know,' said Geordie, who had no reply ready that would
express affectingly the desolation of the nursery. 'If I were mummy I'd
travel.'

'Well now that's your mummy's idea--she has gone to travel,' returned
the father. 'Were you ever in Paris, Miss Steet?'

Miss Steet gave a nervous laugh and said No, but she had been to
Boulogne; while to her added confusion Ferdy announced that he knew
where Paris was--it was in America. 'No, it ain't--it's in Scotland!'
cried Geordie; and Laura asked Lionel how he knew--whether his wife had
written to him.

'Written to me? when did she ever write to me? No, I saw a fellow in
town this morning who saw her there--at breakfast yesterday. He came
over last night. That's how I know my wife's in Paris. You can't have
better proof than that!'

'I suppose it's a very pleasant season there,' the governess murmured,
as if from a sense of duty, in a distant, discomfortable tone.

'I daresay it's very pleasant indeed--I daresay it's awfully amusing!'
laughed Mr. Berrington. 'Shouldn't you like to run over with me for a
few days, Laura--just to have a go at the theatres? I don't see why we
should always be moping at home. We'll take Miss Steet and the children
and give mummy a pleasant surprise. Now who do you suppose she was with,
in Paris--who do you suppose she was seen with?'

Laura had turned pale, she looked at him hard, imploringly, in the eyes:
there was a name she was terribly afraid he would mention. 'Oh sir, in
that case we had better go and get ready!' Miss Steet quavered, betwixt
a laugh and a groan, in a spasm of discretion; and before Laura knew it
she had gathered Geordie and Ferdy together and swept them out of the
room. The door closed behind her with a very quick softness and Lionel
remained a moment staring at it.

'I say, what does she mean?--ain't that damned impertinent?' he
stammered. 'What did she think I was going to say? Does she suppose I
would say any harm before--before _her_? Dash it, does she suppose I
would give away my wife to the servants?' Then he added, 'And I wouldn't
say any harm before you, Laura. You are too good and too nice and I like
you too much!'

'Won't you come downstairs? won't you have some tea?' the girl asked,
uneasily.

'No, no, I want to stay here--I like this place,' he replied, very
gently and reasoningly. 'It's a deuced nice place--it's an awfully jolly
room. It used to be this way--always--when I was a little chap. I was a
rough one, my dear; I wasn't a pretty little lamb like that pair. I
think it's because you look after them--that's what makes 'em so sweet.
The one in my time--what was her name? I think it was Bald or Bold--I
rather think she found me a handful. I used to kick her shins--I was
decidedly vicious. And do _you_ see it's kept so well, Laura?' he went
on, looking round him. ''Pon my soul, it's the prettiest room in the
house. What does she want to go to Paris for when she has got such a
charming house? Now can you answer me that, Laura?'

'I suppose she has gone to get some clothes: her dressmaker lives in
Paris, you know.'

'Dressmaker? Clothes? Why, she has got whole rooms full of them. Hasn't
she got whole rooms full of them?'

'Speaking of clothes I must go and change mine,' said Laura. 'I have
been out in the rain--I have been to Plash--I'm decidedly damp.'

'Oh, you have been to Plash? You have seen my mother? I hope she's in
very good health.' But before the girl could reply to this he went on:
'Now, I want you to guess who she's in Paris with. Motcomb saw them
together--at that place, what's his name? close to the Madeleine.' And
as Laura was silent, not wishing at all to guess, he continued--'It's
the ruin of any woman, you know; I can't think what she has got in her
head.' Still Laura said nothing, and as he had hold of her arm, she
having turned away, she led him this time out of the room. She had a
horror of the name, the name that was in her mind and that was
apparently on his lips, though his tone was so singular, so
contemplative. 'My dear girl, she's with Lady Ringrose--what do you say
to that?' he exclaimed, as they passed along the corridor to the
staircase.

'With Lady Ringrose?'

'They went over on Tuesday--they are knocking about there alone.'

'I don't know Lady Ringrose,' Laura said, infinitely relieved that the
name was not the one she had feared. Lionel leaned on her arm as they
went downstairs.

'I rather hope not--I promise you she has never put her foot in this
house! If Selina expects to bring her here I should like half an hour's
notice; yes, half an hour would do. She might as well be seen with----'
And Lionel Berrington checked himself. 'She has had at least fifty----'
And again he stopped short. 'You must pull me up, you know, if I say
anything you don't like!'

'I don't understand you--let me alone, please!' the girl broke out,
disengaging herself with an effort from his arm. She hurried down the
rest of the steps and left him there looking after her, and as she went
she heard him give an irrelevant laugh.




IV


She determined not to go to dinner--she wished for that day not to meet
him again. He would drink more--he would be worse--she didn't know what
he might say. Besides she was too angry--not with him but with
Selina--and in addition to being angry she was sick. She knew who Lady
Ringrose was; she knew so many things to-day that when she was
younger--and only a little--she had not expected ever to know. Her eyes
had been opened very wide in England and certainly they had been opened
to Lady Ringrose. She had heard what she had done and perhaps a good
deal more, and it was not very different from what she had heard of
other women. She knew Selina had been to her house; she had an
impression that her ladyship had been to Selina's, in London, though she
herself had not seen her there. But she had not known they were so
intimate as that--that Selina would rush over to Paris with her. What
they had gone to Paris for was not necessarily criminal; there were a
hundred reasons, familiar to ladies who were fond of change, of
movement, of the theatres and of new bonnets; but nevertheless it was
the fact of this little excursion quite as much as the companion that
excited Laura's disgust.

She was not ready to say that the companion was any worse, though
Lionel appeared to think so, than twenty other women who were her
sister's intimates and whom she herself had seen in London, in Grosvenor
Place, and even under the motherly old beeches at Mellows. But she
thought it unpleasant and base in Selina to go abroad that way, like a
commercial traveller, capriciously, clandestinely, without giving
notice, when she had left her to understand that she was simply spending
three or four days in town. It was bad taste and bad form, it was
_cabotin_ and had the mark of Selina's complete, irremediable
frivolity--the worst accusation (Laura tried to cling to that opinion)
that she laid herself open to. Of course frivolity that was never
ashamed of itself was like a neglected cold--you could die of it morally
as well as of anything else. Laura knew this and it was why she was
inexpressibly vexed with her sister. She hoped she should get a letter
from Selina the next morning (Mrs. Berrington would show at least that
remnant of propriety) which would give her a chance to despatch her an
answer that was already writing itself in her brain. It scarcely
diminished Laura's eagerness for such an opportunity that she had a
vision of Selina's showing her letter, laughing, across the table, at
the place near the Madeleine, to Lady Ringrose (who would be
painted--Selina herself, to do her justice, was not yet) while the
French waiters, in white aprons, contemplated _ces dames_. It was new
work for our young lady to judge of these shades--the gradations, the
probabilities of license, and of the side of the line on which, or
rather how far on the wrong side, Lady Ringrose was situated.

A quarter of an hour before dinner Lionel sent word to her room that
she was to sit down without him--he had a headache and wouldn't appear.
This was an unexpected grace and it simplified the position for Laura;
so that, smoothing her ruffles, she betook herself to the table. Before
doing this however she went back to the schoolroom and told Miss Steet
she must contribute her company. She took the governess (the little boys
were in bed) downstairs with her and made her sit opposite, thinking she
would be a safeguard if Lionel were to change his mind. Miss Steet was
more frightened than herself--she was a very shrinking bulwark. The
dinner was dull and the conversation rare; the governess ate three
olives and looked at the figures on the spoons. Laura had more than ever
her sense of impending calamity; a draught of misfortune seemed to blow
through the house; it chilled her feet under her chair. The letter she
had in her head went out like a flame in the wind and her only thought
now was to telegraph to Selina the first thing in the morning, in quite
different words. She scarcely spoke to Miss Steet and there was very
little the governess could say to her: she had already related her
history so often. After dinner she carried her companion into the
drawing-room, by the arm, and they sat down to the piano together. They
played duets for an hour, mechanically, violently; Laura had no idea
what the music was--she only knew that their playing was execrable. In
spite of this--'That's a very nice thing, that last,' she heard a vague
voice say, behind her, at the end; and she became aware that her
brother-in-law had joined them again.

Miss Steet was pusillanimous--she retreated on the spot, though Lionel
had already forgotten that he was angry at the scandalous way she had
carried off the children from the schoolroom. Laura would have gone too
if Lionel had not told her that he had something very particular to say
to her. That made her want to go more, but she had to listen to him when
he expressed the hope that she hadn't taken offence at anything he had
said before. He didn't strike her as tipsy now; he had slept it off or
got rid of it and she saw no traces of his headache. He was still
conspicuously cheerful, as if he had got some good news and were very
much encouraged. She knew the news he had got and she might have
thought, in view of his manner, that it could not really have seemed to
him so bad as he had pretended to think it. It was not the first time
however that she had seen him pleased that he had a case against his
wife, and she was to learn on this occasion how extreme a satisfaction
he could take in his wrongs. She would not sit down again; she only
lingered by the fire, pretending to warm her feet, and he walked to and
fro in the long room, where the lamp-light to-night was limited,
stepping on certain figures of the carpet as if his triumph were alloyed
with hesitation.

'I never know how to talk to you--you are so beastly clever,' he said.
'I can't treat you like a little girl in a pinafore--and yet of course
you are only a young lady. You're so deuced good--that makes it worse,'
he went on, stopping in front of her with his hands in his pockets and
the air he himself had of being a good-natured but dissipated boy; with
his small stature, his smooth, fat, suffused face, his round, watery,
light-coloured eyes and his hair growing in curious infantile rings. He
had lost one of his front teeth and always wore a stiff white scarf,
with a pin representing some symbol of the turf or the chase. 'I don't
see why _she_ couldn't have been a little more like you. If I could have
had a shot at you first!'

'I don't care for any compliments at my sister's expense,' Laura said,
with some majesty.

'Oh I say, Laura, don't put on so many frills, as Selina says. You know
what your sister is as well as I do!' They stood looking at each other a
moment and he appeared to see something in her face which led him to
add--'You know, at any rate, how little we hit it off.'

'I know you don't love each other--it's too dreadful.'

'Love each other? she hates me as she'd hate a hump on her back. She'd
do me any devilish turn she could. There isn't a feeling of loathing
that she doesn't have for me! She'd like to stamp on me and hear me
crack, like a black beetle, and she never opens her mouth but she
insults me.' Lionel Berrington delivered himself of these assertions
without violence, without passion or the sting of a new discovery; there
was a familiar gaiety in his trivial little tone and he had the air of
being so sure of what he said that he did not need to exaggerate in
order to prove enough.

'Oh, Lionel!' the girl murmured, turning pale. 'Is that the particular
thing you wished to say to me?'

'And you can't say it's my fault--you won't pretend to do that, will
you?' he went on. 'Ain't I quiet, ain't I kind, don't I go steady?
Haven't I given her every blessed thing she has ever asked for?'

'You haven't given her an example!' Laura replied, with spirit. 'You
don't care for anything in the wide world but to amuse yourself, from
the beginning of the year to the end. No more does she--and perhaps it's
even worse in a woman. You are both as selfish as you can live, with
nothing in your head or your heart but your vulgar pleasure, incapable
of a concession, incapable of a sacrifice!' She at least spoke with
passion; something that had been pent up in her soul broke out and it
gave her relief, almost a momentary joy.

It made Lionel Berrington stare; he coloured, but after a moment he
threw back his head with laughter. 'Don't you call me kind when I stand
here and take all that? If I'm so keen for my pleasure what pleasure do
_you_ give me? Look at the way I take it, Laura. You ought to do me
justice. Haven't I sacrificed my home? and what more can a man do?'

'I don't think you care any more for your home than Selina does. And
it's so sacred and so beautiful, God forgive you! You are all blind and
senseless and heartless and I don't know what poison is in your veins.
There is a curse on you and there will be a judgment!' the girl went on,
glowing like a young prophetess.

'What do you want me to do? Do you want me to stay at home and read the
Bible?' her companion demanded with an effect of profanity, confronted
with her deep seriousness.

'It wouldn't do you any harm, once in a while.'

'There will be a judgment on _her_--that's very sure, and I know where
it will be delivered,' said Lionel Berrington, indulging in a visible
approach to a wink. 'Have I done the half to her she has done to me? I
won't say the half but the hundredth part? Answer me truly, my dear!'

'I don't know what she has done to you,' said Laura, impatiently.

'That's exactly what I want to tell you. But it's difficult. I'll bet
you five pounds she's doing it now!'

'You are too unable to make yourself respected,' the girl remarked, not
shrinking now from the enjoyment of an advantage--that of feeling
herself superior and taking her opportunity.

Her brother-in-law seemed to feel for the moment the prick of this
observation. 'What has such a piece of nasty boldness as that to do with
respect? She's the first that ever defied me!' exclaimed the young man,
whose aspect somehow scarcely confirmed this pretension. 'You know all
about her--don't make believe you don't,' he continued in another tone.
'You see everything--you're one of the sharp ones. There's no use
beating about the bush, Laura--you've lived in this precious house and
you're not so green as that comes to. Besides, you're so good yourself
that you needn't give a shriek if one is obliged to say what one means.
Why didn't you grow up a little sooner? Then, over there in New York, it
would certainly have been you I would have made up to. _You_ would have
respected me--eh? now don't say you wouldn't.' He rambled on, turning
about the room again, partly like a person whose sequences were
naturally slow but also a little as if, though he knew what he had in
mind, there were still a scruple attached to it that he was trying to
rub off.

'I take it that isn't what I must sit up to listen to, Lionel, is it?'
Laura said, wearily.

'Why, you don't want to go to bed at nine o'clock, do you? That's all
rot, of course. But I want you to help me.'

'To help you--how?'

'I'll tell you--but you must give me my head. I don't know what I said
to you before dinner--I had had too many brandy and sodas. Perhaps I was
too free; if I was I beg your pardon. I made the governess bolt--very
proper in the superintendent of one's children. Do you suppose they saw
anything? I shouldn't care for that. I did take half a dozen or so; I
was thirsty and I was awfully gratified.'

'You have little enough to gratify you.'

'Now that's just where you are wrong. I don't know when I've fancied
anything so much as what I told you.'

'What you told me?'

'About her being in Paris. I hope she'll stay a month!'

'I don't understand you,' Laura said.

'Are you very sure, Laura? My dear, it suits my book! Now you know
yourself he's not the first.'

Laura was silent; his round eyes were fixed on her face and she saw
something she had not seen before--a little shining point which on
Lionel's part might represent an idea, but which made his expression
conscious as well as eager. 'He?' she presently asked. 'Whom are you
speaking of?'

'Why, of Charley Crispin, G----' And Lionel Berrington accompanied this
name with a startling imprecation.

'What has he to do----?'

'He has everything to do. Isn't he with her there?'

'How should I know? You said Lady Ringrose.'

'Lady Ringrose is a mere blind--and a devilish poor one at that. I'm
sorry to have to say it to you, but he's her lover. I mean Selina's. And
he ain't the first.'

There was another short silence while they stood opposed, and then Laura
asked--and the question was unexpected--'Why do you call him Charley?'

'Doesn't he call me Lion, like all the rest?' said her brother-in-law,
staring.

'You're the most extraordinary people. I suppose you have a certain
amount of proof before you say such things to me?'

'Proof, I've oceans of proof! And not only about Crispin, but about
Deepmere.'

'And pray who is Deepmere?'

'Did you never hear of Lord Deepmere? He has gone to India. That was
before you came. I don't say all this for my pleasure, Laura,' Mr.
Berrington added.

'Don't you, indeed?' asked the girl with a singular laugh. 'I thought
you were so glad.'

'I'm glad to know it but I'm not glad to tell it. When I say I'm glad to
know it I mean I'm glad to be fixed at last. Oh, I've got the tip! It's
all open country now and I know just how to go. I've gone into it most
extensively; there's nothing you can't find out to-day--if you go to the
right place. I've--I've----' He hesitated a moment, then went on: 'Well,
it's no matter what I've done. I know where I am and it's a great
comfort. She's up a tree, if ever a woman was. Now we'll see who's a
beetle and who's a toad!' Lionel Berrington concluded, gaily, with some
incongruity of metaphor.

'It's not true--it's not true--it's not true,' Laura said, slowly.

'That's just what she'll say--though that's not the way she'll say it.
Oh, if she could get off by your saying it for her!--for you, my dear,
would be believed.'

'Get off--what do you mean?' the girl demanded, with a coldness she
failed to feel, for she was tingling all over with shame and rage.

'Why, what do you suppose I'm talking about? I'm going to haul her up
and to have it out.'

'You're going to make a scandal?'

'_Make_ it? Bless my soul, it isn't me! And I should think it was made
enough. I'm going to appeal to the laws of my country--that's what I'm
going to do. She pretends I'm stopped, whatever she does. But that's all
gammon--I ain't!'

'I understand--but you won't do anything so horrible,' said Laura, very
gently.

'Horrible as you please, but less so than going on in this way; I
haven't told you the fiftieth part--you will easily understand that I
can't. They are not nice things to say to a girl like you--especially
about Deepmere, if you didn't know it. But when they happen you've got
to look at them, haven't you? That's the way I look at it.'

'It's not true--it's not true--it's not true,' Laura Wing repeated, in
the same way, slowly shaking her head.

'Of course you stand up for your sister--but that's just what I wanted
to say to you, that you ought to have some pity for _me_ and some sense
of justice. Haven't I always been nice to you? Have you ever had so much
as a nasty word from me?'

This appeal touched the girl; she had eaten her brother-in-law's bread
for months, she had had the use of all the luxuries with which he was
surrounded, and to herself personally she had never known him anything
but good-natured. She made no direct response however; she only
said--'Be quiet, be quiet and leave her to me. I will answer for her.'

'Answer for her--what do you mean?'

'She shall be better--she shall be reasonable--there shall be no more
talk of these horrors. Leave her to me--let me go away with her
somewhere.'

'Go away with her? I wouldn't let you come within a mile of her, if you
were _my_ sister!'

'Oh, shame, shame!' cried Laura Wing, turning away from him.

She hurried to the door of the room, but he stopped her before she
reached it. He got his back to it, he barred her way and she had to
stand there and hear him. 'I haven't said what I wanted--for I told you
that I wanted you to help me. I ain't cruel--I ain't insulting--you
can't make out that against me; I'm sure you know in your heart that
I've swallowed what would sicken most men. Therefore I will say that you
ought to be fair. You're too clever not to be; _you_ can't pretend to
swallow----' He paused a moment and went on, and she saw it was his
idea--an idea very simple and bold. He wanted her to side with him--to
watch for him--to help him to get his divorce. He forbore to say that
she owed him as much for the hospitality and protection she had in her
poverty enjoyed, but she was sure that was in his heart. 'Of course
she's your sister, but when one's sister's a perfect bad 'un there's no
law to force one to jump into the mud to save her. It _is_ mud, my dear,
and mud up to your neck. You had much better think of her children--you
had much better stop in _my_ boat.'

'Do you ask me to help you with evidence against her?' the girl
murmured. She had stood there passive, waiting while he talked, covering
her face with her hands, which she parted a little, looking at him.

He hesitated a moment. 'I ask you not to deny what you have seen--what
you feel to be true.'

'Then of the abominations of which you say you have proof, you haven't
proof.'

'Why haven't I proof?'

'If you want _me_ to come forward!'

'I shall go into court with a strong case. You may do what you like. But
I give you notice and I expect you not to forget that I have given it.
Don't forget--because you'll be asked--that I have told you to-night
where she is and with whom she is and what measures I intend to take.'

'Be asked--be asked?' the girl repeated.

'Why, of course you'll be cross-examined.'

'Oh, mother, mother!' cried Laura Wing. Her hands were over her face
again and as Lionel Berrington, opening the door, let her pass, she
burst into tears. He looked after her, distressed, compunctious,
half-ashamed, and he exclaimed to himself--'The bloody brute, the bloody
brute!' But the words had reference to his wife.




V


'And are you telling me the perfect truth when you say that Captain
Crispin was not there?'

'The perfect truth?' Mrs. Berrington straightened herself to her height,
threw back her head and measured her interlocutress up and down; it is
to be surmised that this was one of the many ways in which she knew she
looked very handsome indeed. Her interlocutress was her sister, and even
in a discussion with a person long since initiated she was not incapable
of feeling that her beauty was a new advantage. On this occasion she had
at first the air of depending upon it mainly to produce an effect upon
Laura; then, after an instant's reflection, she determined to arrive at
her result in another way. She exchanged her expression of scorn (of
resentment at her veracity's being impugned) for a look of gentle
amusement; she smiled patiently, as if she remembered that of course
Laura couldn't understand of what an impertinence she had been guilty.
There was a quickness of perception and lightness of hand which, to her
sense, her American sister had never acquired: the girl's earnest,
almost barbarous probity blinded her to the importance of certain
pleasant little forms. 'My poor child, the things you do say! One
doesn't put a question about the perfect truth in a manner that implies
that a person is telling a perfect lie. However, as it's only you, I
don't mind satisfying your clumsy curiosity. I haven't the least idea
whether Captain Crispin was there or not. I know nothing of his
movements and he doesn't keep me informed--why should he, poor man?--of
his whereabouts. He was not there for me--isn't that all that need
interest you? As far as I was concerned he might have been at the North
Pole. I neither saw him nor heard of him. I didn't see the end of his
nose!' Selina continued, still with her wiser, tolerant brightness,
looking straight into her sister's eyes. Her own were clear and lovely
and she was but little less handsome than if she had been proud and
freezing. Laura wondered at her more and more; stupefied suspense was
now almost the girl's constant state of mind.

Mrs. Berrington had come back from Paris the day before but had not
proceeded to Mellows the same night, though there was more than one
train she might have taken. Neither had she gone to the house in
Grosvenor Place but had spent the night at an hotel. Her husband was
absent again; he was supposed to be in Grosvenor Place, so that they had
not yet met. Little as she was a woman to admit that she had been in the
wrong she was known to have granted later that at this moment she had
made a mistake in not going straight to her own house. It had given
Lionel a degree of advantage, made it appear perhaps a little that she
had a bad conscience and was afraid to face him. But she had had her
reasons for putting up at an hotel, and she thought it unnecessary to
express them very definitely. She came home by a morning train, the
second day, and arrived before luncheon, of which meal she partook in
the company of her sister and in that of Miss Steet and the children,
sent for in honour of the occasion. After luncheon she let the governess
go but kept Scratch and Parson--kept them on ever so long in the
morning-room where she remained; longer than she had ever kept them
before. Laura was conscious that she ought to have been pleased at this,
but there was a perversity even in Selina's manner of doing right; for
she wished immensely now to see her alone--she had something so serious
to say to her. Selina hugged her children repeatedly, encouraging their
sallies; she laughed extravagantly at the artlessness of their remarks,
so that at table Miss Steet was quite abashed by her unusual high
spirits. Laura was unable to question her about Captain Crispin and Lady
Ringrose while Geordie and Ferdy were there: they would not understand,
of course, but names were always reflected in their limpid little minds
and they gave forth the image later--often in the most extraordinary
connections. It was as if Selina knew what she was waiting for and were
determined to make her wait. The girl wished her to go to her room, that
she might follow her there. But Selina showed no disposition to retire,
and one could never entertain the idea for her, on any occasion, that it
would be suitable that she should change her dress. The dress she
wore--whatever it was--was too becoming to her, and to the moment, for
that. Laura noticed how the very folds of her garment told that she had
been to Paris; she had spent only a week there but the mark of her
_couturière_ was all over her: it was simply to confer with this great
artist that, from her own account, she had crossed the Channel. The
signs of the conference were so conspicuous that it was as if she had
said, 'Don't you see the proof that it was for nothing but _chiffons_?'
She walked up and down the room with Geordie in her arms, in an access
of maternal tenderness; he was much too big to nestle gracefully in her
bosom, but that only made her seem younger, more flexible, fairer in her
tall, strong slimness. Her distinguished figure bent itself hither and
thither, but always in perfect freedom, as she romped with her children;
and there was another moment, when she came slowly down the room,
holding one of them in each hand and singing to them while they looked
up at her beauty, charmed and listening and a little surprised at such
new ways--a moment when she might have passed for some grave, antique
statue of a young matron, or even for a picture of Saint Cecilia. This
morning, more than ever, Laura was struck with her air of youth, the
inextinguishable freshness that would have made any one exclaim at her
being the mother of such bouncing little boys. Laura had always admired
her, thought her the prettiest woman in London, the beauty with the
finest points; and now these points were so vivid (especially her
finished slenderness and the grace, the natural elegance of every
turn--the fall of her shoulders had never looked so perfect) that the
girl almost detested them: they appeared to her a kind of advertisement
of danger and even of shame.

Miss Steet at last came back for the children, and as soon as she had
taken them away Selina observed that she would go over to Plash--just
as she was: she rang for her hat and jacket and for the carriage. Laura
could see that she would not give her just yet the advantage of a
retreat to her room. The hat and jacket were quickly brought, but after
they were put on Selina kept her maid in the drawing-room, talking to
her a long time, telling her elaborately what she wished done with the
things she had brought from Paris. Before the maid departed the carriage
was announced, and the servant, leaving the door of the room open,
hovered within earshot. Laura then, losing patience, turned out the maid
and closed the door; she stood before her sister, who was prepared for
her drive. Then she asked her abruptly, fiercely, but colouring with her
question, whether Captain Crispin had been in Paris. We have heard Mrs.
Berrington's answer, with which her strenuous sister was imperfectly
satisfied; a fact the perception of which it doubtless was that led
Selina to break out, with a greater show of indignation: 'I never heard
of such extraordinary ideas for a girl to have, and such extraordinary
things for a girl to talk about! My dear, you have acquired a
freedom--you have emancipated yourself from conventionality--and I
suppose I must congratulate you.' Laura only stood there, with her eyes
fixed, without answering the sally, and Selina went on, with another
change of tone: 'And pray if he _was_ there, what is there so monstrous?
Hasn't it happened that he is in London when I am there? Why is it then
so awful that he should be in Paris?'

'Awful, awful, too awful,' murmured Laura, with intense gravity, still
looking at her--looking all the more fixedly that she knew how little
Selina liked it.

'My dear, you do indulge in a style of innuendo, for a respectable
young woman!' Mrs. Berrington exclaimed, with an angry laugh. 'You have
ideas that when I was a girl----' She paused, and her sister saw that
she had not the assurance to finish her sentence on that particular
note.

'Don't talk about my innuendoes and my ideas--you might remember those
in which I have heard you indulge! Ideas? what ideas did I ever have
before I came here?' Laura Wing asked, with a trembling voice. 'Don't
pretend to be shocked, Selina; that's too cheap a defence. You have said
things to me--if you choose to talk of freedom! What is the talk of your
house and what does one hear if one lives with you? I don't care what I
hear now (it's all odious and there's little choice and my sweet
sensibility has gone God knows where!) and I'm very glad if you
understand that I don't care what I say. If one talks about your
affairs, my dear, one mustn't be too particular!' the girl continued,
with a flash of passion.

Mrs. Berrington buried her face in her hands. 'Merciful powers, to be
insulted, to be covered with outrage, by one's wretched little sister!'
she moaned.

'I think you should be thankful there is one human being--however
wretched--who cares enough for you to care about the truth in what
concerns you,' Laura said. 'Selina, Selina--are you hideously deceiving
us?'

'Us?' Selina repeated, with a singular laugh. 'Whom do you mean by us?'

Laura Wing hesitated; she had asked herself whether it would be best she
should let her sister know the dreadful scene she had had with Lionel;
but she had not, in her mind, settled that point. However, it was
settled now in an instant. 'I don't mean your friends--those of them
that I have seen. I don't think _they_ care a straw--I have never seen
such people. But last week Lionel spoke to me--he told me he _knew_ it,
as a certainty.'

'Lionel spoke to you?' said Mrs. Berrington, holding up her head with a
stare. 'And what is it that he knows?'

'That Captain Crispin was in Paris and that you were with him. He
believes you went there to meet him.'

'He said this to _you_?'

'Yes, and much more--I don't know why I should make a secret of it.'

'The disgusting beast!' Selina exclaimed slowly, solemnly. 'He enjoys
the right--the legal right--to pour forth his vileness upon _me_; but
when he is so lost to every feeling as to begin to talk to you in such a
way----!' And Mrs. Berrington paused, in the extremity of her
reprobation.

'Oh, it was not his talk that shocked me--it was his believing it,' the
girl replied. 'That, I confess, made an impression on me.'

'Did it indeed? I'm infinitely obliged to you! You are a tender, loving
little sister.'

'Yes, I am, if it's tender to have cried about you--all these days--till
I'm blind and sick!' Laura replied. 'I hope you are prepared to meet
him. His mind is quite made up to apply for a divorce.'

Laura's voice almost failed her as she said this--it was the first time
that in talking with Selina she had uttered that horrible word. She had
heard it however, often enough on the lips of others; it had been
bandied lightly enough in her presence under those somewhat austere
ceilings of Mellows, of which the admired decorations and mouldings, in
the taste of the middle of the last century, all in delicate plaster and
reminding her of Wedgewood pottery, consisted of slim festoons, urns and
trophies and knotted ribbons, so many symbols of domestic affection and
irrevocable union. Selina herself had flashed it at her with light
superiority, as if it were some precious jewel kept in reserve, which
she could convert at any moment into specie, so that it would constitute
a happy provision for her future. The idea--associated with her own
point of view--was apparently too familiar to Mrs. Berrington to be the
cause of her changing colour; it struck her indeed, as presented by
Laura, in a ludicrous light, for her pretty eyes expanded a moment and
she smiled pityingly. 'Well, you are a poor dear innocent, after all.
Lionel would be about as able to divorce me--even if I were the most
abandoned of my sex--as he would be to write a leader in the _Times_.'

'I know nothing about that,' said Laura.

'So I perceive--as I also perceive that you must have shut your eyes
very tight. Should you like to know a few of the reasons--heaven forbid
I should attempt to go over them all; there are millions!--why his hands
are tied?'

'Not in the least.'

'Should you like to know that his own life is too base for words and
that his impudence in talking about me would be sickening if it weren't
grotesque?' Selina went on, with increasing emotion. 'Should you like me
to tell you to what he has stooped--to the very gutter--and the
charming history of his relations with----'

'No, I don't want you to tell me anything of the sort,' Laura
interrupted. 'Especially as you were just now so pained by the license
of my own allusions.'

'You listen to him then--but it suits your purpose not to listen to me!'

'Oh, Selina, Selina!' the girl almost shrieked, turning away.

'Where have your eyes been, or your senses, or your powers of
observation? You can be clever enough when it suits you!' Mrs.
Berrington continued, throwing off another ripple of derision. 'And now
perhaps, as the carriage is waiting, you will let me go about my
duties.'

Laura turned again and stopped her, holding her arm as she passed toward
the door. 'Will you swear--will you swear by everything that is most
sacred?'

'Will I swear what?' And now she thought Selina visibly blanched.

'That you didn't lay eyes on Captain Crispin in Paris.'

Mrs. Berrington hesitated, but only for an instant. 'You are really too
odious, but as you are pinching me to death I will swear, to get away
from you. I never laid eyes on him.'

The organs of vision which Mrs. Berrington was ready solemnly to declare
that she had not misapplied were, as her sister looked into them, an
abyss of indefinite prettiness. The girl had sounded them before without
discovering a conscience at the bottom of them, and they had never
helped any one to find out anything about their possessor except that
she was one of the beauties of London. Even while Selina spoke Laura had
a cold, horrible sense of not believing her, and at the same time a
desire, colder still, to extract a reiteration of the pledge. Was it the
asseveration of her innocence that she wished her to repeat, or only the
attestation of her falsity? One way or the other it seemed to her that
this would settle something, and she went on inexorably--'By our dear
mother's memory--by our poor father's?'

'By my mother's, by my father's,' said Mrs. Berrington, 'and by that of
any other member of the family you like!' Laura let her go; she had not
been pinching her, as Selina described the pressure, but had clung to
her with insistent hands. As she opened the door Selina said, in a
changed voice: 'I suppose it's no use to ask you if you care to drive to
Plash.'

'No, thank you, I don't care--I shall take a walk.'

'I suppose, from that, that your friend Lady Davenant has gone.'

'No, I think she is still there.'

'That's a bore!' Selina exclaimed, as she went off.




VI


Laura Wing hastened to her room to prepare herself for her walk; but
when she reached it she simply fell on her knees, shuddering, beside her
bed. She buried her face in the soft counterpane of wadded silk; she
remained there a long time, with a kind of aversion to lifting it again
to the day. It burned with horror and there was coolness in the smooth
glaze of the silk. It seemed to her that she had been concerned in a
hideous transaction, and her uppermost feeling was, strangely enough,
that she was ashamed--not of her sister but of herself. She did not
believe her--that was at the bottom of everything, and she had made her
lie, she had brought out her perjury, she had associated it with the
sacred images of the dead. She took no walk, she remained in her room,
and quite late, towards six o'clock, she heard on the gravel, outside of
her windows, the wheels of the carriage bringing back Mrs. Berrington.
She had evidently been elsewhere as well as to Plash; no doubt she had
been to the vicarage--she was capable even of that. She could pay
'duty-visits,' like that (she called at the vicarage about three times a
year), and she could go and be nice to her mother-in-law with her fresh
lips still fresher for the lie she had just told. For it was as definite
as an aching nerve to Laura that she did not believe her, and if she did
not believe her the words she had spoken were a lie. It was the lie, the
lie to _her_ and which she had dragged out of her that seemed to the
girl the ugliest thing. If she had admitted her folly, if she had
explained, attenuated, sophisticated, there would have been a difference
in her favour; but now she was bad because she was hard. She had a
surface of polished metal. And she could make plans and calculate, she
could act and do things for a particular effect. She could go straight
to old Mrs. Berrington and to the parson's wife and his many daughters
(just as she had kept the children after luncheon, on purpose, so long)
because that looked innocent and domestic and denoted a mind without a
feather's weight upon it.

A servant came to the young lady's door to tell her that tea was ready;
and on her asking who else was below (for she had heard the wheels of a
second vehicle just after Selina's return), she learned that Lionel had
come back. At this news she requested that some tea should be brought to
her room--she determined not to go to dinner. When the dinner-hour came
she sent down word that she had a headache, that she was going to bed.
She wondered whether Selina would come to her (she could forget
disagreeable scenes amazingly); but her fervent hope that she would stay
away was gratified. Indeed she would have another call upon her
attention if her meeting with her husband was half as much of a
concussion as was to have been expected. Laura had found herself
listening hard, after knowing that her brother-in-law was in the house:
she half expected to hear indications of violence--loud cries or the
sound of a scuffle. It was a matter of course to her that some dreadful
scene had not been slow to take place, something that discretion should
keep her out of even if she had not been too sick. She did not go to
bed--partly because she didn't know what might happen in the house. But
she was restless also for herself: things had reached a point when it
seemed to her that she must make up her mind. She left her candles
unlighted--she sat up till the small hours, in the glow of the fire.
What had been settled by her scene with Selina was that worse things
were to come (looking into her fire, as the night went on, she had a
rare prevision of the catastrophe that hung over the house), and she
considered, or tried to consider, what it would be best for her, in
anticipation, to do. The first thing was to take flight.

It may be related without delay that Laura Wing did not take flight and
that though the circumstance detracts from the interest that should be
felt in her character she did not even make up her mind. That was not so
easy when action had to ensue. At the same time she had not the excuse
of a conviction that by not acting--that is by not withdrawing from her
brother-in-law's roof--she should be able to hold Selina up to her duty,
to drag her back into the straight path. The hopes connected with that
project were now a phase that she had left behind her; she had not
to-day an illusion about her sister large enough to cover a sixpence.
She had passed through the period of superstition, which had lasted the
longest--the time when it seemed to her, as at first, a kind of
profanity to doubt of Selina and judge her, the elder sister whose
beauty and success she had ever been proud of and who carried herself,
though with the most good-natured fraternisings, as one native to an
upper air. She had called herself in moments of early penitence for
irrepressible suspicion a little presumptuous prig: so strange did it
seem to her at first, the impulse of criticism in regard to her bright
protectress. But the revolution was over and she had a desolate, lonely
freedom which struck her as not the most cynical thing in the world only
because Selina's behaviour was more so. She supposed she should learn,
though she was afraid of the knowledge, what had passed between that
lady and her husband while her vigil ached itself away. But it appeared
to her the next day, to her surprise, that nothing was changed in the
situation save that Selina knew at present how much more she was
suspected. As this had not a chastening effect upon Mrs. Berrington
nothing had been gained by Laura's appeal to her. Whatever Lionel had
said to his wife he said nothing to Laura: he left her at perfect
liberty to forget the subject he had opened up to her so luminously.
This was very characteristic of his good-nature; it had come over him
that after all she wouldn't like it, and if the free use of the gray
ponies could make up to her for the shock she might order them every day
in the week and banish the unpleasant episode from her mind.

Laura ordered the gray ponies very often: she drove herself all over the
country. She visited not only the neighbouring but the distant poor, and
she never went out without stopping for one of the vicar's fresh
daughters. Mellows was now half the time full of visitors and when it
was not its master and mistress were staying with their friends either
together or singly. Sometimes (almost always when she was asked) Laura
Wing accompanied her sister and on two or three occasions she paid an
independent visit. Selina had often told her that she wished her to have
her own friends, so that the girl now felt a great desire to show her
that she had them. She had arrived at no decision whatever; she had
embraced in intention no particular course. She drifted on, shutting her
eyes, averting her head and, as it seemed to herself, hardening her
heart. This admission will doubtless suggest to the reader that she was
a weak, inconsequent, spasmodic young person, with a standard not
really, or at any rate not continuously, high; and I have no desire that
she shall appear anything but what she was. It must even be related of
her that since she could not escape and live in lodgings and paint fans
(there were reasons why this combination was impossible) she determined
to try and be happy in the given circumstances--to float in shallow,
turbid water. She gave up the attempt to understand the cynical _modus
vivendi_ at which her companions seemed to have arrived; she knew it was
not final but it served them sufficiently for the time; and if it served
them why should it not serve her, the dependent, impecunious, tolerated
little sister, representative of the class whom it behoved above all to
mind their own business? The time was coming round when they would all
move up to town, and there, in the crowd, with the added movement, the
strain would be less and indifference easier.

Whatever Lionel had said to his wife that evening she had found
something to say to him: that Laura could see, though not so much from
any change in the simple expression of his little red face and in the
vain bustle of his existence as from the grand manner in which Selina
now carried herself. She was 'smarter' than ever and her waist was
smaller and her back straighter and the fall of her shoulders finer; her
long eyes were more oddly charming and the extreme detachment of her
elbows from her sides conduced still more to the exhibition of her
beautiful arms. So she floated, with a serenity not disturbed by a
general tardiness, through the interminable succession of her
engagements. Her photographs were not to be purchased in the Burlington
Arcade--she had kept out of that; but she looked more than ever as they
would have represented her if they had been obtainable there. There were
times when Laura thought her brother-in-law's formless desistence too
frivolous for nature: it even gave her a sense of deeper dangers. It was
as if he had been digging away in the dark and they would all tumble
into the hole. It happened to her to ask herself whether the things he
had said to her the afternoon he fell upon her in the schoolroom had not
all been a clumsy practical joke, a crude desire to scare, that of a
schoolboy playing with a sheet in the dark; or else brandy and soda,
which came to the same thing. However this might be she was obliged to
recognise that the impression of brandy and soda had not again been
given her. More striking still however was Selina's capacity to recover
from shocks and condone imputations; she kissed again--kissed
Laura--without tears, and proposed problems connected with the
rearrangement of trimmings and of the flowers at dinner, as
candidly--as earnestly--as if there had never been an intenser question
between them. Captain Crispin was not mentioned; much less of course, so
far as Laura was concerned, was he seen. But Lady Ringrose appeared; she
came down for two days, during an absence of Lionel's. Laura, to her
surprise, found her no such Jezebel but a clever little woman with a
single eye-glass and short hair who had read Lecky and could give her
useful hints about water-colours: a reconciliation that encouraged the
girl, for this was the direction in which it now seemed to her best that
she herself should grow.




VII


In Grosvenor Place, on Sunday afternoon, during the first weeks of the
season, Mrs. Berrington was usually at home: this indeed was the only
time when a visitor who had not made an appointment could hope to be
admitted to her presence. Very few hours in the twenty-four did she
spend in her own house. Gentlemen calling on these occasions rarely
found her sister: Mrs. Berrington had the field to herself. It was
understood between the pair that Laura should take this time for going
to see her old women: it was in that manner that Selina qualified the
girl's independent social resources. The old women however were not a
dozen in number; they consisted mainly of Lady Davenant and the elder
Mrs. Berrington, who had a house in Portman Street. Lady Davenant lived
at Queen's Gate and also was usually at home of a Sunday afternoon: her
visitors were not all men, like Selina Berrington's, and Laura's
maidenly bonnet was not a false note in her drawing-room. Selina liked
her sister, naturally enough, to make herself useful, but of late,
somehow, they had grown rarer, the occasions that depended in any degree
upon her aid, and she had never been much appealed to--though it would
have seemed natural she should be--on behalf of the weekly chorus of
gentlemen. It came to be recognised on Selina's part that nature had
dedicated her more to the relief of old women than to that of young men.
Laura had a distinct sense of interfering with the free interchange of
anecdote and pleasantry that went on at her sister's fireside: the
anecdotes were mostly such an immense secret that they could not be told
fairly if she were there, and she had their privacy on her conscience.
There was an exception however; when Selina expected Americans she
naturally asked her to stay at home: not apparently so much because
their conversation would be good for her as because hers would be good
for them.

One Sunday, about the middle of May, Laura Wing prepared herself to go
and see Lady Davenant, who had made a long absence from town at Easter
but would now have returned. The weather was charming, she had from the
first established her right to tread the London streets alone (if she
was a poor girl she could have the detachment as well as the
helplessness of it) and she promised herself the pleasure of a walk
along the park, where the new grass was bright. A moment before she
quitted the house her sister sent for her to the drawing-room; the
servant gave her a note scrawled in pencil: 'That man from New York is
here--Mr. Wendover, who brought me the introduction the other day from
the Schoolings. He's rather a dose--you must positively come down and
talk to him. Take him out with you if you can.' The description was not
alluring, but Selina had never made a request of her to which the girl
had not instantly responded: it seemed to her she was there for that.
She joined the circle in the drawing-room and found that it consisted
of five persons, one of whom was Lady Ringrose. Lady Ringrose was at all
times and in all places a fitful apparition; she had described herself
to Laura during her visit at Mellows as 'a bird on the branch.' She had
no fixed habit of receiving on Sunday, she was in and out as she liked,
and she was one of the few specimens of her sex who, in Grosvenor Place,
ever turned up, as she said, on the occasions to which I allude. Of the
three gentlemen two were known to Laura; she could have told you at
least that the big one with the red hair was in the Guards and the other
in the Rifles; the latter looked like a rosy child and as if he ought to
be sent up to play with Geordie and Ferdy: his social nickname indeed
was the Baby. Selina's admirers were of all ages--they ranged from
infants to octogenarians.

She introduced the third gentleman to her sister; a tall, fair, slender
young man who suggested that he had made a mistake in the shade of his
tight, perpendicular coat, ordering it of too heavenly a blue. This
added however to the candour of his appearance, and if he was a dose, as
Selina had described him, he could only operate beneficently. There were
moments when Laura's heart rather yearned towards her countrymen, and
now, though she was preoccupied and a little disappointed at having been
detained, she tried to like Mr. Wendover, whom her sister had compared
invidiously, as it seemed to her, with her other companions. It struck
her that his surface at least was as glossy as theirs. The Baby, whom
she remembered to have heard spoken of as a dangerous flirt, was in
conversation with Lady Ringrose and the guardsman with Mrs. Berrington;
so she did her best to entertain the American visitor, as to whom any
one could easily see (she thought) that he had brought a letter of
introduction--he wished so to maintain the credit of those who had given
it to him. Laura scarcely knew these people, American friends of her
sister who had spent a period of festivity in London and gone back
across the sea before her own advent; but Mr. Wendover gave her all
possible information about them. He lingered upon them, returned to
them, corrected statements he had made at first, discoursed upon them
earnestly and exhaustively. He seemed to fear to leave them, lest he
should find nothing again so good, and he indulged in a parallel that
was almost elaborate between Miss Fanny and Miss Katie. Selina told her
sister afterwards that she had overheard him--that he talked of them as
if he had been a nursemaid; upon which Laura defended the young man even
to extravagance. She reminded her sister that people in London were
always saying Lady Mary and Lady Susan: why then shouldn't Americans use
the Christian name, with the humbler prefix with which they had to
content themselves? There had been a time when Mrs. Berrington had been
happy enough to be Miss Lina, even though she was the elder sister; and
the girl liked to think there were still old friends--friends of the
family, at home, for whom, even should she live to sixty years of
spinsterhood, she would never be anything but Miss Laura. This was as
good as Donna Anna or Donna Elvira: English people could never call
people as other people did, for fear of resembling the servants.

Mr. Wendover was very attentive, as well as communicative; however his
letter might be regarded in Grosvenor Place he evidently took it very
seriously himself; but his eyes wandered considerably, none the less, to
the other side of the room, and Laura felt that though he had often seen
persons like her before (not that he betrayed this too crudely) he had
never seen any one like Lady Ringrose. His glance rested also on Mrs.
Berrington, who, to do her justice, abstained from showing, by the way
she returned it, that she wished her sister to get him out of the room.
Her smile was particularly pretty on Sunday afternoons and he was
welcome to enjoy it as a part of the decoration of the place. Whether or
no the young man should prove interesting he was at any rate interested;
indeed she afterwards learned that what Selina deprecated in him was the
fact that he would eventually display a fatiguing intensity of
observation. He would be one of the sort who noticed all kinds of little
things--things she never saw or heard of--in the newspapers or in
society, and would call upon her (a dreadful prospect) to explain or
even to defend them. She had not come there to explain England to the
Americans; the more particularly as her life had been a burden to her
during the first years of her marriage through her having to explain
America to the English. As for defending England to her countrymen she
had much rather defend it _from_ them: there were too many--too many for
those who were already there. This was the class she wished to
spare--she didn't care about the English. They could obtain an eye for
an eye and a cutlet for a cutlet by going over there; which she had no
desire to do--not for all the cutlets in Christendom!

When Mr. Wendover and Laura had at last cut loose from the Schoolings
he let her know confidentially that he had come over really to see
London; he had time, that year; he didn't know when he should have it
again (if ever, as he said) and he had made up his mind that this was
about the best use he could make of four months and a half. He had heard
so much of it; it was talked of so much to-day; a man felt as if he
ought to know something about it. Laura wished the others could hear
this--that England was coming up, was making her way at last to a place
among the topics of societies more universal. She thought Mr. Wendover
after all remarkably like an Englishman, in spite of his saying that he
believed she had resided in London quite a time. He talked a great deal
about things being characteristic, and wanted to know, lowering his
voice to make the inquiry, whether Lady Ringrose were not particularly
so. He had heard of her very often, he said; and he observed that it was
very interesting to see her: he could not have used a different tone if
he had been speaking of the prime minister or the laureate. Laura was
ignorant of what he had heard of Lady Ringrose; she doubted whether it
could be the same as what she had heard from her brother-in-law: if this
had been the case he never would have mentioned it. She foresaw that his
friends in London would have a good deal to do in the way of telling him
whether this or that were characteristic or not; he would go about in
much the same way that English travellers did in America, fixing his
attention mainly on society (he let Laura know that this was especially
what he wished to go into) and neglecting the antiquities and sights,
quite as if he failed to believe in their importance. He would ask
questions it was impossible to answer; as to whether for instance
society were very different in the two countries. If you said yes you
gave a wrong impression and if you said no you didn't give a right one:
that was the kind of thing that Selina had suffered from. Laura found
her new acquaintance, on the present occasion and later, more
philosophically analytic of his impressions than those of her countrymen
she had hitherto encountered in her new home: the latter, in regard to
such impressions, usually exhibited either a profane levity or a
tendency to mawkish idealism.

Mrs. Berrington called out at last to Laura that she must not stay if
she had prepared herself to go out: whereupon the girl, having nodded
and smiled good-bye at the other members of the circle, took a more
formal leave of Mr. Wendover--expressed the hope, as an American girl
does in such a case, that they should see him again. Selina asked him to
come and dine three days later; which was as much as to say that
relations might be suspended till then. Mr. Wendover took it so, and
having accepted the invitation he departed at the same time as Laura. He
passed out of the house with her and in the street she asked him which
way he was going. He was too tender, but she liked him; he appeared not
to deal in chaff and that was a change that relieved her--she had so
often had to pay out that coin when she felt wretchedly poor. She hoped
he would ask her leave to go with her the way she was going--and this
not on particular but on general grounds. It would be American, it
would remind her of old times; she should like him to be as American as
that. There was no reason for her taking so quick an interest in his
nature, inasmuch as she had not fallen under his spell; but there were
moments when she felt a whimsical desire to be reminded of the way
people felt and acted at home. Mr. Wendover did not disappoint her, and
the bright chocolate-coloured vista of the Fifth Avenue seemed to surge
before her as he said, 'May I have the pleasure of making my direction
the same as yours?' and moved round, systematically, to take his place
between her and the curbstone. She had never walked much with young men
in America (she had been brought up in the new school, the school of
attendant maids and the avoidance of certain streets) and she had very
often done so in England, in the country; yet, as at the top of
Grosvenor Place she crossed over to the park, proposing they should take
that way, the breath of her native land was in her nostrils. It was
certainly only an American who could have the tension of Mr. Wendover;
his solemnity almost made her laugh, just as her eyes grew dull when
people 'slanged' each other hilariously in her sister's house; but at
the same time he gave her a feeling of high respectability. It would be
respectable still if she were to go on with him indefinitely--if she
never were to come home at all. He asked her after a while, as they
went, whether he had violated the custom of the English in offering her
his company; whether in that country a gentleman might walk with a young
lady--the first time he saw her--not because their roads lay together
but for the sake of the walk.

'Why should it matter to me whether it is the custom of the English? I
am not English,' said Laura Wing. Then her companion explained that he
only wanted a general guidance--that with her (she was so kind) he had
not the sense of having taken a liberty. The point was simply--and
rather comprehensively and strenuously he began to set forth the point.
Laura interrupted him; she said she didn't care about it and he almost
irritated her by telling her she was kind. She was, but she was not
pleased at its being recognised so soon; and he was still too
importunate when he asked her whether she continued to go by American
usage, didn't find that if one lived there one had to conform in a great
many ways to the English. She was weary of the perpetual comparison, for
she not only heard it from others--she heard it a great deal from
herself. She held that there were certain differences you felt, if you
belonged to one or the other nation, and that was the end of it: there
was no use trying to express them. Those you _could_ express were not
real or not important ones and were not worth talking about. Mr.
Wendover asked her if she liked English society and if it were superior
to American; also if the tone were very high in London. She thought his
questions 'academic'--the term she used to see applied in the _Times_ to
certain speeches in Parliament. Bending his long leanness over her (she
had never seen a man whose material presence was so insubstantial, so
unoppressive) and walking almost sidewise, to give her a proper
attention, he struck her as innocent, as incapable of guessing that she
had had a certain observation of life. They were talking about totally
different things: English society, as he asked her judgment upon it and
she had happened to see it, was an affair that he didn't suspect. If
she were to give him that judgment it would be more than he doubtless
bargained for; but she would do it not to make him open his eyes--only
to relieve herself. She had thought of that before in regard to two or
three persons she had met--of the satisfaction of breaking out with some
of her feelings. It would make little difference whether the person
understood her or not; the one who should do so best would be far from
understanding everything. 'I want to get out of it, please--out of the
set I live in, the one I have tumbled into through my sister, the people
you saw just now. There are thousands of people in London who are
different from that and ever so much nicer; but I don't see them, I
don't know how to get at them; and after all, poor dear man, what power
have you to help me?' That was in the last analysis the gist of what she
had to say.

Mr. Wendover asked her about Selina in the tone of a person who thought
Mrs. Berrington a very important phenomenon, and that by itself was
irritating to Laura Wing. Important--gracious goodness, no! She might
have to live with her, to hold her tongue about her; but at least she
was not bound to exaggerate her significance. The young man forbore
decorously to make use of the expression, but she could see that he
supposed Selina to be a professional beauty and she guessed that as this
product had not yet been domesticated in the western world the desire to
behold it, after having read so much about it, had been one of the
motives of Mr. Wendover's pilgrimage. Mrs. Schooling, who must have been
a goose, had told him that Mrs. Berrington, though transplanted, was
the finest flower of a rich, ripe society and as clever and virtuous as
she was beautiful. Meanwhile Laura knew what Selina thought of Fanny
Schooling and her incurable provinciality. 'Now was that a good example
of London talk--what I heard (I only heard a little of it, but the
conversation was more general before you came in) in your sister's
drawing-room? I don't mean literary, intellectual talk--I suppose there
are special places to hear that; I mean--I mean----' Mr. Wendover went
on with a deliberation which gave his companion an opportunity to
interrupt him. They had arrived at Lady Davenant's door and she cut his
meaning short. A fancy had taken her, on the spot, and the fact that it
was whimsical seemed only to recommend it.

'If you want to hear London talk there will be some very good going on
in here,' she said. 'If you would like to come in with me----?'

'Oh, you are very kind--I should be delighted,' replied Mr. Wendover,
endeavouring to emulate her own more rapid processes. They stepped into
the porch and the young man, anticipating his companion, lifted the
knocker and gave a postman's rap. She laughed at him for this and he
looked bewildered; the idea of taking him in with her had become
agreeably exhilarating. Their acquaintance, in that moment, took a long
jump. She explained to him who Lady Davenant was and that if he was in
search of the characteristic it would be a pity he shouldn't know her;
and then she added, before he could put the question:

'And what I am doing is _not_ in the least usual. No, it is not the
custom for young ladies here to take strange gentlemen off to call on
their friends the first time they see them.'

'So that Lady Davenant will think it rather extraordinary?' Mr. Wendover
eagerly inquired; not as if that idea frightened him, but so that his
observation on this point should also be well founded. He had entered
into Laura's proposal with complete serenity.

'Oh, most extraordinary!' said Laura, as they went in. The old lady
however concealed such surprise as she may have felt, and greeted Mr.
Wendover as if he were any one of fifty familiars. She took him
altogether for granted and asked him no questions about his arrival, his
departure, his hotel or his business in England. He noticed, as he
afterwards confided to Laura, her omission of these forms; but he was
not wounded by it--he only made a mark against it as an illustration of
the difference between English and American manners: in New York people
always asked the arriving stranger the first thing about the steamer and
the hotel. Mr. Wendover appeared greatly impressed with Lady Davenant's
antiquity, though he confessed to his companion on a subsequent occasion
that he thought her a little flippant, a little frivolous even for her
years. 'Oh yes,' said the girl, on that occasion, 'I have no doubt that
you considered she talked too much, for one so old. In America old
ladies sit silent and listen to the young.' Mr. Wendover stared a little
and replied to this that with her--with Laura Wing--it was impossible to
tell which side she was on, the American or the English: sometimes she
seemed to take one, sometimes the other. At any rate, he added, smiling,
with regard to the other great division it was easy to see--she was on
the side of the old. 'Of course I am,' she said; 'when one _is_ old!'
And then he inquired, according to his wont, if she were thought so in
England; to which she answered that it was England that had made her so.

Lady Davenant's bright drawing-room was filled with mementoes and
especially with a collection of portraits of distinguished people,
mainly fine old prints with signatures, an array of precious autographs.
'Oh, it's a cemetery,' she said, when the young man asked her some
question about one of the pictures; 'they are my contemporaries, they
are all dead and those things are the tombstones, with the inscriptions.
I'm the grave-digger, I look after the place and try to keep it a little
tidy. I have dug my own little hole,' she went on, to Laura, 'and when
you are sent for you must come and put me in.' This evocation of
mortality led Mr. Wendover to ask her if she had known Charles Lamb; at
which she stared for an instant, replying: 'Dear me, no--one didn't meet
him.'

'Oh, I meant to say Lord Byron,' said Mr. Wendover.

'Bless me, yes; I was in love with him. But he didn't notice me,
fortunately--we were so many. He was very nice-looking but he was very
vulgar.' Lady Davenant talked to Laura as if Mr. Wendover had not been
there; or rather as if his interests and knowledge were identical with
hers. Before they went away the young man asked her if she had known
Garrick and she replied: 'Oh, dear, no, we didn't have them in our
houses, in those days.'

'He must have been dead long before you were born!' Laura exclaimed.

'I daresay; but one used to hear of him.'

'I think I meant Edmund Kean,' said Mr. Wendover.

'You make little mistakes of a century or two,' Laura Wing remarked,
laughing. She felt now as if she had known Mr. Wendover a long time.

'Oh, he was very clever,' said Lady Davenant.

'Very magnetic, I suppose,' Mr. Wendover went on.

'What's that? I believe he used to get tipsy.'

'Perhaps you don't use that expression in England?' Laura's companion
inquired.

'Oh, I daresay we do, if it's American; we talk American now. You seem
very good-natured people, but such a jargon as you _do_ speak!'

'I like _your_ way, Lady Davenant,' said Mr. Wendover, benevolently,
smiling.

'You might do worse,' cried the old woman; and then she added: 'Please
go out!' They were taking leave of her but she kept Laura's hand and,
for the young man, nodded with decision at the open door. 'Now, wouldn't
_he_ do?' she asked, after Mr. Wendover had passed into the hall.

'Do for what?'

'For a husband, of course.'

'For a husband--for whom?'

'Why--for me,' said Lady Davenant.

'I don't know--I think he might tire you.'

'Oh--if he's tiresome!' the old lady continued, smiling at the girl.

'I think he is very good,' said Laura.

'Well then, he'll do.'

'Ah, perhaps _you_ won't!' Laura exclaimed, smiling back at her and
turning away.




VIII


She was of a serious turn by nature and unlike many serious people she
made no particular study of the art of being gay. Had her circumstances
been different she might have done so, but she lived in a merry house
(heaven save the mark! as she used to say) and therefore was not driven
to amuse herself for conscience sake. The diversions she sought were of
a serious cast and she liked those best which showed most the note of
difference from Selina's interests and Lionel's. She felt that she was
most divergent when she attempted to cultivate her mind, and it was a
branch of such cultivation to visit the curiosities, the antiquities,
the monuments of London. She was fond of the Abbey and the British
Museum--she had extended her researches as far as the Tower. She read
the works of Mr. John Timbs and made notes of the old corners of history
that had not yet been abolished--the houses in which great men had lived
and died. She planned a general tour of inspection of the ancient
churches of the City and a pilgrimage to the queer places commemorated
by Dickens. It must be added that though her intentions were great her
adventures had as yet been small. She had wanted for opportunity and
independence; people had other things to do than to go with her, so that
it was not till she had been some time in the country and till a good
while after she had begun to go out alone that she entered upon the
privilege of visiting public institutions by herself. There were some
aspects of London that frightened her, but there were certain spots,
such as the Poets' Corner in the Abbey or the room of the Elgin marbles,
where she liked better to be alone than not to have the right companion.
At the time Mr. Wendover presented himself in Grosvenor Place she had
begun to put in, as they said, a museum or something of that sort
whenever she had a chance. Besides her idea that such places were
sources of knowledge (it is to be feared that the poor girl's notions of
knowledge were at once conventional and crude) they were also occasions
for detachment, an escape from worrying thoughts. She forgot Selina and
she 'qualified' herself a little--though for what she hardly knew.

The day Mr. Wendover dined in Grosvenor Place they talked about St.
Paul's, which he expressed a desire to see, wishing to get some idea of
the great past, as he said, in England as well as of the present. Laura
mentioned that she had spent half an hour the summer before in the big
black temple on Ludgate Hill; whereupon he asked her if he might
entertain the hope that--if it were not disagreeable to her to go
again--she would serve as his guide there. She had taken him to see Lady
Davenant, who was so remarkable and worth a long journey, and now he
should like to pay her back--to show _her_ something. The difficulty
would be that there was probably nothing she had not seen; but if she
could think of anything he was completely at her service. They sat
together at dinner and she told him she would think of something before
the repast was over. A little while later she let him know that a
charming place had occurred to her--a place to which she was afraid to
go alone and where she should be grateful for a protector: she would
tell him more about it afterwards. It was then settled between them that
on a certain afternoon of the same week they would go to St. Paul's
together, extending their ramble as much further as they had time. Laura
lowered her voice for this discussion, as if the range of allusion had
had a kind of impropriety. She was now still more of the mind that Mr.
Wendover was a good young man--he had such worthy eyes. His principal
defect was that he treated all subjects as if they were equally
important; but that was perhaps better than treating them with equal
levity. If one took an interest in him one might not despair of teaching
him to discriminate.

Laura said nothing at first to her sister about her appointment with
him: the feelings with which she regarded Selina were not such as to
make it easy for her to talk over matters of conduct, as it were, with
this votary of pleasure at any price, or at any rate to report her
arrangements to her as one would do to a person of fine judgment. All
the same, as she had a horror of positively hiding anything (Selina
herself did that enough for two) it was her purpose to mention at
luncheon on the day of the event that she had agreed to accompany Mr.
Wendover to St. Paul's. It so happened however that Mrs. Berrington was
not at home at this repast; Laura partook of it in the company of Miss
Steet and her young charges. It very often happened now that the
sisters failed to meet in the morning, for Selina remained very late in
her room and there had been a considerable intermission of the girl's
earlier custom of visiting her there. It was Selina's habit to send
forth from this fragrant sanctuary little hieroglyphic notes in which
she expressed her wishes or gave her directions for the day. On the
morning I speak of her maid put into Laura's hand one of these
communications, which contained the words: 'Please be sure and replace
me with the children at lunch--I meant to give them that hour to-day.
But I have a frantic appeal from Lady Watermouth; she is worse and
beseeches me to come to her, so I rush for the 12.30 train.' These lines
required no answer and Laura had no questions to ask about Lady
Watermouth. She knew she was tiresomely ill, in exile, condemned to
forego the diversions of the season and calling out to her friends, in a
house she had taken for three months at Weybridge (for a certain
particular air) where Selina had already been to see her. Selina's
devotion to her appeared commendable--she had her so much on her mind.
Laura had observed in her sister in relation to other persons and
objects these sudden intensities of charity, and she had said to
herself, watching them--'Is it because she is bad?--does she want to
make up for it somehow and to buy herself off from the penalties?'

Mr. Wendover called for his _cicerone_ and they agreed to go in a
romantic, Bohemian manner (the young man was very docile and
appreciative about this), walking the short distance to the Victoria
station and taking the mysterious underground railway. In the carriage
she anticipated the inquiry that she figured to herself he presently
would make and said, laughing: 'No, no, this is very exceptional; if we
were both English--and both what we are, otherwise--we wouldn't do
this.'

'And if only one of us were English?'

'It would depend upon which one.'

'Well, say me.'

'Oh, in that case I certainly--on so short an acquaintance--would not go
sight-seeing with you.'

'Well, I am glad I'm American,' said Mr. Wendover, sitting opposite to
her.

'Yes, you may thank your fate. It's much simpler,' Laura added.

'Oh, you spoil it!' the young man exclaimed--a speech of which she took
no notice but which made her think him brighter, as they used to say at
home. He was brighter still after they had descended from the train at
the Temple station (they had meant to go on to Blackfriars, but they
jumped out on seeing the sign of the Temple, fired with the thought of
visiting that institution too) and got admission to the old garden of
the Benchers, which lies beside the foggy, crowded river, and looked at
the tombs of the crusaders in the low Romanesque church, with the
cross-legged figures sleeping so close to the eternal uproar, and
lingered in the flagged, homely courts of brick, with their
much-lettered door-posts, their dull old windows and atmosphere of
consultation--lingered to talk of Johnson and Goldsmith and to remark
how London opened one's eyes to Dickens; and he was brightest of all
when they stood in the high, bare cathedral, which suggested a dirty
whiteness, saying it was fine but wondering why it was not finer and
letting a glance as cold as the dusty, colourless glass fall upon
epitaphs that seemed to make most of the defunct bores even in death.
Mr. Wendover was decorous but he was increasingly gay, and these
qualities appeared in him in spite of the fact that St. Paul's was
rather a disappointment. Then they felt the advantage of having the
other place--the one Laura had had in mind at dinner--to fall back upon:
that perhaps would prove a compensation. They entered a hansom now (they
had to come to that, though they had walked also from the Temple to St.
Paul's) and drove to Lincoln's Inn Fields, Laura making the reflection
as they went that it was really a charm to roam about London under valid
protection--such a mixture of freedom and safety--and that perhaps she
had been unjust, ungenerous to her sister. A good-natured, positively
charitable doubt came into her mind--a doubt that Selina might have the
benefit of. What she liked in her present undertaking was the element of
the _imprévu_ that it contained, and perhaps it was simply the same
happy sense of getting the laws of London--once in a way--off her back
that had led Selina to go over to Paris to ramble about with Captain
Crispin. Possibly they had done nothing worse than go together to the
Invalides and Notre Dame; and if any one were to meet _her_ driving that
way, so far from home, with Mr. Wendover--Laura, mentally, did not
finish her sentence, overtaken as she was by the reflection that she had
fallen again into her old assumption (she had been in and out of it a
hundred times), that Mrs. Berrington _had_ met Captain Crispin--the idea
she so passionately repudiated. She at least would never deny that she
had spent the afternoon with Mr. Wendover: she would simply say that he
was an American and had brought a letter of introduction.

The cab stopped at the Soane Museum, which Laura Wing had always wanted
to see, a compatriot having once told her that it was one of the most
curious things in London and one of the least known. While Mr. Wendover
was discharging the vehicle she looked over the important old-fashioned
square (which led her to say to herself that London was endlessly big
and one would never know all the places that made it up) and saw a great
bank of cloud hanging above it--a definite portent of a summer storm.
'We are going to have thunder; you had better keep the cab,' she said;
upon which her companion told the man to wait, so that they should not
afterwards, in the wet, have to walk for another conveyance. The
heterogeneous objects collected by the late Sir John Soane are arranged
in a fine old dwelling-house, and the place gives one the impression of
a sort of Saturday afternoon of one's youth--a long, rummaging visit,
under indulgent care, to some eccentric and rather alarming old
travelled person. Our young friends wandered from room to room and
thought everything queer and some few objects interesting; Mr. Wendover
said it would be a very good place to find a thing you couldn't find
anywhere else--it illustrated the prudent virtue of keeping. They took
note of the sarcophagi and pagodas, the artless old maps and medals.
They admired the fine Hogarths; there were uncanny, unexpected objects
that Laura edged away from, that she would have preferred not to be in
the room with. They had been there half an hour--it had grown much
darker--when they heard a tremendous peal of thunder and became aware
that the storm had broken. They watched it a while from the upper
windows--a violent June shower, with quick sheets of lightning and a
rainfall that danced on the pavements. They took it sociably, they
lingered at the window, inhaling the odour of the fresh wet that
splashed over the sultry town. They would have to wait till it had
passed, and they resigned themselves serenely to this idea, repeating
very often that it would pass very soon. One of the keepers told them
that there were other rooms to see--that there were very interesting
things in the basement. They made their way down--it grew much darker
and they heard a great deal of thunder--and entered a part of the house
which presented itself to Laura as a series of dim, irregular
vaults--passages and little narrow avenues--encumbered with strange
vague things, obscured for the time but some of which had a wicked,
startling look, so that she wondered how the keepers could stay there.
'It's very fearful--it looks like a cave of idols!' she said to her
companion; and then she added--'Just look there--is that a person or a
thing?' As she spoke they drew nearer to the object of her reference--a
figure in the middle of a small vista of curiosities, a figure which
answered her question by uttering a short shriek as they approached. The
immediate cause of this cry was apparently a vivid flash of lightning,
which penetrated into the room and illuminated both Laura's face and
that of the mysterious person. Our young lady recognised her sister, as
Mrs. Berrington had evidently recognised her. 'Why, Selina!' broke from
her lips before she had time to check the words. At the same moment the
figure turned quickly away, and then Laura saw that it was accompanied
by another, that of a tall gentleman with a light beard which shone in
the dusk. The two persons retreated together--dodged out of sight, as it
were, disappearing in the gloom or in the labyrinth of the objects
exhibited. The whole encounter was but the business of an instant.

'Was it Mrs. Berrington?' Mr. Wendover asked with interest while Laura
stood staring.

'Oh no, I only thought it was at first,' she managed to reply, very
quickly. She had recognised the gentleman--he had the fine fair beard of
Captain Crispin--and her heart seemed to her to jump up and down. She
was glad her companion could not see her face, and yet she wanted to get
out, to rush up the stairs, where he would see it again, to escape from
the place. She wished not to be there with _them_--she was overwhelmed
with a sudden horror. 'She has lied--she has lied again--she has
lied!'--that was the rhythm to which her thought began to dance. She
took a few steps one way and then another: she was afraid of running
against the dreadful pair again. She remarked to her companion that it
was time they should go off, and then when he showed her the way back to
the staircase she pleaded that she had not half seen the things. She
pretended suddenly to a deep interest in them, and lingered there
roaming and prying about. She was flurried still more by the thought
that he would have seen her flurry, and she wondered whether he believed
the woman who had shrieked and rushed away was _not_ Selina. If she was
not Selina why had she shrieked? and if she was Selina what would Mr.
Wendover think of her behaviour, and of her own, and of the strange
accident of their meeting? What must she herself think of that? so
astonishing it was that in the immensity of London so infinitesimally
small a chance should have got itself enacted. What a queer place to
come to--for people like them! They would get away as soon as possible,
of that she could be sure; and she would wait a little to give them
time.

Mr. Wendover made no further remark--that was a relief; though his
silence itself seemed to show that he was mystified. They went upstairs
again and on reaching the door found to their surprise that their cab
had disappeared--a circumstance the more singular as the man had not
been paid. The rain was still coming down, though with less violence,
and the square had been cleared of vehicles by the sudden storm. The
doorkeeper, perceiving the dismay of our friends, explained that the cab
had been taken up by another lady and another gentleman who had gone out
a few minutes before; and when they inquired how he had been induced to
depart without the money they owed him the reply was that there
evidently had been a discussion (he hadn't heard it, but the lady seemed
in a fearful hurry) and the gentleman had told him that they would make
it all up to him and give him a lot more into the bargain. The
doorkeeper hazarded the candid surmise that the cabby would make ten
shillings by the job. But there were plenty more cabs; there would be
one up in a minute and the rain moreover was going to stop. 'Well, that
_is_ sharp practice!' said Mr. Wendover. He made no further allusion to
the identity of the lady.




IX


The rain did stop while they stood there, and a brace of hansoms was not
slow to appear. Laura told her companion that he must put her into
one--she could go home alone: she had taken up enough of his time. He
deprecated this course very respectfully; urged that he had it on his
conscience to deliver her at her own door; but she sprang into the cab
and closed the apron with a movement that was a sharp prohibition. She
wanted to get away from him--it would be too awkward, the long,
pottering drive back. Her hansom started off while Mr. Wendover, smiling
sadly, lifted his hat. It was not very comfortable, even without him;
especially as before she had gone a quarter of a mile she felt that her
action had been too marked--she wished she had let him come. His
puzzled, innocent air of wondering what was the matter annoyed her; and
she was in the absurd situation of being angry at a desistence which she
would have been still angrier if he had been guiltless of. It would have
comforted her (because it would seem to share her burden) and yet it
would have covered her with shame if he had guessed that what she saw
was wrong. It would not occur to him that there was a scandal so near
her, because he thought with no great promptitude of such things; and
yet, since there was--but since there was after all Laura scarcely knew
what attitude would sit upon him most gracefully. As to what he might be
prepared to suspect by having heard what Selina's reputation was in
London, of that Laura was unable to judge, not knowing what was said,
because of course it was not said to _her_. Lionel would undertake to
give her the benefit of this any moment she would allow him, but how in
the world could _he_ know either, for how could things be said to him?
Then, in the rattle of the hansom, passing through streets for which the
girl had no eyes, 'She has lied, she has lied, she has lied!' kept
repeating itself. Why had she written and signed that wanton falsehood
about her going down to Lady Watermouth? How could she have gone to Lady
Watermouth's when she was making so very different and so extraordinary
a use of the hours she had announced her intention of spending there?
What had been the need of that misrepresentation and why did she lie
before she was driven to it?

It was because she was false altogether and deception came out of her
with her breath; she was so depraved that it was easier to her to
fabricate than to let it alone. Laura would not have asked her to give
an account of her day, but she would ask her now. She shuddered at one
moment, as she found herself saying--even in silence--such things of her
sister, and the next she sat staring out of the front of the cab at the
stiff problem presented by Selina's turning up with the partner of her
guilt at the Soane Museum, of all places in the world. The girl shifted
this fact about in various ways, to account for it--not unconscious as
she did so that it was a pretty exercise of ingenuity for a nice girl.
Plainly, it was a rare accident: if it had been their plan to spend the
day together the Soane Museum had not been in the original programme.
They had been near it, they had been on foot and they had rushed in to
take refuge from the rain. But how did they come to be near it and above
all to be on foot? How could Selina do anything so reckless from her own
point of view as to walk about the town--even an out-of-the-way part of
it--with her suspected lover? Laura Wing felt the want of proper
knowledge to explain such anomalies. It was too little clear to her
where ladies went and how they proceeded when they consorted with
gentlemen in regard to their meetings with whom they had to lie. She
knew nothing of where Captain Crispin lived; very possibly--for she
vaguely remembered having heard Selina say of him that he was very
poor--he had chambers in that part of the town, and they were either
going to them or coming from them. If Selina had neglected to take her
way in a four-wheeler with the glasses up it was through some chance
that would not seem natural till it was explained, like that of their
having darted into a public institution. Then no doubt it would hang
together with the rest only too well. The explanation most exact would
probably be that the pair had snatched a walk together (in the course of
a day of many edifying episodes) for the 'lark' of it, and for the sake
of the walk had taken the risk, which in that part of London, so
detached from all gentility, had appeared to them small. The last thing
Selina could have expected was to meet her sister in such a strange
corner--her sister with a young man of her own!

She was dining out that night with both Selina and Lionel--a conjunction
that was rather rare. She was by no means always invited with them, and
Selina constantly went without her husband. Appearances, however,
sometimes got a sop thrown them; three or four times a month Lionel and
she entered the brougham together like people who still had forms, who
still said 'my dear.' This was to be one of those occasions, and Mrs.
Berrington's young unmarried sister was included in the invitation. When
Laura reached home she learned, on inquiry, that Selina had not yet come
in, and she went straight to her own room. If her sister had been there
she would have gone to hers instead--she would have cried out to her as
soon as she had closed the door: 'Oh, stop, stop--in God's name, stop
before you go any further, before exposure and ruin and shame come down
and bury us!' That was what was in the air--the vulgarest disgrace, and
the girl, harder now than ever about her sister, was conscious of a more
passionate desire to save herself. But Selina's absence made the
difference that during the next hour a certain chill fell upon this
impulse from other feelings: she found suddenly that she was late and
she began to dress. They were to go together after dinner to a couple of
balls; a diversion which struck her as ghastly for people who carried
such horrors in their breasts. Ghastly was the idea of the drive of
husband, wife and sister in pursuit of pleasure, with falsity and
detection and hate between them. Selina's maid came to her door to tell
her that she was in the carriage--an extraordinary piece of punctuality,
which made her wonder, as Selina was always dreadfully late for
everything. Laura went down as quickly as she could, passed through the
open door, where the servants were grouped in the foolish majesty of
their superfluous attendance, and through the file of dingy gazers who
had paused at the sight of the carpet across the pavement and the
waiting carriage, in which Selina sat in pure white splendour. Mrs.
Berrington had a tiara on her head and a proud patience in her face, as
if her sister were really a sore trial. As soon as the girl had taken
her place she said to the footman: 'Is Mr. Berrington there?'--to which
the man replied: 'No ma'am, not yet.' It was not new to Laura that if
there was any one later as a general thing than Selina it was Selina's
husband. 'Then he must take a hansom. Go on.' The footman mounted and
they rolled away.

There were several different things that had been present to Laura's
mind during the last couple of hours as destined to mark--one or the
other--this present encounter with her sister; but the words Selina
spoke the moment the brougham began to move were of course exactly those
she had not foreseen. She had considered that she might take this tone
or that tone or even no tone at all; she was quite prepared for her
presenting a face of blankness to any form of interrogation and saying,
'What on earth are you talking about?' It was in short conceivable to
her that Selina would deny absolutely that she had been in the museum,
that they had stood face to face and that she had fled in confusion. She
was capable of explaining the incident by an idiotic error on Laura's
part, by her having seized on another person, by her seeing Captain
Crispin in every bush; though doubtless she would be taxed (of course
she would say _that_ was the woman's own affair) to supply a reason for
the embarrassment of the other lady. But she was not prepared for
Selina's breaking out with: 'Will you be so good as to inform me if you
are engaged to be married to Mr. Wendover?'

'Engaged to him? I have seen him but three times.'

'And is that what you usually do with gentlemen you have seen three
times?'

'Are you talking about my having gone with him to see some sights? I see
nothing wrong in that. To begin with you see what he is. One might go
with him anywhere. Then he brought us an introduction--we have to do
something for him. Moreover you threw him upon me the moment he
came--you asked me to take charge of him.'

'I didn't ask you to be indecent! If Lionel were to know it he wouldn't
tolerate it, so long as you live with us.'

Laura was silent a moment. 'I shall not live with you long.' The
sisters, side by side, with their heads turned, looked at each other, a
deep crimson leaping into Laura's face. 'I wouldn't have believed
it--that you are so bad,' she said. 'You are horrible!' She saw that
Selina had not taken up the idea of denying--she judged that would be
hopeless: the recognition on either side had been too sharp. She looked
radiantly handsome, especially with the strange new expression that
Laura's last word brought into her eyes. This expression seemed to the
girl to show her more of Selina morally than she had ever yet
seen--something of the full extent and the miserable limit.

'It's different for a married woman, especially when she's married to a
cad. It's in a girl that such things are odious--scouring London with
strange men. I am not bound to explain to you--there would be too many
things to say. I have my reasons--I have my conscience. It was the
oddest of all things, our meeting in that place--I know that as well as
you,' Selina went on, with her wonderful affected clearness; 'but it was
not your finding me that was out of the way; it was my finding you--with
your remarkable escort! That was incredible. I pretended not to
recognise you, so that the gentleman who was with me shouldn't see you,
shouldn't know you. He questioned me and I repudiated you. You may thank
me for saving you! You had better wear a veil next time--one never knows
what may happen. I met an acquaintance at Lady Watermouth's and he came
up to town with me. He happened to talk about old prints; I told him how
I have collected them and we spoke of the bother one has about the
frames. He insisted on my going with him to that place--from
Waterloo--to see such an excellent model.'

Laura had turned her face to the window of the carriage again; they were
spinning along Park Lane, passing in the quick flash of other vehicles
an endless succession of ladies with 'dressed' heads, of gentlemen in
white neckties. 'Why, I thought your frames were all so pretty!' Laura
murmured. Then she added: 'I suppose it was your eagerness to save your
companion the shock of seeing me--in my dishonour--that led you to steal
our cab.'

'Your cab?'

'Your delicacy was expensive for you!'

'You don't mean you were knocking about in _cabs_ with him!' Selina
cried.

'Of course I know that you don't really think a word of what you say
about me,' Laura went on; 'though I don't know that that makes your
saying it a bit less unspeakably base.'

The brougham pulled up in Park Lane and Mrs. Berrington bent herself to
have a view through the front glass. 'We are there, but there are two
other carriages,' she remarked, for all answer. 'Ah, there are the
Collingwoods.'

'Where are you going--where are you going--where are you going?' Laura
broke out.

The carriage moved on, to set them down, and while the footman was
getting off the box Selina said: 'I don't pretend to be better than
other women, but you do!' And being on the side of the house she quickly
stepped out and carried her crowned brilliancy through the
long-lingering daylight and into the open portals.




X


What do you intend to do? You will grant that I have a right to ask you
that.'

'To do? I shall do as I have always done--not so badly, as it seems to
me.'

This colloquy took place in Mrs. Berrington's room, in the early morning
hours, after Selina's return from the entertainment to which reference
was last made. Her sister came home before her--she found herself
incapable of 'going on' when Selina quitted the house in Park Lane at
which they had dined. Mrs. Berrington had the night still before her,
and she stepped into her carriage with her usual air of graceful
resignation to a brilliant lot. She had taken the precaution, however,
to provide herself with a defence, against a little sister bristling
with righteousness, in the person of Mrs. Collingwood, to whom she
offered a lift, as they were bent upon the same business and Mr.
Collingwood had a use of his own for his brougham. The Collingwoods were
a happy pair who could discuss such a divergence before their friends
candidly, amicably, with a great many 'My loves' and 'Not for the
worlds.' Lionel Berrington disappeared after dinner, without holding any
communication with his wife, and Laura expected to find that he had
taken the carriage, to repay her in kind for her having driven off from
Grosvenor Place without him. But it was not new to the girl that he
really spared his wife more than she spared him; not so much perhaps
because he wouldn't do the 'nastiest' thing as because he couldn't.
Selina could always be nastier. There was ever a whimsicality in her
actions: if two or three hours before it had been her fancy to keep a
third person out of the carriage she had now her reasons for bringing
such a person in. Laura knew that she would not only pretend, but would
really believe, that her vindication of her conduct on their way to
dinner had been powerful and that she had won a brilliant victory. What
need, therefore, to thresh out further a subject that she had chopped
into atoms? Laura Wing, however, had needs of her own, and her remaining
in the carriage when the footman next opened the door was intimately
connected with them.

'I don't care to go in,' she said to her sister. 'If you will allow me
to be driven home and send back the carriage for you, that's what I
shall like best.'

Selina stared and Laura knew what she would have said if she could have
spoken her thought. 'Oh, you are furious that I haven't given you a
chance to fly at me again, and you must take it out in sulks!' These
were the ideas--ideas of 'fury' and sulks--into which Selina could
translate feelings that sprang from the pure depths of one's conscience.
Mrs. Collingwood protested--she said it was a shame that Laura shouldn't
go in and enjoy herself when she looked so lovely. 'Doesn't she look
lovely?' She appealed to Mrs. Berrington. 'Bless us, what's the use of
being pretty? Now, if she had _my_ face!'

'I think she looks rather cross,' said Selina, getting out with her
friend and leaving her sister to her own inventions. Laura had a vision,
as the carriage drove away again, of what her situation would have been,
or her peace of mind, if Selina and Lionel had been good, attached
people like the Collingwoods, and at the same time of the singularity of
a good woman's being ready to accept favours from a person as to whose
behaviour she had the lights that must have come to the lady in question
in regard to Selina. She accepted favours herself and she only wanted to
be good: that was oppressively true; but if she had not been Selina's
sister she would never drive in her carriage. That conviction was strong
in the girl as this vehicle conveyed her to Grosvenor Place; but it was
not in its nature consoling. The prevision of disgrace was now so vivid
to her that it seemed to her that if it had not already overtaken them
she had only to thank the loose, mysterious, rather ignoble tolerance of
people like Mrs. Collingwood. There were plenty of that species, even
among the good; perhaps indeed exposure and dishonour would begin only
when the bad had got hold of the facts. Would the bad be most horrified
and do most to spread the scandal? There were, in any event, plenty of
them too.

Laura sat up for her sister that night, with that nice question to help
her to torment herself--whether if she was hard and merciless in judging
Selina it would be with the bad too that she would associate herself.
Was she all wrong after all--was she cruel by being too rigid? Was Mrs.
Collingwood's attitude the right one and ought she only to propose to
herself to 'allow' more and more, and to allow ever, and to smooth
things down by gentleness, by sympathy, by not looking at them too hard?
It was not the first time that the just measure of things seemed to slip
from her hands as she became conscious of possible, or rather of very
actual, differences of standard and usage. On this occasion Geordie and
Ferdy asserted themselves, by the mere force of lying asleep upstairs in
their little cribs, as on the whole the proper measure. Laura went into
the nursery to look at them when she came home--it was her habit almost
any night--and yearned over them as mothers and maids do alike over the
pillow of rosy childhood. They were an antidote to all casuistry; for
Selina to forget _them_--that was the beginning and the end of shame.
She came back to the library, where she should best hear the sound of
her sister's return; the hours passed as she sat there, without bringing
round this event. Carriages came and went all night; the soft shock of
swift hoofs was on the wooden roadway long after the summer dawn grew
fair--till it was merged in the rumble of the awakening day. Lionel had
not come in when she returned, and he continued absent, to Laura's
satisfaction; for if she wanted not to miss Selina she had no desire at
present to have to tell her brother-in-law why she was sitting up. She
prayed Selina might arrive first: then she would have more time to think
of something that harassed her particularly--the question of whether she
ought to tell Lionel that she had seen her in a far-away corner of the
town with Captain Crispin. Almost impossible as she found it now to feel
any tenderness for her, she yet detested the idea of bearing witness
against her: notwithstanding which it appeared to her that she could
make up her mind to do this if there were a chance of its preventing the
last scandal--a catastrophe to which she saw her sister rushing
straight. That Selina was capable at a given moment of going off with
her lover, and capable of it precisely because it was the greatest
ineptitude as well as the greatest wickedness--there was a voice of
prophecy, of warning, to this effect in the silent, empty house. If
repeating to Lionel what she had seen would contribute to prevent
anything, or to stave off the danger, was it not her duty to denounce
his wife, flesh and blood of her own as she was, to his further
reprobation? This point was not intolerably difficult to determine, as
she sat there waiting, only because even what was righteous in that
reprobation could not present itself to her as fruitful or efficient.
What could Lionel frustrate, after all, and what intelligent or
authoritative step was he capable of taking? Mixed with all that now
haunted her was her consciousness of what his own absence at such an
hour represented in the way of the unedifying. He might be at some
sporting club or he might be anywhere else; at any rate he was not where
he ought to be at three o'clock in the morning. Such the husband such
the wife, she said to herself; and she felt that Selina would have a
kind of advantage, which she grudged her, if she should come in and say:
'And where is _he_, please--where is he, the exalted being on whose
behalf you have undertaken to preach so much better than he himself
practises?'

But still Selina failed to come in--even to take that advantage; yet in
proportion as her waiting was useless did the girl find it impossible to
go to bed. A new fear had seized her, the fear that she would never come
back at all--that they were already in the presence of the dreaded
catastrophe. This made her so nervous that she paced about the lower
rooms, listening to every sound, roaming till she was tired. She knew it
was absurd, the image of Selina taking flight in a ball-dress; but she
said to herself that she might very well have sent other clothes away,
in advance, somewhere (Laura had her own ripe views about the maid); and
at any rate, for herself, that was the fate she had to expect, if not
that night then some other one soon, and it was all the same: to sit
counting the hours till a hope was given up and a hideous certainty
remained. She had fallen into such a state of apprehension that when at
last she heard a carriage stop at the door she was almost happy, in
spite of her prevision of how disgusted her sister would be to find her.
They met in the hall--Laura went out as she heard the opening of the
door, Selina stopped short, seeing her, but said nothing--on account
apparently of the presence of the sleepy footman. Then she moved
straight to the stairs, where she paused again, asking the footman if
Mr. Berrington had come in.

'Not yet, ma'am,' the footman answered.

'Ah!' said Mrs. Berrington, dramatically, and ascended the stairs.

'I have sat up on purpose--I want particularly to speak to you,' Laura
remarked, following her.

'Ah!' Selina repeated, more superior still. She went fast, almost as if
she wished to get to her room before her sister could overtake her. But
the girl was close behind her, she passed into the room with her. Laura
closed the door; then she told her that she had found it impossible to
go to bed without asking her what she intended to do.

'Your behaviour is too monstrous!' Selina flashed out. 'What on earth do
you wish to make the servants suppose?'

'Oh, the servants--in _this_ house; as if one could put any idea into
their heads that is not there already!' Laura thought. But she said
nothing of this--she only repeated her question: aware that she was
exasperating to her sister but also aware that she could not be anything
else. Mrs. Berrington, whose maid, having outlived surprises, had gone
to rest, began to divest herself of some of her ornaments, and it was
not till after a moment, during which she stood before the glass, that
she made that answer about doing as she had always done. To this Laura
rejoined that she ought to put herself in her place enough to feel how
important it was to _her_ to know what was likely to happen, so that she
might take time by the forelock and think of her own situation. If
anything should happen she would infinitely rather be out of it--be as
far away as possible. Therefore she must take her measures.

It was in the mirror that they looked at each other--in the strange,
candle-lighted duplication of the scene that their eyes met. Selina drew
the diamonds out of her hair, and in this occupation, for a minute, she
was silent. Presently she asked: 'What are you talking about--what do
you allude to as happening?'

'Why, it seems to me that there is nothing left for you but to go away
with him. If there is a prospect of that insanity----' But here Laura
stopped; something so unexpected was taking place in Selina's
countenance--the movement that precedes a sudden gush of tears. Mrs.
Berrington dashed down the glittering pins she had detached from her
tresses, and the next moment she had flung herself into an armchair and
was weeping profusely, extravagantly. Laura forbore to go to her; she
made no motion to soothe or reassure her, she only stood and watched her
tears and wondered what they signified. Somehow even the slight
refreshment she felt at having affected her in that particular and, as
it had lately come to seem, improbable way did not suggest to her that
they were precious symptoms. Since she had come to disbelieve her word
so completely there was nothing precious about Selina any more. But she
continued for some moments to cry passionately, and while this lasted
Laura remained silent. At last from the midst of her sobs Selina broke
out, 'Go away, go away--leave me alone!'

'Of course I infuriate you,' said the girl; 'but how can I see you rush
to your ruin--to that of all of us--without holding on to you and
dragging you back?'

'Oh, you don't understand anything about anything!' Selina wailed, with
her beautiful hair tumbling all over her.

'I certainly don't understand how you can give such a tremendous handle
to Lionel.'

At the mention of her husband's name Selina always gave a bound, and she
sprang up now, shaking back her dense braids. 'I give him no handle and
you don't know what you are talking about! I know what I am doing and
what becomes me, and I don't care if I do. He is welcome to all the
handles in the world, for all that he can do with them!'

'In the name of common pity think of your children!' said Laura.

'Have I ever thought of anything else? Have you sat up all night to have
the pleasure of accusing me of cruelty? Are there sweeter or more
delightful children in the world, and isn't that a little my merit,
pray?' Selina went on, sweeping away her tears. 'Who has made them what
they are, pray?--is it their lovely father? Perhaps you'll say it's you!
Certainly you have been nice to them, but you must remember that you
only came here the other day. Isn't it only for them that I am trying to
keep myself alive?'

This formula struck Laura Wing as grotesque, so that she replied with a
laugh which betrayed too much her impression, 'Die for them--that would
be better!'

Her sister, at this, looked at her with an extraordinary cold gravity.
'Don't interfere between me and my children. And for God's sake cease to
harry me!'

Laura turned away: she said to herself that, given that intensity of
silliness, of course the worst would come. She felt sick and helpless,
and, practically, she had got the certitude she both wanted and dreaded.
'I don't know what has become of your mind,' she murmured; and she went
to the door. But before she reached it Selina had flung herself upon her
in one of her strange but, as she felt, really not encouraging
revulsions. Her arms were about her, she clung to her, she covered
Laura with the tears that had again begun to flow. She besought her to
save her, to stay with her, to help her against herself, against _him_,
against Lionel, against everything--to forgive her also all the horrid
things she had said to her. Mrs. Berrington melted, liquefied, and the
room was deluged with her repentance, her desolation, her confession,
her promises and the articles of apparel which were detached from her by
the high tide of her agitation. Laura remained with her for an hour, and
before they separated the culpable woman had taken a tremendous
vow--kneeling before her sister with her head in her lap--never again,
as long as she lived, to consent to see Captain Crispin or to address a
word to him, spoken or written. The girl went terribly tired to bed.

A month afterwards she lunched with Lady Davenant, whom she had not seen
since the day she took Mr. Wendover to call upon her. The old woman had
found herself obliged to entertain a small company, and as she disliked
set parties she sent Laura a request for sympathy and assistance. She
had disencumbered herself, at the end of so many years, of the burden of
hospitality; but every now and then she invited people, in order to
prove that she was not too old. Laura suspected her of choosing stupid
ones on purpose to prove it better--to show that she could submit not
only to the extraordinary but, what was much more difficult, to the
usual. But when they had been properly fed she encouraged them to
disperse; on this occasion as the party broke up Laura was the only
person she asked to stay. She wished to know in the first place why she
had not been to see her for so long, and in the second how that young
man had behaved--the one she had brought that Sunday. Lady Davenant
didn't remember his name, though he had been so good-natured, as she
said, since then, as to leave a card. If he had behaved well that was a
very good reason for the girl's neglect and Laura need give no other.
Laura herself would not have behaved well if at such a time she had been
running after old women. There was nothing, in general, that the girl
liked less than being spoken of, off-hand, as a marriageable
article--being planned and arranged for in this particular. It made too
light of her independence, and though in general such inventions passed
for benevolence they had always seemed to her to contain at bottom an
impertinence--as if people could be moved about like a game of chequers.
There was a liberty in the way Lady Davenant's imagination disposed of
her (with such an _insouciance_ of her own preferences), but she forgave
that, because after all this old friend was not obliged to think of her
at all.

'I knew that you were almost always out of town now, on Sundays--and so
have we been,' Laura said. 'And then I have been a great deal with my
sister--more than before.'

'More than before what?'

'Well, a kind of estrangement we had, about a certain matter.'

'And now you have made it all up?'

'Well, we have been able to talk of it (we couldn't before--without
painful scenes), and that has cleared the air. We have gone about
together a good deal,' Laura went on. 'She has wanted me constantly with
her.'

'That's very nice. And where has she taken you?' asked the old lady.

'Oh, it's I who have taken her, rather.' And Laura hesitated.

'Where do you mean?--to say her prayers?'

'Well, to some concerts--and to the National Gallery.'

Lady Davenant laughed, disrespectfully, at this, and the girl watched
her with a mournful face. 'My dear child, you are too delightful! You
are trying to reform her? by Beethoven and Bach, by Rubens and Titian?'

'She is very intelligent, about music and pictures--she has excellent
ideas,' said Laura.

'And you have been trying to draw them out? that is very commendable.'

'I think you are laughing at me, but I don't care,' the girl declared,
smiling faintly.

'Because you have a consciousness of success?--in what do they call
it?--the attempt to raise her tone? You have been trying to wind her up,
and you _have_ raised her tone?'

'Oh, Lady Davenant, I don't know and I don't understand!' Laura broke
out. 'I don't understand anything any more--I have given up trying.'

'That's what I recommended you to do last winter. Don't you remember
that day at Plash?'

'You told me to let her go,' said Laura.

'And evidently you haven't taken my advice.'

'How can I--how can I?'

'Of course, how can you? And meanwhile if she doesn't go it's so much
gained. But even if she should, won't that nice young man remain?' Lady
Davenant inquired. 'I hope very much Selina hasn't taken you altogether
away from him.'

Laura was silent a moment; then she returned: 'What nice young man would
ever look at me, if anything bad should happen?'

'I would never look at _him_ if he should let that prevent him!' the old
woman cried. 'It isn't for your sister he loves you, I suppose; is it?'

'He doesn't love me at all.'

'Ah, then he does?' Lady Davenant demanded, with some eagerness, laying
her hand on the girl's arm. Laura sat near her on her sofa and looked at
her, for all answer to this, with an expression of which the sadness
appeared to strike the old woman freshly. 'Doesn't he come to the
house--doesn't he say anything?' she continued, with a voice of
kindness.

'He comes to the house--very often.'

'And don't you like him?'

'Yes, very much--more than I did at first.'

'Well, as you liked him at first well enough to bring him straight to
see me, I suppose that means that now you are immensely pleased with
him.'

'He's a gentleman,' said Laura.

'So he seems to me. But why then doesn't he speak out?'

'Perhaps that's the very reason! Seriously,' the girl added, 'I don't
know what he comes to the house for.'

'Is he in love with your sister?'

'I sometimes think so.'

'And does she encourage him?'

'She detests him.'

'Oh, then, I like him! I shall immediately write to him to come and see
me: I shall appoint an hour and give him a piece of my mind.'

'If I believed that, I should kill myself,' said Laura.

'You may believe what you like; but I wish you didn't show your feelings
so in your eyes. They might be those of a poor widow with fifteen
children. When I was young I managed to be happy, whatever occurred; and
I am sure I looked so.'

'Oh yes, Lady Davenant--for you it was different. You were safe, in so
many ways,' Laura said. 'And you were surrounded with consideration.'

'I don't know; some of us were very wild, and exceedingly ill thought
of, and I didn't cry about it. However, there are natures and natures.
If you will come and stay with me to-morrow I will take you in.'

'You know how kind I think you, but I have promised Selina not to leave
her.'

'Well, then, if she keeps you she must at least go straight!' cried the
old woman, with some asperity. Laura made no answer to this and Lady
Davenant asked, after a moment: 'And what is Lionel doing?'

'I don't know--he is very quiet.'

'Doesn't it please him--his wife's improvement?' The girl got up;
apparently she was made uncomfortable by the ironical effect, if not by
the ironical intention, of this question. Her old friend was kind but
she was penetrating; her very next words pierced further. 'Of course if
you are really protecting her I can't count upon you': a remark not
adapted to enliven Laura, who would have liked immensely to transfer
herself to Queen's Gate and had her very private ideas as to the
efficacy of her protection. Lady Davenant kissed her and then suddenly
said--'Oh, by the way, his address; you must tell me that.'

'His address?'

'The young man's whom you brought here. But it's no matter,' the old
woman added; 'the butler will have entered it--from his card.'

'Lady Davenant, you won't do anything so loathsome!' the girl cried,
seizing her hand.

'Why is it loathsome, if he comes so often? It's rubbish, his caring for
Selina--a married woman--when you are there.'

'Why is it rubbish--when so many other people do?'

'Oh, well, he is different--I could see that; or if he isn't he ought to
be!'

'He likes to observe--he came here to take notes,' said the girl. 'And
he thinks Selina a very interesting London specimen.'

'In spite of her dislike of him?'

'Oh, he doesn't know that!' Laura exclaimed.

'Why not? he isn't a fool.'

'Oh, I have made it seem----' But here Laura stopped; her colour had
risen.

Lady Davenant stared an instant. 'Made it seem that she inclines to him?
Mercy, to do that how fond of him you must be!' An observation which had
the effect of driving the girl straight out of the house.




XI


On one of the last days of June Mrs. Berrington showed her sister a note
she had received from 'your dear friend,' as she called him, Mr.
Wendover. This was the manner in which she usually designated him, but
she had naturally, in the present phase of her relations with Laura,
never indulged in any renewal of the eminently perverse insinuations by
means of which she had attempted, after the incident at the Soane
Museum, to throw dust in her eyes. Mr. Wendover proposed to Mrs.
Berrington that she and her sister should honour with their presence a
box he had obtained for the opera three nights later--an occasion of
high curiosity, the first appearance of a young American singer of whom
considerable things were expected. Laura left it to Selina to decide
whether they should accept this invitation, and Selina proved to be of
two or three differing minds. First she said it wouldn't be convenient
to her to go, and she wrote to the young man to this effect. Then, on
second thoughts, she considered she might very well go, and telegraphed
an acceptance. Later she saw reason to regret her acceptance and
communicated this circumstance to her sister, who remarked that it was
still not too late to change. Selina left her in ignorance till the
next day as to whether she had retracted; then she told her that she had
let the matter stand--they would go. To this Laura replied that she was
glad--for Mr. Wendover. 'And for yourself,' Selina said, leaving the
girl to wonder why every one (this universality was represented by Mrs.
Lionel Berrington and Lady Davenant) had taken up the idea that she
entertained a passion for her compatriot. She was clearly conscious that
this was not the case; though she was glad her esteem for him had not
yet suffered the disturbance of her seeing reason to believe that Lady
Davenant had already meddled, according to her terrible threat. Laura
was surprised to learn afterwards that Selina had, in London parlance,
'thrown over' a dinner in order to make the evening at the opera fit in.
The dinner would have made her too late, and she didn't care about it:
she wanted to hear the whole opera.

The sisters dined together alone, without any question of Lionel, and on
alighting at Covent Garden found Mr. Wendover awaiting them in the
portico. His box proved commodious and comfortable, and Selina was
gracious to him: she thanked him for his consideration in not stuffing
it full of people. He assured her that he expected but one other
inmate--a gentleman of a shrinking disposition, who would take up no
room. The gentleman came in after the first act; he was introduced to
the ladies as Mr. Booker, of Baltimore. He knew a great deal about the
young lady they had come to listen to, and he was not so shrinking but
that he attempted to impart a portion of his knowledge even while she
was singing. Before the second act was over Laura perceived Lady
Ringrose in a box on the other side of the house, accompanied by a lady
unknown to her. There was apparently another person in the box, behind
the two ladies, whom they turned round from time to time to talk with.
Laura made no observation about Lady Ringrose to her sister, and she
noticed that Selina never resorted to the glass to look at her. That
Mrs. Berrington had not failed to see her, however, was proved by the
fact that at the end of the second act (the opera was Meyerbeer's
_Huguenots_) she suddenly said, turning to Mr. Wendover: 'I hope you
won't mind very much if I go for a short time to sit with a friend on
the other side of the house.' She smiled with all her sweetness as she
announced this intention, and had the benefit of the fact that an
apologetic expression is highly becoming to a pretty woman. But she
abstained from looking at her sister, and the latter, after a wondering
glance at her, looked at Mr. Wendover. She saw that he was
disappointed--even slightly wounded: he had taken some trouble to get
his box and it had been no small pleasure to him to see it graced by the
presence of a celebrated beauty. Now his situation collapsed if the
celebrated beauty were going to transfer her light to another quarter.
Laura was unable to imagine what had come into her sister's head--to
make her so inconsiderate, so rude. Selina tried to perform her act of
defection in a soothing, conciliating way, so far as appealing eyebeams
went; but she gave no particular reason for her escapade, withheld the
name of the friends in question and betrayed no consciousness that it
was not usual for ladies to roam about the lobbies. Laura asked her no
question, but she said to her, after an hesitation: 'You won't be long,
surely. You know you oughtn't to leave me here.' Selina took no notice
of this--excused herself in no way to the girl. Mr. Wendover only
exclaimed, smiling in reference to Laura's last remark: 'Oh, so far as
leaving you here goes----!' In spite of his great defect (and it was his
only one, that she could see) of having only an ascending scale of
seriousness, she judged him interestedly enough to feel a real pleasure
in noticing that though he was annoyed at Selina's going away and not
saying that she would come back soon, he conducted himself as a
gentleman should, submitted respectfully, gallantly, to her wish. He
suggested that her friends might perhaps, instead, be induced to come to
his box, but when she had objected, 'Oh, you see, there are too many,'
he put her shawl on her shoulders, opened the box, offered her his arm.
While this was going on Laura saw Lady Ringrose studying them with her
glass. Selina refused Mr. Wendover's arm; she said, 'Oh no, you stay
with _her_--I daresay _he'll_ take me:' and she gazed inspiringly at Mr.
Booker. Selina never mentioned a name when the pronoun would do. Mr.
Booker of course sprang to the service required and led her away, with
an injunction from his friend to bring her back promptly. As they went
off Laura heard Selina say to her companion--and she knew Mr. Wendover
could also hear it--'Nothing would have induced me to leave her alone
with _you_!' She thought this a very extraordinary speech--she thought
it even vulgar; especially considering that she had never seen the
young man till half an hour before and since then had not exchanged
twenty words with him. It came to their ears so distinctly that Laura
was moved to notice it by exclaiming, with a laugh: 'Poor Mr. Booker,
what does she suppose I would do to him?'

'Oh, it's for you she's afraid,' said Mr. Wendover.

Laura went on, after a moment: 'She oughtn't to have left me alone with
you, either.'

'Oh yes, she ought--after all!' the young man returned.

The girl had uttered these words from no desire to say something
flirtatious, but because they simply expressed a part of the judgment
she passed, mentally, on Selina's behaviour. She had a sense of
wrong--of being made light of; for Mrs. Berrington certainly knew that
honourable women didn't (for the appearance of the thing) arrange to
leave their unmarried sister sitting alone, publicly, at the playhouse,
with a couple of young men--the couple that there would be as soon as
Mr. Booker should come back. It displeased her that the people in the
opposite box, the people Selina had joined, should see her exhibited in
this light. She drew the curtain of the box a little, she moved a little
more behind it, and she heard her companion utter a vague appealing,
protecting sigh, which seemed to express his sense (her own corresponded
with it) that the glory of the occasion had somehow suddenly departed.
At the end of some minutes she perceived among Lady Ringrose and her
companions a movement which appeared to denote that Selina had come in.
The two ladies in front turned round--something went on at the back of
the box. 'She's there,' Laura said, indicating the place; but Mrs.
Berrington did not show herself--she remained masked by the others.
Neither was Mr. Booker visible; he had not, seemingly, been persuaded to
remain, and indeed Laura could see that there would not have been room
for him. Mr. Wendover observed, ruefully, that as Mrs. Berrington
evidently could see nothing at all from where she had gone she had
exchanged a very good place for a very bad one. 'I can't imagine--I
can't imagine----' said the girl; but she paused, losing herself in
reflections and wonderments, in conjectures that soon became anxieties.
Suspicion of Selina was now so rooted in her heart that it could make
her unhappy even when it pointed nowhere, and by the end of half an hour
she felt how little her fears had really been lulled since that scene of
dishevelment and contrition in the early dawn.

The opera resumed its course, but Mr. Booker did not come back. The
American singer trilled and warbled, executed remarkable flights, and
there was much applause, every symptom of success; but Laura became more
and more unaware of the music--she had no eyes but for Lady Ringrose and
her friend. She watched them earnestly--she tried to sound with her
glass the curtained dimness behind them. Their attention was all for the
stage and they gave no present sign of having any fellow-listeners.
These others had either gone away or were leaving them very much to
themselves. Laura was unable to guess any particular motive on her
sister's part, but the conviction grew within her that she had not put
such an affront on Mr. Wendover simply in order to have a little chat
with Lady Ringrose. There was something else, there was some one else,
in the affair; and when once the girl's idea had become as definite as
that it took but little longer to associate itself with the image of
Captain Crispin. This image made her draw back further behind her
curtain, because it brought the blood to her face; and if she coloured
for shame she coloured also for anger. Captain Crispin was there, in the
opposite box; those horrible women concealed him (she forgot how
harmless and well-read Lady Ringrose had appeared to her that time at
Mellows); they had lent themselves to this abominable proceeding. Selina
was nestling there in safety with him, by their favour, and she had had
the baseness to lay an honest girl, the most loyal, the most unselfish
of sisters, under contribution to the same end. Laura crimsoned with the
sense that she had been, unsuspectingly, part of a scheme, that she was
being used as the two women opposite were used, but that she had been
outraged into the bargain, inasmuch as she was not, like them, a
conscious accomplice and not a person to be given away in that manner
before hundreds of people. It came back to her how bad Selina had been
the day of the business in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and how in spite of
intervening comedies the woman who had then found such words of injury
would be sure to break out in a new spot with a new weapon. Accordingly,
while the pure music filled the place and the rich picture of the stage
glowed beneath it, Laura found herself face to face with the strange
inference that the evil of Selina's nature made her wish--since she had
given herself to it--to bring her sister to her own colour by putting an
appearance of 'fastness' upon her. The girl said to herself that she
would have succeeded, in the cynical view of London; and to her troubled
spirit the immense theatre had a myriad eyes, eyes that she knew, eyes
that would know her, that would see her sitting there with a strange
young man. She had recognised many faces already and her imagination
quickly multiplied them. However, after she had burned a while with this
particular revolt she ceased to think of herself and of what, as
regarded herself, Selina had intended: all her thought went to the mere
calculation of Mrs. Berrington's return. As she did not return, and
still did not, Laura felt a sharp constriction of the heart. She knew
not what she feared--she knew not what she supposed. She was so nervous
(as she had been the night she waited, till morning, for her sister to
re-enter the house in Grosvenor Place) that when Mr. Wendover
occasionally made a remark to her she failed to understand him, was
unable to answer him. Fortunately he made very few; he was
preoccupied--either wondering also what Selina was 'up to' or, more
probably, simply absorbed in the music. What she _had_ comprehended,
however, was that when at three different moments she had said,
restlessly, 'Why doesn't Mr. Booker come back?' he replied, 'Oh, there's
plenty of time--we are very comfortable.' These words she was conscious
of; she particularly noted them and they interwove themselves with her
restlessness. She also noted, in her tension, that after her third
inquiry Mr. Wendover said something about looking up his friend, if she
didn't mind being left alone a moment. He quitted the box and during
this interval Laura tried more than ever to see with her glass what had
become of her sister. But it was as if the ladies opposite had arranged
themselves, had arranged their curtains, on purpose to frustrate such an
attempt: it was impossible to her even to assure herself of what she had
begun to suspect, that Selina was now not with them. If she was not with
them where in the world had she gone? As the moments elapsed, before Mr.
Wendover's return, she went to the door of the box and stood watching
the lobby, for the chance that he would bring back the absentee.
Presently she saw him coming alone, and something in the expression of
his face made her step out into the lobby to meet him. He was smiling,
but he looked embarrassed and strange, especially when he saw her
standing there as if she wished to leave the place.

'I hope you don't want to go,' he said, holding the door for her to pass
back into the box.

'Where are they--where are they?' she demanded, remaining in the
corridor.

'I saw our friend--he has found a place in the stalls, near the door by
which you go into them--just here under us.'

'And does he like that better?'

Mr. Wendover's smile became perfunctory as he looked down at her. 'Mrs.
Berrington has made such an amusing request of him.'

'An amusing request?'

'She made him promise not to come back.'

'Made him promise----?' Laura stared.

'She asked him--as a particular favour to her--not to join us again. And
he said he wouldn't.'

'Ah, the monster!' Laura exclaimed, blushing crimson.

'Do you mean poor Mr. Booker?' Mr. Wendover asked. 'Of course he had to
assure her that the wish of so lovely a lady was law. But he doesn't
understand!' laughed the young man.

'No more do I. And where is the lovely lady?' said Laura, trying to
recover herself.

'He hasn't the least idea.'

'Isn't she with Lady Ringrose?'

'If you like I will go and see.'

Laura hesitated, looking down the curved lobby, where there was nothing
to see but the little numbered doors of the boxes. They were alone in
the lamplit bareness; the _finale_ of the act was ringing and booming
behind them. In a moment she said: 'I'm afraid I must trouble you to put
me into a cab.'

'Ah, you won't see the rest? _Do_ stay--what difference does it make?'
And her companion still held open the door of the box. Her eyes met his,
in which it seemed to her that as well as in his voice there was
conscious sympathy, entreaty, vindication, tenderness. Then she gazed
into the vulgar corridor again; something said to her that if she should
return she would be taking the most important step of her life. She
considered this, and while she did so a great burst of applause filled
the place as the curtain fell. 'See what we are losing! And the last act
is so fine,' said Mr. Wendover. She returned to her seat and he closed
the door of the box behind them.

Then, in this little upholstered receptacle which was so public and yet
so private, Laura Wing passed through the strangest moments she had
known. An indication of their strangeness is that when she presently
perceived that while she was in the lobby Lady Ringrose and her
companion had quite disappeared, she observed the circumstance without
an exclamation, holding herself silent. Their box was empty, but Laura
looked at it without in the least feeling this to be a sign that Selina
would now come round. She would never come round again, nor would she
have gone home from the opera. That was by this time absolutely definite
to the girl, who had first been hot and now was cold with the sense of
what Selina's injunction to poor Mr. Booker exactly meant. It was worthy
of her, for it was simply a vicious little kick as she took her flight.
Grosvenor Place would not shelter her that night and would never shelter
her more: that was the reason she tried to spatter her sister with the
mud into which she herself had jumped. She would not have dared to treat
her in such a fashion if they had had a prospect of meeting again. The
strangest part of this remarkable juncture was that what ministered most
to our young lady's suppressed emotion was not the tremendous reflection
that this time Selina had really 'bolted' and that on the morrow all
London would know it: all that had taken the glare of certainty (and a
very hideous hue it was), whereas the chill that had fallen upon the
girl now was that of a mystery which waited to be cleared up. Her heart
was full of suspense--suspense of which she returned the pressure,
trying to twist it into expectation. There was a certain chance in life
that sat there beside her, but it would go for ever if it should not
move nearer that night; and she listened, she watched, for it to move. I
need not inform the reader that this chance presented itself in the
person of Mr. Wendover, who more than any one she knew had it in his
hand to transmute her detestable position. To-morrow he would know, and
would think sufficiently little of a young person of _that_ breed:
therefore it could only be a question of his speaking on the spot. That
was what she had come back into the box for--to give him his
opportunity. It was open to her to think he had asked for it--adding
everything together.

The poor girl added, added, deep in her heart, while she said nothing.
The music was not there now, to keep them silent; yet he remained quiet,
even as she did, and that for some minutes was a part of her addition.
She felt as if she were running a race with failure and shame; she would
get in first if she should get in before the degradation of the morrow.
But this was not very far off, and every minute brought it nearer. It
would be there in fact, virtually, that night, if Mr. Wendover should
begin to realise the brutality of Selina's not turning up at all. The
comfort had been, hitherto, that he didn't realise brutalities. There
were certain violins that emitted tentative sounds in the orchestra;
they shortened the time and made her uneasier--fixed her idea that he
could lift her out of her mire if he would. It didn't appear to prove
that he would, his also observing Lady Ringrose's empty box without
making an encouraging comment upon it. Laura waited for him to remark
that her sister obviously would turn up now; but no such words fell from
his lips. He must either like Selina's being away or judge it damningly,
and in either case why didn't he speak? If he had nothing to say, why
_had_ he said, why had he done, what did he mean----? But the girl's
inward challenge to him lost itself in a mist of faintness; she was
screwing herself up to a purpose of her own, and it hurt almost to
anguish, and the whole place, around her, was a blur and swim, through
which she heard the tuning of fiddles. Before she knew it she had said
to him, 'Why have you come so often?'

'So often? To see you, do you mean?'

'To see _me_--it was for that? Why have you come?' she went on. He was
evidently surprised, and his surprise gave her a point of anger, a
desire almost that her words should hurt him, lash him. She spoke low,
but she heard herself, and she thought that if what she said sounded to
_him_ in the same way----! 'You have come very often--too often, too
often!'

He coloured, he looked frightened, he was, clearly, extremely startled.
'Why, you have been so kind, so delightful,' he stammered.

'Yes, of course, and so have you! Did you come for Selina? She is
married, you know, and devoted to her husband.' A single minute had
sufficed to show the girl that her companion was quite unprepared for
her question, that he was distinctly not in love with her and was face
to face with a situation entirely new. The effect of this perception was
to make her say wilder things.

'Why, what is more natural, when one likes people, than to come often?
Perhaps I have bored you--with our American way,' said Mr. Wendover.

'And is it because you like me that you have kept me here?' Laura asked.
She got up, leaning against the side of the box; she had pulled the
curtain far forward and was out of sight of the house.

He rose, but more slowly; he had got over his first confusion. He
smiled at her, but his smile was dreadful. 'Can you have any doubt as to
what I have come for? It's a pleasure to me that you have liked me well
enough to ask.'

For an instant she thought he was coming nearer to her, but he didn't:
he stood there twirling his gloves. Then an unspeakable shame and
horror--horror of herself, of him, of everything--came over her, and she
sank into a chair at the back of the box, with averted eyes, trying to
get further into her corner. 'Leave me, leave me, go away!' she said, in
the lowest tone that he could hear. The whole house seemed to her to be
listening to her, pressing into the box.

'Leave you alone--in this place--when I love you? I can't do
that--indeed I can't.'

'You don't love me--and you torture me by staying!' Laura went on, in a
convulsed voice. 'For God's sake go away and don't speak to me, don't
let me see you or hear of you again!'

Mr. Wendover still stood there, exceedingly agitated, as well he might
be, by this inconceivable scene. Unaccustomed feelings possessed him and
they moved him in different directions. Her command that he should take
himself off was passionate, yet he attempted to resist, to speak. How
would she get home--would she see him to-morrow--would she let him wait
for her outside? To this Laura only replied: 'Oh dear, oh dear, if you
would only go!' and at the same instant she sprang up, gathering her
cloak around her as if to escape from him, to rush away herself. He
checked this movement, however, clapping on his hat and holding the
door. One moment more he looked at her--her own eyes were closed; then
he exclaimed, pitifully, 'Oh Miss Wing, oh Miss Wing!' and stepped out
of the box.

When he had gone she collapsed into one of the chairs again and sat
there with her face buried in a fold of her mantle. For many minutes she
was perfectly still--she was ashamed even to move. The one thing that
could have justified her, blown away the dishonour of her monstrous
overture, would have been, on his side, the quick response of
unmistakable passion. It had not come, and she had nothing left but to
loathe herself. She did so, violently, for a long time, in the dark
corner of the box, and she felt that he loathed her too. 'I love
you!'--how pitifully the poor little make-believe words had quavered out
and how much disgust they must have represented! 'Poor man--poor man!'
Laura Wing suddenly found herself murmuring: compassion filled her mind
at the sense of the way she had used him. At the same moment a flare of
music broke out: the last act of the opera had begun and she had sprung
up and quitted the box.

The passages were empty and she made her way without trouble. She
descended to the vestibule; there was no one to stare at her and her
only fear was that Mr. Wendover would be there. But he was not,
apparently, and she saw that she should be able to go away quickly.
Selina would have taken the carriage--she could be sure of that; or if
she hadn't it wouldn't have come back yet; besides, she couldn't
possibly wait there so long as while it was called. She was in the act
of asking one of the attendants, in the portico, to get her a cab, when
some one hurried up to her from behind, overtaking her--a gentleman in
whom, turning round, she recognised Mr. Booker. He looked almost as
bewildered as Mr. Wendover, and his appearance disconcerted her almost
as much as that of his friend would have done. 'Oh, are you going away,
alone? What must you think of me?' this young man exclaimed; and he
began to tell her something about her sister and to ask her at the same
time if he might not go with her--help her in some way. He made no
inquiry about Mr. Wendover, and she afterwards judged that that
distracted gentleman had sought him out and sent him to her assistance;
also that he himself was at that moment watching them from behind some
column. He would have been hateful if he had shown himself; yet (in this
later meditation) there was a voice in her heart which commended his
delicacy. He effaced himself to look after her--he provided for her
departure by proxy.

'A cab, a cab--that's all I want!' she said to Mr. Booker; and she
almost pushed him out of the place with the wave of the hand with which
she indicated her need. He rushed off to call one, and a minute
afterwards the messenger whom she had already despatched rattled up in a
hansom. She quickly got into it, and as she rolled away she saw Mr.
Booker returning in all haste with another. She gave a passionate
moan--this common confusion seemed to add a grotesqueness to her
predicament.




XII


The next day, at five o'clock, she drove to Queen's Gate, turning to
Lady Davenant in her distress in order to turn somewhere. Her old friend
was at home and by extreme good fortune alone; looking up from her book,
in her place by the window, she gave the girl as she came in a sharp
glance over her glasses. This glance was acquisitive; she said nothing,
but laying down her book stretched out her two gloved hands. Laura took
them and she drew her down toward her, so that the girl sunk on her
knees and in a moment hid her face, sobbing, in the old woman's lap.
There was nothing said for some time: Lady Davenant only pressed her
tenderly--stroked her with her hands. 'Is it very bad?' she asked at
last. Then Laura got up, saying as she took a seat, 'Have you heard of
it and do people know it?'

'I haven't heard anything. Is it very bad?' Lady Davenant repeated.

'We don't know where Selina is--and her maid's gone.'

Lady Davenant looked at her visitor a moment. 'Lord, what an ass!' she
then ejaculated, putting the paper-knife into her book to keep her
place. 'And whom has she persuaded to take her--Charles Crispin?' she
added.

'We suppose--we suppose----' said Laura.

'And he's another,' interrupted the old woman. 'And who
supposes--Geordie and Ferdy?'

'I don't know; it's all black darkness!'

'My dear, it's a blessing, and now you can live in peace.'

'In peace!' cried Laura; 'with my wretched sister leading such a life?'

'Oh, my dear, I daresay it will be very comfortable; I am sorry to say
anything in favour of such doings, but it very often is. Don't worry;
you take her too hard. Has she gone abroad?' the old lady continued. 'I
daresay she has gone to some pretty, amusing place.'

'I don't know anything about it. I only know she is gone. I was with her
last evening and she left me without a word.'

'Well, that was better. I hate 'em when they make parting scenes: it's
too mawkish!'

'Lionel has people watching them,' said the girl; 'agents, detectives, I
don't know what. He has had them for a long time; I didn't know it.'

'Do you mean you would have told her if you had? What is the use of
detectives now? Isn't he rid of her?'

'Oh, I don't know, he's as bad as she; he talks too horribly--he wants
every one to know it,' Laura groaned.

'And has he told his mother?'

'I suppose so: he rushed off to see her at noon. She'll be overwhelmed.'

'Overwhelmed? Not a bit of it!' cried Lady Davenant, almost gaily.
'When did anything in the world overwhelm her and what do you take her
for? She'll only make some delightful odd speech. As for people knowing
it,' she added, 'they'll know it whether he wants them or not. My poor
child, how long do you expect to make believe?'

'Lionel expects some news to-night,' Laura said. 'As soon as I know
where she is I shall start.'

'Start for where?'

'To go to her--to do something.'

'Something preposterous, my dear. Do you expect to bring her back?'

'He won't take her in,' said Laura, with her dried, dismal eyes. 'He
wants his divorce--it's too hideous!'

'Well, as she wants hers what is simpler?'

'Yes, she wants hers. Lionel swears by all the gods she can't get it.'

'Bless me, won't one do?' Lady Davenant asked. 'We shall have some
pretty reading.'

'It's awful, awful, awful!' murmured Laura.

'Yes, they oughtn't to be allowed to publish them. I wonder if we
couldn't stop that. At any rate he had better be quiet: tell him to come
and see me.'

'You won't influence him; he's dreadful against her. Such a house as it
is to-day!'

'Well, my dear, naturally.'

'Yes, but it's terrible for me: it's all more sickening than I can
bear.'

'My dear child, come and stay with me,' said the old woman, gently.

'Oh, I can't desert her; I can't abandon her!'

'Desert--abandon? What a way to put it! Hasn't she abandoned you?'

'She has no heart--she's too base!' said the girl. Her face was white
and the tears now began to rise to her eyes again.

Lady Davenant got up and came and sat on the sofa beside her: she put
her arms round her and the two women embraced. 'Your room is all ready,'
the old lady remarked. And then she said, 'When did she leave you? When
did you see her last?'

'Oh, in the strangest, maddest, crudest way, the way most insulting to
me. We went to the opera together and she left me there with a
gentleman. We know nothing about her since.'

'With a gentleman?'

'With Mr. Wendover--that American, and something too dreadful happened.'

'Dear me, did he kiss you?' asked Lady Davenant.

Laura got up quickly, turning away. 'Good-bye, I'm going, I'm going!'
And in reply to an irritated, protesting exclamation from her companion
she went on, 'Anywhere--anywhere to get away!'

'To get away from your American?'

'I asked him to marry me!' The girl turned round with her tragic face.

'He oughtn't to have left that to you.'

'I knew this horror was coming and it took possession of me, there in
the box, from one moment to the other--the idea of making sure of some
other life, some protection, some respectability. First I thought he
liked me, he had behaved as if he did. And I like him, he is a very good
man. So I asked him, I couldn't help it, it was too hideous--I offered
myself!' Laura spoke as if she were telling that she had stabbed him,
standing there with dilated eyes.

Lady Davenant got up again and went to her; drawing off her glove she
felt her cheek with the back of her hand. 'You are ill, you are in a
fever. I'm sure that whatever you said it was very charming.'

'Yes, I am ill,' said Laura.

'Upon my honour you shan't go home, you shall go straight to bed. And
what did he say to you?'

'Oh, it was too miserable!' cried the girl, pressing her face again into
her companion's kerchief. 'I was all, all mistaken; he had never
thought!'

'Why the deuce then did he run about that way after you? He was a brute
to say it!'

'He didn't say it and he never ran about. He behaved like a perfect
gentleman.'

'I've no patience--I wish I had seen him that time!' Lady Davenant
declared.

'Yes, that would have been nice! You'll never see him; if he _is_ a
gentleman he'll rush away.'

'Bless me, what a rushing away!' murmured the old woman. Then passing
her arm round Laura she added, 'You'll please to come upstairs with me.'

Half an hour later she had some conversation with her butler which led
to his consulting a little register into which it was his law to
transcribe with great neatness, from their cards, the addresses of new
visitors. This volume, kept in the drawer of the hall table, revealed
the fact that Mr. Wendover was staying in George Street, Hanover Square.
'Get into a cab immediately and tell him to come and see me this
evening,' Lady Davenant said. 'Make him understand that it interests him
very nearly, so that no matter what his engagements may be he must give
them up. Go quickly and you'll just find him: he'll be sure to be at
home to dress for dinner.' She had calculated justly, for a few minutes
before ten o'clock the door of her drawing-room was thrown open and Mr.
Wendover was announced.

'Sit there,' said the old lady; 'no, not that one, nearer to me. We must
talk low. My dear sir, I won't bite you!'

'Oh, this is very comfortable,' Mr. Wendover replied vaguely, smiling
through his visible anxiety. It was no more than natural that he should
wonder what Laura Wing's peremptory friend wanted of him at that hour of
the night; but nothing could exceed the gallantry of his attempt to
conceal the symptoms of alarm.

'You ought to have come before, you know,' Lady Davenant went on. 'I
have wanted to see you more than once.'

'I have been dining out--I hurried away. This was the first possible
moment, I assure you.'

'I too was dining out and I stopped at home on purpose to see you. But I
didn't mean to-night, for you have done very well. I was quite intending
to send for you--the other day. But something put it out of my head.
Besides, I knew she wouldn't like it.'

'Why, Lady Davenant, I made a point of calling, ever so long ago--after
that day!' the young man exclaimed, not reassured, or at any rate not
enlightened.

'I daresay you did--but you mustn't justify yourself; that's just what
I don't want; it isn't what I sent for you for. I have something very
particular to say to you, but it's very difficult. Voyons un peu!'

The old woman reflected a little, with her eyes on his face, which had
grown more grave as she went on; its expression intimated that he failed
as yet to understand her and that he at least was not exactly trifling.
Lady Davenant's musings apparently helped her little, if she was looking
for an artful approach; for they ended in her saying abruptly, 'I wonder
if you know what a capital girl she is.'

'Do you mean--do you mean----?' stammered Mr. Wendover, pausing as if he
had given her no right not to allow him to conceive alternatives.

'Yes, I do mean. She's upstairs, in bed.'

'Upstairs in bed!' The young man stared.

'Don't be afraid--I'm not going to send for her!' laughed his hostess;
'her being here, after all, has nothing to do with it, except that she
_did_ come--yes, certainly, she did come. But my keeping her--that was
my doing. My maid has gone to Grosvenor Place to get her things and let
them know that she will stay here for the present. Now am I clear?'

'Not in the least,' said Mr. Wendover, almost sternly.

Lady Davenant, however, was not of a composition to suspect him of
sternness or to care very much if she did, and she went on, with her
quick discursiveness: 'Well, we must be patient; we shall work it out
together. I was afraid you would go away, that's why I lost no time.
Above all I want you to understand that she has not the least idea that
I have sent for you, and you must promise me never, never, never to let
her know. She would be monstrous angry. It is quite my own idea--I have
taken the responsibility. I know very little about you of course, but
she has spoken to me well of you. Besides, I am very clever about
people, and I liked you that day, though you seemed to think I was a
hundred and eighty.'

'You do me great honour,' Mr. Wendover rejoined.

'I'm glad you're pleased! You must be if I tell you that I like you now
even better. I see what you are, except for the question of fortune. It
doesn't perhaps matter much, but have you any money? I mean have you a
fine income?'

'No, indeed I haven't!' And the young man laughed in his bewilderment.
'I have very little money indeed.'

'Well, I daresay you have as much as I. Besides, that would be a proof
she is not mercenary.'

'You haven't in the least made it plain whom you are talking about,'
said Mr. Wendover. 'I have no right to assume anything.'

'Are you afraid of betraying her? I am more devoted to her even than I
want you to be. She has told me what happened between you last
night--what she said to you at the opera. That's what I want to talk to
you about.'

'She was very strange,' the young man remarked.

'I am not so sure that she was strange. However, you are welcome to
think it, for goodness knows she says so herself. She is overwhelmed
with horror at her own words; she is absolutely distracted and
prostrate.'

Mr. Wendover was silent a moment. 'I assured her that I admire
her--beyond every one. I was most kind to her.'

'Did you say it in that tone? You should have thrown yourself at her
feet! From the moment you didn't--surely you understand women well
enough to know.'

'You must remember where we were--in a public place, with very little
room for throwing!' Mr. Wendover exclaimed.

'Ah, so far from blaming you she says your behaviour was perfect. It's
only I who want to have it out with you,' Lady Davenant pursued. 'She's
so clever, so charming, so good and so unhappy.'

'When I said just now she was strange, I meant only in the way she
turned against me.'

'She turned against you?'

'She told me she hoped she should never see me again.'

'And you, should you like to see her?'

'Not now--not now!' Mr. Wendover exclaimed, eagerly.

'I don't mean now, I'm not such a fool as that. I mean some day or
other, when she has stopped accusing herself, if she ever does.'

'Ah, Lady Davenant, you must leave that to me,' the young man returned,
after a moment's hesitation.

'Don't be afraid to tell me I'm meddling with what doesn't concern me,'
said his hostess. 'Of course I know I'm meddling; I sent for you here to
meddle. Who wouldn't, for that creature? She makes one melt.'

'I'm exceedingly sorry for her. I don't know what she thinks she said.'

'Well, that she asked you why you came so often to Grosvenor Place. I
don't see anything so awful in that, if you did go.'

'Yes, I went very often. I liked to go.'

'Now, that's exactly where I wish to prevent a misconception,' said Lady
Davenant. 'If you liked to go you had a reason for liking, and Laura
Wing was the reason, wasn't she?'

'I thought her charming, and I think her so now more than ever.'

'Then you are a dear good man. Vous faisiez votre cour, in short.'

Mr. Wendover made no immediate response: the two sat looking at each
other. 'It isn't easy for me to talk of these things,' he said at last;
'but if you mean that I wished to ask her to be my wife I am bound to
tell you that I had no such intention.'

'Ah, then I'm at sea. You thought her charming and you went to see her
every day. What then did you wish?'

'I didn't go every day. Moreover I think you have a very different idea
in this country of what constitutes--well, what constitutes making love.
A man commits himself much sooner.'

'Oh, I don't know what _your_ odd ways may be!' Lady Davenant exclaimed,
with a shade of irritation.

'Yes, but I was justified in supposing that those ladies did: they at
least are American.'

'"They," my dear sir! For heaven's sake don't mix up that nasty Selina
with it!'

'Why not, if I admired her too? I do extremely, and I thought the house
most interesting.'

'Mercy on us, if that's your idea of a nice house! But I don't know--I
have always kept out of it,' Lady Davenant added, checking herself. Then
she went on, 'If you are so fond of Mrs. Berrington I am sorry to inform
you that she is absolutely good-for-nothing.'

'Good-for-nothing?'

'Nothing to speak of! I have been thinking whether I would tell you, and
I have decided to do so because I take it that your learning it for
yourself would be a matter of but a very short time. Selina has bolted,
as they say.'

'Bolted?' Mr. Wendover repeated.

'I don't know what you call it in America.'

'In America we don't do it.'

'Ah, well, if they stay, as they do usually abroad, that's better. I
suppose you didn't think her capable of behaving herself, did you?'

'Do you mean she has left her husband--with some one else?'

'Neither more nor less; with a fellow named Crispin. It appears it all
came off last evening, and she had her own reasons for doing it in the
most offensive way--publicly, clumsily, with the vulgarest bravado.
Laura has told me what took place, and you must permit me to express my
surprise at your not having divined the miserable business.'

'I saw something was wrong, but I didn't understand. I'm afraid I'm not
very quick at these things.'

'Your state is the more gracious; but certainly you are not quick if you
could call there so often and not see through Selina.'

'Mr. Crispin, whoever he is, was never there,' said the young man.

'Oh, she was a clever hussy!' his companion rejoined.

'I knew she was fond of amusement, but that's what I liked to see. I
wanted to see a house of that sort.'

'Fond of amusement is a very pretty phrase!' said Lady Davenant,
laughing at the simplicity with which her visitor accounted for his
assiduity. 'And did Laura Wing seem to you in her place in a house of
that sort?'

'Why, it was natural she should be with her sister, and she always
struck me as very gay.'

'That was your enlivening effect! And did she strike you as very gay
last night, with this scandal hanging over her?'

'She didn't talk much,' said Mr. Wendover.

'She knew it was coming--she felt it, she saw it, and that's what makes
her sick now, that at _such_ a time she should have challenged you, when
she felt herself about to be associated (in people's minds, of course)
with such a vile business. In people's minds and in yours--when you
should know what had happened.'

'Ah, Miss Wing isn't associated----' said Mr. Wendover. He spoke slowly,
but he rose to his feet with a nervous movement that was not lost upon
his companion: she noted it indeed with a certain inward sense of
triumph. She was very deep, but she had never been so deep as when she
made up her mind to mention the scandal of the house of Berrington to
her visitor and intimated to him that Laura Wing regarded herself as
near enough to it to receive from it a personal stain. 'I'm extremely
sorry to hear of Mrs. Berrington's misconduct,' he continued gravely,
standing before her. 'And I am no less obliged to you for your
interest.'

'Don't mention it,' she said, getting up too and smiling. 'I mean my
interest. As for the other matter, it will all come out. Lionel will
haul her up.'

'Dear me, how dreadful!'

'Yes, dreadful enough. But don't betray me.'

'Betray you?' he repeated, as if his thoughts had gone astray a moment.

'I mean to the girl. Think of her shame!'

'Her shame?' Mr. Wendover said, in the same way.

'It seemed to her, with what was becoming so clear to her, that an
honest man might save her from it, might give her his name and his faith
and help her to traverse the bad place. She exaggerates the badness of
it, the stigma of her relationship. Good heavens, at that rate where
would some of us be? But those are her ideas, they are absolutely
sincere, and they had possession of her at the opera. She had a sense of
being lost and was in a real agony to be rescued. She saw before her a
kind gentleman who had seemed--who had certainly seemed----' And Lady
Davenant, with her fine old face lighted by her bright sagacity and her
eyes on Mr. Wendover's, paused, lingering on this word. 'Of course she
must have been in a state of nerves.'

'I am very sorry for her,' said Mr. Wendover, with his gravity that
committed him to nothing.

'So am I! And of course if you were not in love with her you weren't,
were you?'

'I must bid you good-bye, I am leaving London.' That was the only
answer Lady Davenant got to her inquiry.

'Good-bye then. She is the nicest girl I know. But once more, mind you
don't let her suspect!'

'How can I let her suspect anything when I shall never see her again?'

'Oh, don't say that,' said Lady Davenant, very gently.

'She drove me away from her with a kind of ferocity.'

'Oh, gammon!' cried the old woman.

'I'm going home,' he said, looking at her with his hand on the door.

'Well, it's the best place for you. And for her too!' she added as he
went out. She was not sure that the last words reached him.




XIII


Laura Wing was sharply ill for three days, but on the fourth she made up
her mind she was better, though this was not the opinion of Lady
Davenant, who would not hear of her getting up. The remedy she urged was
lying still and yet lying still; but this specific the girl found
well-nigh intolerable--it was a form of relief that only ministered to
fever. She assured her friend that it killed her to do nothing: to which
her friend replied by asking her what she had a fancy to do. Laura had
her idea and held it tight, but there was no use in producing it before
Lady Davenant, who would have knocked it to pieces. On the afternoon of
the first day Lionel Berrington came, and though his intention was
honest he brought no healing. Hearing she was ill he wanted to look
after her--he wanted to take her back to Grosvenor Place and make her
comfortable: he spoke as if he had every convenience for producing that
condition, though he confessed there was a little bar to it in his own
case. This impediment was the 'cheeky' aspect of Miss Steet, who went
sniffing about as if she knew a lot, if she should only condescend to
tell it. He saw more of the children now; 'I'm going to have 'em in
every day, poor little devils,' he said; and he spoke as if the
discipline of suffering had already begun for him and a kind of holy
change had taken place in his life. Nothing had been said yet in the
house, of course, as Laura knew, about Selina's disappearance, in the
way of treating it as irregular; but the servants pretended so hard not
to be aware of anything in particular that they were like pickpockets
looking with unnatural interest the other way after they have cribbed a
fellow's watch. To a certainty, in a day or two, the governess would
give him warning: she would come and tell him she couldn't stay in such
a place, and he would tell her, in return, that she was a little donkey
for not knowing that the place was much more respectable now than it had
ever been.

This information Selina's husband imparted to Lady Davenant, to whom he
discoursed with infinite candour and humour, taking a highly
philosophical view of his position and declaring that it suited him down
to the ground. His wife couldn't have pleased him better if she had done
it on purpose; he knew where she had been every hour since she quitted
Laura at the opera--he knew where she was at that moment and he was
expecting to find another telegram on his return to Grosvenor Place. So
if it suited _her_ it was all right, wasn't it? and the whole thing
would go as straight as a shot. Lady Davenant took him up to see Laura,
though she viewed their meeting with extreme disfavour, the girl being
in no state for talking. In general Laura had little enough mind for it,
but she insisted on seeing Lionel: she declared that if this were not
allowed her she would go after him, ill as she was--she would dress
herself and drive to his house. She dressed herself now, after a
fashion; she got upon a sofa to receive him. Lady Davenant left him
alone with her for twenty minutes, at the end of which she returned to
take him away. This interview was not fortifying to the girl, whose
idea--the idea of which I have said that she was tenacious--was to go
after her sister, to take possession of her, cling to her and bring her
back. Lionel, of course, wouldn't hear of taking her back, nor would
Selina presumably hear of coming; but this made no difference in Laura's
heroic plan. She would work it, she would compass it, she would go down
on her knees, she would find the eloquence of angels, she would achieve
miracles. At any rate it made her frantic not to try, especially as even
in fruitless action she should escape from herself--an object of which
her horror was not yet extinguished.

As she lay there through inexorably conscious hours the picture of that
hideous moment in the box alternated with the vision of her sister's
guilty flight. She wanted to fly, herself--to go off and keep going for
ever. Lionel was fussily kind to her and he didn't abuse Selina--he
didn't tell her again how that lady's behaviour suited his book. He
simply resisted, with a little exasperating, dogged grin, her pitiful
appeal for knowledge of her sister's whereabouts. He knew what she
wanted it for and he wouldn't help her in any such game. If she would
promise, solemnly, to be quiet, he would tell her when she got better,
but he wouldn't lend her a hand to make a fool of herself. Her work was
cut out for her--she was to stay and mind the children: if she was so
keen to do her duty she needn't go further than that for it. He talked a
great deal about the children and figured himself as pressing the
little deserted darlings to his bosom. He was not a comedian, and she
could see that he really believed he was going to be better and purer
now. Laura said she was sure Selina would make an attempt to get
them--or at least one of them; and he replied, grimly, 'Yes, my dear,
she had better try!' The girl was so angry with him, in her hot, tossing
weakness, for refusing to tell her even whether the desperate pair had
crossed the Channel, that she was guilty of the immorality of regretting
that the difference in badness between husband and wife was so distinct
(for it was distinct, she could see that) as he made his dry little
remark about Selina's trying. He told her he had already seen his
solicitor, the clever Mr. Smallshaw, and she said she didn't care.

On the fourth day of her absence from Grosvenor Place she got up, at an
hour when she was alone (in the afternoon, rather late), and prepared
herself to go out. Lady Davenant had admitted in the morning that she
was better, and fortunately she had not the complication of being
subject to a medical opinion, having absolutely refused to see a doctor.
Her old friend had been obliged to go out--she had scarcely quitted her
before--and Laura had requested the hovering, rustling lady's-maid to
leave her alone: she assured her she was doing beautifully. Laura had no
plan except to leave London that night; she had a moral certainty that
Selina had gone to the Continent. She had always done so whenever she
had a chance, and what chance had ever been larger than the present? The
Continent was fearfully vague, but she would deal sharply with
Lionel--she would show him she had a right to knowledge. He would
certainly be in town; he would be in a complacent bustle with his
lawyers. She had told him that she didn't believe he had yet gone to
them, but in her heart she believed it perfectly. If he didn't satisfy
her she would go to Lady Ringrose, odious as it would be to her to ask a
favour of this depraved creature: unless indeed Lady Ringrose had joined
the little party to France, as on the occasion of Selina's last journey
thither. On her way downstairs she met one of the footmen, of whom she
made the request that he would call her a cab as quickly as
possible--she was obliged to go out for half an hour. He expressed the
respectful hope that she was better and she replied that she was
perfectly well--he would please tell her ladyship when she came in. To
this the footman rejoined that her ladyship _had_ come in--she had
returned five minutes before and had gone to her room. 'Miss Frothingham
told her you were asleep, Miss,' said the man, 'and her ladyship said it
was a blessing and you were not to be disturbed.'

'Very good, I will see her,' Laura remarked, with dissimulation: 'only
please let me have my cab.'

The footman went downstairs and she stood there listening; presently she
heard the house-door close--he had gone out on his errand. Then she
descended very softly--she prayed he might not be long. The door of the
drawing-room stood open as she passed it, and she paused before it,
thinking she heard sounds in the lower hall. They appeared to subside
and then she found herself faint--she was terribly impatient for her
cab. Partly to sit down till it came (there was a seat on the landing,
but another servant might come up or down and see her), and partly to
look, at the front window, whether it were not coming, she went for a
moment into the drawing-room. She stood at the window, but the footman
was slow; then she sank upon a chair--she felt very weak. Just after she
had done so she became aware of steps on the stairs and she got up
quickly, supposing that her messenger had returned, though she had not
heard wheels. What she saw was not the footman she had sent out, but the
expansive person of the butler, followed apparently by a visitor. This
functionary ushered the visitor in with the remark that he would call
her ladyship, and before she knew it she was face to face with Mr.
Wendover. At the same moment she heard a cab drive up, while Mr.
Wendover instantly closed the door.

'Don't turn me away; do see me--do see me!' he said. 'I asked for Lady
Davenant--they told me she was at home. But it was you I wanted, and I
wanted her to help me. I was going away--but I couldn't. You look very
ill--do listen to me! You don't understand--I will explain everything.
Ah, how ill you look!' the young man cried, as the climax of this
sudden, soft, distressed appeal. Laura, for all answer, tried to push
past him, but the result of this movement was that she found herself
enclosed in his arms. He stopped her, but she disengaged herself, she
got her hand upon the door. He was leaning against it, so she couldn't
open it, and as she stood there panting she shut her eyes, so as not to
see him. 'If you would let me tell you what I think--I would do anything
in the world for you!' he went on.

'Let me go--you persecute me!' the girl cried, pulling at the handle.

'You don't do me justice--you are too cruel!' Mr. Wendover persisted.

'Let me go--let me go!' she only repeated, with her high, quavering,
distracted note; and as he moved a little she got the door open. But he
followed her out: would she see him that night? Where was she going?
might he not go with her? would she see him to-morrow?

'Never, never, never!' she flung at him as she hurried away. The butler
was on the stairs, descending from above; so he checked himself, letting
her go. Laura passed out of the house and flew into her cab with
extraordinary speed, for Mr. Wendover heard the wheels bear her away
while the servant was saying to him in measured accents that her
ladyship would come down immediately.

Lionel was at home, in Grosvenor Place: she burst into the library and
found him playing papa. Geordie and Ferdy were sporting around him, the
presence of Miss Steet had been dispensed with, and he was holding his
younger son by the stomach, horizontally, between his legs, while the
child made little sprawling movements which were apparently intended to
represent the act of swimming. Geordie stood impatient on the brink of
the imaginary stream, protesting that it was his turn now, and as soon
as he saw his aunt he rushed at her with the request that she would take
him up in the same fashion. She was struck with the superficiality of
their childhood; they appeared to have no sense that she had been away
and no care that she had been ill. But Lionel made up for this; he
greeted her with affectionate jollity, said it was a good job she had
come back, and remarked to the children that they would have great
larks now that auntie was home again. Ferdy asked if she had been with
mummy, but didn't wait for an answer, and she observed that they put no
question about their mother and made no further allusion to her while
they remained in the room. She wondered whether their father had
enjoined upon them not to mention her, and reflected that even if he had
such a command would not have been efficacious. It added to the ugliness
of Selina's flight that even her children didn't miss her, and to the
dreariness, somehow, to Laura's sense, of the whole situation that one
could neither spend tears on the mother and wife, because she was not
worth it, nor sentimentalise about the little boys, because they didn't
inspire it. 'Well, you do look seedy--I'm bound to say that!' Lionel
exclaimed; and he recommended strongly a glass of port, while Ferdy, not
seizing this reference, suggested that daddy should take her by the
waistband and teach her to 'strike out.' He represented himself in the
act of drowning, but Laura interrupted this entertainment, when the
servant answered the bell (Lionel having rung for the port), by
requesting that the children should be conveyed to Miss Steet. 'Tell her
she must never go away again,' Lionel said to Geordie, as the butler
took him by the hand; but the only touching consequence of this
injunction was that the child piped back to his father, over his
shoulder, 'Well, you mustn't either, you know!'

'You must tell me or I'll kill myself--I give you my word!' Laura said
to her brother-in-law, with unnecessary violence, as soon as they had
left the room.

'I say, I say,' he rejoined, 'you _are_ a wilful one! What do you want
to threaten me for? Don't you know me well enough to know that ain't the
way? That's the tone Selina used to take. Surely you don't want to begin
and imitate her!' She only sat there, looking at him, while he leaned
against the chimney-piece smoking a short cigar. There was a silence,
during which she felt the heat of a certain irrational anger at the
thought that a little ignorant, red-faced jockey should have the luck to
be in the right as against her flesh and blood. She considered him
helplessly, with something in her eyes that had never been there
before--something that, apparently, after a moment, made an impression
on him. Afterwards, however, she saw very well that it was not her
threat that had moved him, and even at the moment she had a sense, from
the way he looked back at her, that this was in no manner the first time
a baffled woman had told him that she would kill herself. He had always
accepted his kinship with her, but even in her trouble it was part of
her consciousness that he now lumped her with a mixed group of female
figures, a little wavering and dim, who were associated in his memory
with 'scenes,' with importunities and bothers. It is apt to be the
disadvantage of women, on occasions of measuring their strength with
men, that they may perceive that the man has a larger experience and
that they themselves are a part of it. It is doubtless as a provision
against such emergencies that nature has opened to them operations of
the mind that are independent of experience. Laura felt the dishonour of
her race the more that her brother-in-law seemed so gay and bright about
it: he had an air of positive prosperity, as if his misfortune had
turned into that. It came to her that he really liked the idea of the
public _éclaircissement_--the fresh occupation, the bustle and
importance and celebrity of it. That was sufficiently incredible, but as
she was on the wrong side it was also humiliating. Besides, higher
spirits always suggest finer wisdom, and such an attribute on Lionel's
part was most humiliating of all. 'I haven't the least objection at
present to telling you what you want to know. I shall have made my
little arrangements very soon and you will be subpoenaed.'

'Subpoenaed?' the girl repeated, mechanically.

'You will be called as a witness on my side.'

'On your side.'

'Of course you're on my side, ain't you?'

'Can they force me to come?' asked Laura, in answer to this.

'No, they can't force you, if you leave the country.'

'That's exactly what I want to do.'

'That will be idiotic,' said Lionel, 'and very bad for your sister. If
you don't help me you ought at least to help her.'

She sat a moment with her eyes on the ground. 'Where is she--where is
she?' she then asked.

'They are at Brussels, at the Hôtel de Flandres. They appear to like it
very much.'

'Are you telling me the truth?'

'Lord, my dear child, _I_ don't lie!' Lionel exclaimed. 'You'll make a
jolly mistake if you go to her,' he added. 'If you have seen her with
him how can you speak for her?'

'I won't see her with him.'

'That's all very well, but he'll take care of that. Of course if you're
ready for perjury----!' Lionel exclaimed.

'I'm ready for anything.'

'Well, I've been kind to you, my dear,' he continued, smoking, with his
chin in the air.

'Certainly you have been kind to me.'

'If you want to defend her you had better keep away from her,' said
Lionel. 'Besides for yourself, it won't be the best thing in the
world--to be known to have been in it.'

'I don't care about myself,' the girl returned, musingly.

'Don't you care about the children, that you are so ready to throw them
over? For you would, my dear, you know. If you go to Brussels you never
come back here--you never cross this threshold--you never touch them
again!'

Laura appeared to listen to this last declaration, but she made no reply
to it; she only exclaimed after a moment, with a certain impatience,
'Oh, the children will do anyway!' Then she added passionately, 'You
_won't_, Lionel; in mercy's name tell me that you won't!'

'I won't what?'

'Do the awful thing you say.'

'Divorce her? The devil I won't!'

'Then why do you speak of the children--if you have no pity for them?'

Lionel stared an instant. 'I thought you said yourself that they would
do anyway!'

Laura bent her head, resting it on the back of her hand, on the leathern
arm of the sofa. So she remained, while Lionel stood smoking; but at
last, to leave the room, she got up with an effort that was a physical
pain. He came to her, to detain her, with a little good intention that
had no felicity for her, trying to take her hand persuasively. 'Dear old
girl, don't try and behave just as _she_ did! If you'll stay quietly
here I won't call you, I give you my honour I won't; there! You want to
see the doctor--that's the fellow you want to see. And what good will it
do you, even if you bring her home in pink paper? Do you candidly
suppose I'll ever look at her--except across the court-room?'

'I must, I must, I must!' Laura cried, jerking herself away from him and
reaching the door.

'Well then, good-bye,' he said, in the sternest tone she had ever heard
him use.

She made no answer, she only escaped. She locked herself in her room;
she remained there an hour. At the end of this time she came out and
went to the door of the schoolroom, where she asked Miss Steet to be so
good as to come and speak to her. The governess followed her to her
apartment and there Laura took her partly into her confidence. There
were things she wanted to do before going, and she was too weak to act
without assistance. She didn't want it from the servants, if only Miss
Steet would learn from them whether Mr. Berrington were dining at home.
Laura told her that her sister was ill and she was hurrying to join her
abroad. It had to be mentioned, that way, that Mrs. Berrington had left
the country, though of course there was no spoken recognition between
the two women of the reasons for which she had done so. There was only a
tacit hypocritical assumption that she was on a visit to friends and
that there had been nothing queer about her departure. Laura knew that
Miss Steet knew the truth, and the governess knew that she knew it.
This young woman lent a hand, very confusedly, to the girl's
preparations; she ventured not to be sympathetic, as that would point
too much to badness, but she succeeded perfectly in being dismal. She
suggested that Laura was ill herself, but Laura replied that this was no
matter when her sister was so much worse. She elicited the fact that Mr.
Berrington was dining out--the butler believed with his mother--but she
was of no use when it came to finding in the 'Bradshaw' which she
brought up from the hall the hour of the night-boat to Ostend. Laura
found it herself; it was conveniently late, and it was a gain to her
that she was very near the Victoria station, where she would take the
train for Dover. The governess wanted to go to the station with her, but
the girl would not listen to this--she would only allow her to see that
she had a cab. Laura let her help her still further; she sent her down
to talk to Lady Davenant's maid when that personage arrived in Grosvenor
Place to inquire, from her mistress, what in the world had become of
poor Miss Wing. The maid intimated, Miss Steet said on her return, that
her ladyship would have come herself, only she was too angry. She was
very bad indeed. It was an indication of this that she had sent back her
young friend's dressing-case and her clothes. Laura also borrowed money
from the governess--she had too little in her pocket. The latter
brightened up as the preparations advanced; she had never before been
concerned in a flurried night-episode, with an unavowed clandestine
side; the very imprudence of it (for a sick girl alone) was romantic,
and before Laura had gone down to the cab she began to say that foreign
life must be fascinating and to make wistful reflections. She saw that
the coast was clear, in the nursery--that the children were asleep, for
their aunt to come in. She kissed Ferdy while her companion pressed her
lips upon Geordie, and Geordie while Laura hung for a moment over Ferdy.
At the door of the cab she tried to make her take more money, and our
heroine had an odd sense that if the vehicle had not rolled away she
would have thrust into her hand a keepsake for Captain Crispin.

A quarter of an hour later Laura sat in the corner of a
railway-carriage, muffled in her cloak (the July evening was fresh, as
it so often is in London--fresh enough to add to her sombre thoughts the
suggestion of the wind in the Channel), waiting in a vain torment of
nervousness for the train to set itself in motion. Her nervousness
itself had led her to come too early to the station, and it seemed to
her that she had already waited long. A lady and a gentleman had taken
their place in the carriage (it was not yet the moment for the outward
crowd of tourists) and had left their appurtenances there while they
strolled up and down the platform. The long English twilight was still
in the air, but there was dusk under the grimy arch of the station and
Laura flattered herself that the off-corner of the carriage she had
chosen was in shadow. This, however, apparently did not prevent her from
being recognised by a gentleman who stopped at the door, looking in,
with the movement of a person who was going from carriage to carriage.
As soon as he saw her he stepped quickly in, and the next moment Mr.
Wendover was seated on the edge of the place beside her, leaning toward
her, speaking to her low, with clasped hands. She fell back in her seat,
closing her eyes again. He barred the way out of the compartment.

'I have followed you here--I saw Miss Steet--I want to implore you not
to go! Don't, don't! I know what you're doing. Don't go, I beseech you.
I saw Lady Davenant, I wanted to ask her to help me, I could bear it no
longer. I have thought of you, night and day, these four days. Lady
Davenant has told me things, and I entreat you not to go!'

Laura opened her eyes (there was something in his voice, in his pressing
nearness), and looked at him a moment: it was the first time she had
done so since the first of those detestable moments in the box at Covent
Garden. She had never spoken to him of Selina in any but an honourable
sense. Now she said, 'I'm going to my sister.'

'I know it, and I wish unspeakably you would give it up--it isn't
good--it's a great mistake. Stay here and let me talk to you.'

The girl raised herself, she stood up in the carriage. Mr. Wendover did
the same; Laura saw that the lady and gentleman outside were now
standing near the door. 'What have you to say? It's my own business!'
she returned, between her teeth. 'Go out, go out, go out!'

'Do you suppose I would speak if I didn't care--do you suppose I would
care if I didn't love you?' the young man murmured, close to her face.

'What is there to care about? Because people will know it and talk? If
it's bad it's the right thing for me! If I don't go to her where else
shall I go?'

'Come to me, dearest, dearest!' Mr. Wendover went on. 'You are ill, you
are mad! I love you--I assure you I do!'

She pushed him away with her hands. 'If you follow me I will jump off
the boat!'

'Take your places, take your places!' cried the guard, on the platform.
Mr. Wendover had to slip out, the lady and gentleman were coming in.
Laura huddled herself into her corner again and presently the train drew
away.

Mr. Wendover did not get into another compartment; he went back that
evening to Queen's Gate. He knew how interested his old friend there, as
he now considered her, would be to hear what Laura had undertaken
(though, as he learned, on entering her drawing-room again, she had
already heard of it from her maid), and he felt the necessity to tell
her once more how her words of four days before had fructified in his
heart, what a strange, ineffaceable impression she had made upon him: to
tell her in short and to repeat it over and over, that he had taken the
most extraordinary fancy----! Lady Davenant was tremendously vexed at
the girl's perversity, but she counselled him patience, a long,
persistent patience. A week later she heard from Laura Wing, from
Antwerp, that she was sailing to America from that port--a letter
containing no mention whatever of Selina or of the reception she had
found at Brussels. To America Mr. Wendover followed his young compatriot
(that at least she had no right to forbid), and there, for the moment,
he has had a chance to practise the humble virtue recommended by Lady
Davenant. He knows she has no money and that she is staying with some
distant relatives in Virginia; a situation that he--perhaps too
superficially--figures as unspeakably dreary. He knows further that Lady
Davenant has sent her fifty pounds, and he himself has ideas of
transmitting funds, not directly to Virginia but by the roundabout road
of Queen's Gate. Now, however, that Lionel Berrington's deplorable suit
is coming on he reflects with some satisfaction that the Court of
Probate and Divorce is far from the banks of the Rappahannock.
'Berrington _versus_ Berrington and Others' is coming on--but these are
matters of the present hour.




THE PATAGONIA




I


The houses were dark in the August night and the perspective of Beacon
Street, with its double chain of lamps, was a foreshortened desert. The
club on the hill alone, from its semi-cylindrical front, projected a
glow upon the dusky vagueness of the Common, and as I passed it I heard
in the hot stillness the click of a pair of billiard balls. As 'every
one' was out of town perhaps the servants, in the extravagance of their
leisure, were profaning the tables. The heat was insufferable and I
thought with joy of the morrow, of the deck of the steamer, the
freshening breeze, the sense of getting out to sea. I was even glad of
what I had learned in the afternoon at the office of the company--that
at the eleventh hour an old ship with a lower standard of speed had been
put on in place of the vessel in which I had taken my passage. America
was roasting, England might very well be stuffy, and a slow passage
(which at that season of the year would probably also be a fine one) was
a guarantee of ten or twelve days of fresh air.

I strolled down the hill without meeting a creature, though I could see
through the palings of the Common that that recreative expanse was
peopled with dim forms. I remembered Mrs. Nettlepoint's house--she lived
in those days (they are not so distant, but there have been changes) on
the water-side, a little way beyond the spot at which the Public Garden
terminates; and I reflected that like myself she would be spending the
night in Boston if it were true that, as had been mentioned to me a few
days before at Mount Desert, she was to embark on the morrow for
Liverpool. I presently saw this appearance confirmed by a light above
her door and in two or three of her windows, and I determined to ask for
her, having nothing to do till bedtime. I had come out simply to pass an
hour, leaving my hotel to the blaze of its gas and the perspiration of
its porters; but it occurred to me that my old friend might very well
not know of the substitution of the _Patagonia_ for the _Scandinavia_,
so that it would be an act of consideration to prepare her mind.
Besides, I could offer to help her, to look after her in the morning:
lone women are grateful for support in taking ship for far countries.

As I stood on her doorstep I remembered that as she had a son she might
not after all be so lone; yet at the same time it was present to me that
Jasper Nettlepoint was not quite a young man to lean upon, having (as I
at least supposed) a life of his own and tastes and habits which had
long since drawn him away from the maternal side. If he did happen just
now to be at home my solicitude would of course seem officious; for in
his many wanderings--I believed he had roamed all over the globe--he
would certainly have learned how to manage. None the less I was very
glad to show Mrs. Nettlepoint I thought of her. With my long absence I
had lost sight of her; but I had liked her of old; she had been a close
friend of my sisters; and I had in regard to her that sense which is
pleasant to those who, in general, have grown strange or detached--the
feeling that she at least knew all about me. I could trust her at any
time to tell people what a respectable person I was. Perhaps I was
conscious of how little I deserved this indulgence when it came over me
that for years I had not communicated with her. The measure of this
neglect was given by my vagueness of mind about her son. However, I
really belonged nowadays to a different generation: I was more the old
lady's contemporary than Jasper's.

Mrs. Nettlepoint was at home: I found her in her back drawing-room,
where the wide windows opened upon the water. The room was dusky--it was
too hot for lamps--and she sat slowly moving her fan and looking out on
the little arm of the sea which is so pretty at night, reflecting the
lights of Cambridgeport and Charlestown. I supposed she was musing upon
the loved ones she was to leave behind, her married daughters, her
grandchildren; but she struck a note more specifically Bostonian as she
said to me, pointing with her fan to the Back Bay--'I shall see nothing
more charming than that over there, you know!' She made me very welcome,
but her son had told her about the _Patagonia_, for which she was sorry,
as this would mean a longer voyage. She was a poor creature on shipboard
and mainly confined to her cabin, even in weather extravagantly termed
fine--as if any weather could be fine at sea.

'Ah, then your son's going with you?' I asked.

'Here he comes, he will tell you for himself much better than I am able
to do.'

Jasper Nettlepoint came into the room at that moment, dressed in white
flannel and carrying a large fan.

'Well, my dear, have you decided?' his mother continued, with some irony
in her tone. 'He hasn't yet made up his mind, and we sail at ten
o'clock!'

'What does it matter, when my things are put up?' said the young man.
'There is no crowd at this moment; there will be cabins to spare. I'm
waiting for a telegram--that will settle it. I just walked up to the
club to see if it was come--they'll send it there because they think the
house is closed. Not yet, but I shall go back in twenty minutes.'

'Mercy, how you rush about in this temperature!' his mother exclaimed,
while I reflected that it was perhaps _his_ billiard-balls I had heard
ten minutes before. I was sure he was fond of billiards.

'Rush? not in the least. I take it uncommonly easy.'

'Ah, I'm bound to say you do,' Mrs. Nettlepoint exclaimed,
inconsequently. I divined that there was a certain tension between the
pair and a want of consideration on the young man's part, arising
perhaps from selfishness. His mother was nervous, in suspense, wanting
to be at rest as to whether she should have his company on the voyage or
be obliged to make it alone. But as he stood there smiling and slowly
moving his fan he struck me somehow as a person on whom this fact would
not sit very heavily. He was of the type of those whom other people
worry about, not of those who worry about other people. Tall and
strong, he had a handsome face, with a round head and close-curling
hair; the whites of his eyes and the enamel of his teeth, under his
brown moustache, gleamed vaguely in the lights of the Back Bay. I made
out that he was sunburnt, as if he lived much in the open air, and that
he looked intelligent but also slightly brutal, though not in a morose
way. His brutality, if he had any, was bright and finished. I had to
tell him who I was, but even then I saw that he failed to place me and
that my explanations gave me in his mind no great identity or at any
rate no great importance. I foresaw that he would in intercourse make me
feel sometimes very young and sometimes very old. He mentioned, as if to
show his mother that he might safely be left to his own devices, that he
had once started from London to Bombay at three-quarters of an hour's
notice.

'Yes, and it must have been pleasant for the people you were with!'

'Oh, the people I was with----!' he rejoined; and his tone appeared to
signify that such people would always have to come off as they could. He
asked if there were no cold drinks in the house, no lemonade, no iced
syrups; in such weather something of that sort ought always to be kept
going. When his mother remarked that surely at the club they _were_
going he went on, 'Oh, yes, I had various things there; but you know I
have walked down the hill since. One should have something at either
end. May I ring and see?' He rang while Mrs. Nettlepoint observed that
with the people they had in the house--an establishment reduced
naturally at such a moment to its simplest expression (they were
burning-up candle-ends and there were no luxuries) she would not answer
for the service. The matter ended in the old lady's going out of the
room in quest of syrup with the female domestic who had appeared in
response to the bell and in whom Jasper's appeal aroused no visible
intelligence.

She remained away some time and I talked with her son, who was sociable
but desultory and kept moving about the room, always with his fan, as if
he were impatient. Sometimes he seated himself for an instant on the
window-sill, and then I saw that he was in fact very good-looking; a
fine brown, clean young athlete. He never told me on what special
contingency his decision depended; he only alluded familiarly to an
expected telegram, and I perceived that he was probably not addicted to
copious explanations. His mother's absence was an indication that when
it was a question of gratifying him she had grown used to spare no
pains, and I fancied her rummaging in some close storeroom, among old
preserve-pots, while the dull maid-servant held the candle awry. I know
not whether this same vision was in his own eyes; at all events it did
not prevent him from saying suddenly, as he looked at his watch, that I
must excuse him, as he had to go back to the club. He would return in
half an hour--or in less. He walked away and I sat there alone,
conscious, in the dark, dismantled, simplified room, in the deep silence
that rests on American towns during the hot season (there was now and
then a far cry or a plash in the water, and at intervals the tinkle of
the bells of the horse-cars on the long bridge, slow in the suffocating
night), of the strange influence, half sweet, half sad, that abides in
houses uninhabited or about to become so--in places muffled and
bereaved, where the unheeded sofas and patient belittered tables seem to
know (like the disconcerted dogs) that it is the eve of a journey.

After a while I heard the sound of voices, of steps, the rustle of
dresses, and I looked round, supposing these things to be the sign of
the return of Mrs. Nettlepoint and her handmaiden, bearing the
refreshment prepared for her son. What I saw however was two other
female forms, visitors just admitted apparently, who were ushered into
the room. They were not announced--the servant turned her back on them
and rambled off to our hostess. They came forward in a wavering,
tentative, unintroduced way--partly, I could see, because the place was
dark and partly because their visit was in its nature experimental, a
stretch of confidence. One of the ladies was stout and the other was
slim, and I perceived in a moment that one was talkative and the other
silent. I made out further that one was elderly and the other young and
that the fact that they were so unlike did not prevent their being
mother and daughter. Mrs. Nettlepoint reappeared in a very few minutes,
but the interval had sufficed to establish a communication (really
copious for the occasion) between the strangers and the unknown
gentleman whom they found in possession, hat and stick in hand. This was
not my doing (for what had I to go upon?) and still less was it the
doing of the person whom I supposed and whom I indeed quickly and
definitely learned to be the daughter. She spoke but once--when her
companion informed me that she was going out to Europe the next day to
be married. Then she said, 'Oh, mother!' protestingly, in a tone which
struck me in the darkness as doubly strange, exciting my curiosity to
see her face.

It had taken her mother but a moment to come to that and to other things
besides, after I had explained that I myself was waiting for Mrs.
Nettlepoint, who would doubtless soon come back.

'Well, she won't know me--I guess she hasn't ever heard much about me,'
the good lady said; 'but I have come from Mrs. Allen and I guess that
will make it all right. I presume you know Mrs. Allen?'

I was unacquainted with this influential personage, but I assented
vaguely to the proposition. Mrs. Allen's emissary was good-humoured and
familiar, but rather appealing than insistent (she remarked that if her
friend _had_ found time to come in the afternoon--she had so much to do,
being just up for the day, that she couldn't be sure--it would be all
right); and somehow even before she mentioned Merrimac Avenue (they had
come all the way from there) my imagination had associated her with that
indefinite social limbo known to the properly-constituted Boston mind as
the South End--a nebulous region which condenses here and there into a
pretty face, in which the daughters are an 'improvement' on the mothers
and are sometimes acquainted with gentlemen resident in more
distinguished districts of the New England capital--gentlemen whose
wives and sisters in turn are not acquainted with them.

When at last Mrs. Nettlepoint came in, accompanied by candles and by a
tray laden with glasses of coloured fluid which emitted a cool tinkling,
I was in a position to officiate as master of the ceremonies, to
introduce Mrs. Mavis and Miss Grace Mavis, to represent that Mrs. Allen
had recommended them--nay, had urged them--to come that way, informally,
and had been prevented only by the pressure of occupations so
characteristic of her (especially when she was up from Mattapoisett just
for a few hours' shopping) from herself calling in the course of the day
to explain who they were and what was the favour they had to ask of Mrs.
Nettlepoint. Good-natured women understand each other even when divided
by the line of topographical fashion, and our hostess had quickly
mastered the main facts: Mrs. Allen's visit in the morning in Merrimac
Avenue to talk of Mrs. Amber's great idea, the classes at the public
schools in vacation (she was interested with an equal charity to that of
Mrs. Mavis--even in such weather!--in those of the South End) for games
and exercises and music, to keep the poor unoccupied children out of the
streets; then the revelation that it had suddenly been settled almost
from one hour to the other that Grace should sail for Liverpool, Mr.
Porterfield at last being ready. He was taking a little holiday; his
mother was with him, they had come over from Paris to see some of the
celebrated old buildings in England, and he had telegraphed to say that
if Grace would start right off they would just finish it up and be
married. It often happened that when things had dragged on that way for
years they were all huddled up at the end. Of course in such a case she,
Mrs. Mavis, had had to fly round. Her daughter's passage was taken, but
it seemed too dreadful that she should make her journey all alone, the
first time she had ever been at sea, without any companion or escort.
_She_ couldn't go--Mr. Mavis was too sick: she hadn't even been able to
get him off to the seaside.

'Well, Mrs. Nettlepoint is going in that ship,' Mrs. Allen had said; and
she had represented that nothing was simpler than to put the girl in her
charge. When Mrs. Mavis had replied that that was all very well but that
she didn't know the lady, Mrs. Allen had declared that that didn't make
a speck of difference, for Mrs. Nettlepoint was kind enough for
anything. It was easy enough to know her, if that was all the trouble.
All Mrs. Mavis would have to do would be to go up to her the next
morning when she took her daughter to the ship (she would see her there
on the deck with her party) and tell her what she wanted. Mrs.
Nettlepoint had daughters herself and she would easily understand. Very
likely she would even look after Grace a little on the other side, in
such a queer situation, going out alone to the gentleman she was engaged
to; she would just help her to turn round before she was married. Mr.
Porterfield seemed to think they wouldn't wait long, once she was there:
they would have it right over at the American consul's. Mrs. Allen had
said it would perhaps be better still to go and see Mrs. Nettlepoint
beforehand, that day, to tell her what they wanted: then they wouldn't
seem to spring it on her just as she was leaving. She herself (Mrs.
Allen) would call and say a word for them if she could save ten minutes
before catching her train. If she hadn't come it was because she hadn't
saved her ten minutes; but she had made them feel that they must come
all the same. Mrs. Mavis liked that better, because on the ship in the
morning there would be such a confusion. She didn't think her daughter
would be any trouble--conscientiously she didn't. It was just to have
some one to speak to her and not sally forth like a servant-girl going
to a situation.

'I see, I am to act as a sort of bridesmaid and to give her away,' said
Mrs. Nettlepoint. She was in fact kind enough for anything and she
showed on this occasion that it was easy enough to know her. There is
nothing more tiresome than complications at sea, but she accepted
without a protest the burden of the young lady's dependence and allowed
her, as Mrs. Mavis said, to hook herself on. She evidently had the habit
of patience, and her reception of her visitors' story reminded me afresh
(I was reminded of it whenever I returned to my native land) that my
dear compatriots are the people in the world who most freely take mutual
accommodation for granted. They have always had to help themselves, and
by a magnanimous extension they confound helping each other with that.
In no country are there fewer forms and more reciprocities.

It was doubtless not singular that the ladies from Merrimac Avenue
should not feel that they were importunate: what was striking was that
Mrs. Nettlepoint did not appear to suspect it. However, she would in any
case have thought it inhuman to show that--though I could see that under
the surface she was amused at everything the lady from the South End
took for granted. I know not whether the attitude of the younger visitor
added or not to the merit of her good-nature. Mr. Porterfield's intended
took no part in her mother's appeal, scarcely spoke, sat looking at the
Back Bay and the lights on the long bridge. She declined the lemonade
and the other mixtures which, at Mrs. Nettlepoint's request, I offered
her, while her mother partook freely of everything and I reflected (for
I as freely consumed the reviving liquid) that Mr. Jasper had better
hurry back if he wished to profit by the refreshment prepared for him.

Was the effect of the young woman's reserve ungracious, or was it only
natural that in her particular situation she should not have a flow of
compliment at her command? I noticed that Mrs. Nettlepoint looked at her
often, and certainly though she was undemonstrative Miss Mavis was
interesting. The candle-light enabled me to see that if she was not in
the very first flower of her youth she was still a handsome girl. Her
eyes and hair were dark, her face was pale and she held up her head as
if, with its thick braids, it were an appurtenance she was not ashamed
of. If her mother was excellent and common she was not common (not
flagrantly so) and perhaps not excellent. At all events she would not
be, in appearance at least, a dreary appendage, and (in the case of a
person 'hooking on') that was always something gained. Is it because
something of a romantic or pathetic interest usually attaches to a good
creature who has been the victim of a 'long engagement' that this young
lady made an impression on me from the first--favoured as I had been so
quickly with this glimpse of her history? Certainly she made no positive
appeal; she only held her tongue and smiled, and her smile corrected
whatever suggestion might have forced itself upon me that the spirit was
dead--the spirit of that promise of which she found herself doomed to
carry out the letter.

What corrected it less, I must add, was an odd recollection which
gathered vividness as I listened to it--a mental association which the
name of Mr. Porterfield had evoked. Surely I had a personal impression,
over-smeared and confused, of the gentleman who was waiting at
Liverpool, or who would be, for Mrs. Nettlepoint's _protégée_. I had met
him, known him, some time, somewhere, somehow, in Europe. Was he not
studying something--very hard--somewhere, probably in Paris, ten years
before, and did he not make extraordinarily neat drawings, linear and
architectural? Didn't he go to a _table d'hôte_, at two francs
twenty-five, in the Rue Bonaparte, which I then frequented, and didn't
he wear spectacles and a Scotch plaid arranged in a manner which seemed
to say, 'I have trustworthy information that that is the way they do it
in the Highlands'? Was he not exemplary and very poor, so that I
supposed he had no overcoat and his tartan was what he slept under at
night? Was he not working very hard still, and wouldn't he be in the
natural course, not yet satisfied that he knew enough to launch out? He
would be a man of long preparations--Miss Mavis's white face seemed to
speak to one of that. It appeared to me that if I had been in love with
her I should not have needed to lay such a train to marry her.
Architecture was his line and he was a pupil of the École des Beaux
Arts. This reminiscence grew so much more vivid with me that at the end
of ten minutes I had a curious sense of knowing--by implication--a good
deal about the young lady.

Even after it was settled that Mrs. Nettlepoint would do everything for
her that she could her mother sat a little, sipping her syrup and
telling how 'low' Mr. Mavis had been. At this period the girl's silence
struck me as still more conscious, partly perhaps because she deprecated
her mother's loquacity (she was enough of an 'improvement' to measure
that) and partly because she was too full of pain at the idea of leaving
her infirm, her perhaps dying father. I divined that they were poor and
that she would take out a very small purse for her trousseau. Moreover
for Mr. Porterfield to make up the sum his own case would have had to
change. If he had enriched himself by the successful practice of his
profession I had not encountered the buildings he had reared--his
reputation had not come to my ears.

Mrs. Nettlepoint notified her new friends that she was a very inactive
person at sea: she was prepared to suffer to the full with Miss Mavis,
but she was not prepared to walk with her, to struggle with her, to
accompany her to the table. To this the girl replied that she would
trouble her little, she was sure: she had a belief that she should prove
a wretched sailor and spend the voyage on her back. Her mother scoffed
at this picture, prophesying perfect weather and a lovely time, and I
said that if I might be trusted, as a tame old bachelor fairly
sea-seasoned, I should be delighted to give the new member of our party
an arm or any other countenance whenever she should require it. Both the
ladies thanked me for this (taking my description only too literally),
and the elder one declared that we were evidently going to be such a
sociable group that it was too bad to have to stay at home. She inquired
of Mrs. Nettlepoint if there were any one else--if she were to be
accompanied by some of her family; and when our hostess mentioned her
son--there was a chance of his embarking but (wasn't it absurd?) he had
not decided yet, she rejoined with extraordinary candour--'Oh dear, I do
hope he'll go: that would be so pleasant for Grace.'

Somehow the words made me think of poor Mr. Porterfield's tartan,
especially as Jasper Nettlepoint strolled in again at that moment. His
mother instantly challenged him: it was ten o'clock; had he by chance
made up his great mind? Apparently he failed to hear her, being in the
first place surprised at the strange ladies and then struck with the
fact that one of them was not strange. The young man, after a slight
hesitation, greeted Miss Mavis with a handshake and an 'Oh, good
evening, how do you do?' He did not utter her name, and I could see that
he had forgotten it; but she immediately pronounced his, availing
herself of an American girl's discretion to introduce him to her mother.

'Well, you might have told me you knew him all this time!' Mrs. Mavis
exclaimed. Then smiling at Mrs. Nettlepoint she added, 'It would have
saved me a worry, an acquaintance already begun.'

'Ah, my son's acquaintances----!' Mrs. Nettlepoint murmured.

'Yes, and my daughter's too!' cried Mrs. Mavis, jovially. 'Mrs. Allen
didn't tell us _you_ were going,' she continued, to the young man.

'She would have been clever if she had been able to!' Mrs. Nettlepoint
ejaculated.

'Dear mother, I have my telegram,' Jasper remarked, looking at Grace
Mavis.

'I know you very little,' the girl said, returning his observation.

'I've danced with you at some ball--for some sufferers by something or
other.'

'I think it was an inundation,' she replied, smiling. 'But it was a long
time ago--and I haven't seen you since.'

'I have been in far countries--to my loss. I should have said it was for
a big fire.'

'It was at the Horticultural Hall. I didn't remember your name,' said
Grace Mavis.

'That is very unkind of you, when I recall vividly that you had a pink
dress.'

'Oh, I remember that dress--you looked lovely in it!' Mrs. Mavis broke
out. 'You must get another just like it--on the other side.'

'Yes, your daughter looked charming in it,' said Jasper Nettlepoint.
Then he added, to the girl--'Yet you mentioned my name to your mother.'

'It came back to me--seeing you here. I had no idea this was your home.'

'Well, I confess it isn't, much. Oh, there are some drinks!' Jasper went
on, approaching the tray and its glasses.

'Indeed there are and quite delicious,' Mrs. Mavis declared.

'Won't you have another then?--a pink one, like your daughter's gown.'

'With pleasure, sir. Oh, do see them over,' Mrs. Mavis continued,
accepting from the young man's hand a third tumbler.

'My mother and that gentleman? Surely they can take care of themselves,'
said Jasper Nettlepoint.

'But my daughter--she has a claim as an old friend.'

'Jasper, what does your telegram say?' his mother interposed.

He gave no heed to her question: he stood there with his glass in his
hand, looking from Mrs. Mavis to Miss Grace.

'Ah, leave her to me, madam; I'm quite competent,' I said to Mrs. Mavis.

Then the young man looked at me. The next minute he asked of the young
lady--'Do you mean you are going to Europe?'

'Yes, to-morrow; in the same ship as your mother.'

'That's what we've come here for, to see all about it,' said Mrs. Mavis.

'My son, take pity on me and tell me what light your telegram throws,'
Mrs. Nettlepoint went on.

'I will, dearest, when I've quenched my thirst.' And Jasper slowly
drained his glass.

'Well, you're worse than Gracie,' Mrs. Mavis commented. 'She was first
one thing and then the other--but only about up to three o'clock
yesterday.'

'Excuse me--won't you take something?' Jasper inquired of Gracie; who
however declined, as if to make up for her mother's copious
_consommation_. I made privately the reflection that the two ladies
ought to take leave, the question of Mrs. Nettlepoint's goodwill being
so satisfactorily settled and the meeting of the morrow at the ship so
near at hand; and I went so far as to judge that their protracted stay,
with their hostess visibly in a fidget, was a sign of a want of
breeding. Miss Grace after all then was not such an improvement on her
mother, for she easily might have taken the initiative of departure, in
spite of Mrs. Mavis's imbibing her glass of syrup in little interspaced
sips, as if to make it last as long as possible. I watched the girl with
an increasing curiosity; I could not help asking myself a question or
two about her and even perceiving already (in a dim and general way)
that there were some complications in her position. Was it not a
complication that she should have wished to remain long enough to
assuage a certain suspense, to learn whether or no Jasper were going to
sail? Had not something particular passed between them on the occasion
or at the period to which they had covertly alluded, and did she really
not know that her mother was bringing her to _his_ mother's, though she
apparently had thought it well not to mention the circumstance? Such
things were complications on the part of a young lady betrothed to that
curious cross-barred phantom of a Mr. Porterfield. But I am bound to add
that she gave me no further warrant for suspecting them than by the
simple fact of her encouraging her mother, by her immobility, to linger.
Somehow I had a sense that _she_ knew better. I got up myself to go, but
Mrs. Nettlepoint detained me after seeing that my movement would not be
taken as a hint, and I perceived she wished me not to leave my
fellow-visitors on her hands. Jasper complained of the closeness of the
room, said that it was not a night to sit in a room--one ought to be out
in the air, under the sky. He denounced the windows that overlooked the
water for not opening upon a balcony or a terrace, until his mother,
whom he had not yet satisfied about his telegram, reminded him that
there was a beautiful balcony in front, with room for a dozen people.
She assured him we would go and sit there if it would please him.

'It will be nice and cool to-morrow, when we steam into the great
ocean,' said Miss Mavis, expressing with more vivacity than she had yet
thrown into any of her utterances my own thought of half an hour before.
Mrs. Nettlepoint replied that it would probably be freezing cold, and
her son murmured that he would go and try the drawing-room balcony and
report upon it. Just as he was turning away he said, smiling, to Miss
Mavis--'Won't you come with me and see if it's pleasant?'

'Oh, well, we had better not stay all night!' her mother exclaimed, but
without moving. The girl moved, after a moment's hesitation; she rose
and accompanied Jasper into the other room. I observed that her slim
tallness showed to advantage as she walked and that she looked well as
she passed, with her head thrown back, into the darkness of the other
part of the house. There was something rather marked, rather surprising
(I scarcely knew why, for the act was simple enough) in her doing so,
and perhaps it was our sense of this that held the rest of us somewhat
stiffly silent as she remained away. I was waiting for Mrs. Mavis to go,
so that I myself might go; and Mrs. Nettlepoint was waiting for her to
go so that I might not. This doubtless made the young lady's absence
appear to us longer than it really was--it was probably very brief. Her
mother moreover, I think, had a vague consciousness of embarrassment.
Jasper Nettlepoint presently returned to the back drawing-room to get a
glass of syrup for his companion, and he took occasion to remark that it
was lovely on the balcony: one really got some air, the breeze was from
that quarter. I remembered, as he went away with his tinkling tumbler,
that from _my_ hand, a few minutes before, Miss Mavis had not been
willing to accept this innocent offering. A little later Mrs.
Nettlepoint said--'Well, if it's so pleasant there we had better go
ourselves.' So we passed to the front and in the other room met the two
young people coming in from the balcony. I wondered in the light of
subsequent events exactly how long they had been sitting there together.
(There were three or four cane chairs which had been placed there for
the summer.) If it had been but five minutes, that only made subsequent
events more curious. 'We must go, mother,' Miss Mavis immediately said;
and a moment later, with a little renewal of chatter as to our general
meeting on the ship, the visitors had taken leave. Jasper went down with
them to the door and as soon as they had gone out Mrs. Nettlepoint
exclaimed--'Ah, but she'll be a bore--she'll be a bore!'

'Not through talking too much--surely.'

'An affectation of silence is as bad. I hate that particular _pose_;
it's coming up very much now; an imitation of the English, like
everything else. A girl who tries to be statuesque at sea--that will act
on one's nerves!'

'I don't know what she tries to be, but she succeeds in being very
handsome.'

'So much the better for you. I'll leave her to you, for I shall be shut
up. I like her being placed under my "care."'

'She will be under Jasper's,' I remarked.

'Ah, he won't go--I want it too much.'

'I have an idea he will go.'

'Why didn't he tell me so then--when he came in?'

'He was diverted by Miss Mavis--a beautiful unexpected girl sitting
there.'

'Diverted from his mother--trembling for his decision?'

'She's an old friend; it was a meeting after a long separation.'

'Yes, such a lot of them as he knows!' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

'Such a lot of them?'

'He has so many female friends--in the most varied circles.'

'Well, we can close round her then--for I on my side knew, or used to
know, her young man.'

'Her young man?'

'The _fiancé_, the intended, the one she is going out to. He can't by
the way be very young now.'

'How odd it sounds!' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

I was going to reply that it was not odd if you knew Mr. Porterfield,
but I reflected that that perhaps only made it odder. I told my
companion briefly who he was--that I had met him in the old days in
Paris, when I believed for a fleeting hour that I could learn to paint,
when I lived with the _jeunesse des écoles_, and her comment on this was
simply--'Well, he had better have come out for her!'

'Perhaps so. She looked to me as she sat there as if she might change
her mind at the last moment.'

'About her marriage?'

'About sailing. But she won't change now.'

Jasper came back, and his mother instantly challenged him. 'Well, _are_
you going?'

'Yes, I shall go,' he said, smiling. 'I have got my telegram.'

'Oh, your telegram!' I ventured to exclaim. 'That charming girl is your
telegram.'

He gave me a look, but in the dusk I could not make out very well what
it conveyed. Then he bent over his mother, kissing her. 'My news isn't
particularly satisfactory. I am going for _you_.'

'Oh, you humbug!' she rejoined. But of course she was delighted.




II


People usually spend the first hours of a voyage in squeezing themselves
into their cabins, taking their little precautions, either so excessive
or so inadequate, wondering how they can pass so many days in such a
hole and asking idiotic questions of the stewards, who appear in
comparison such men of the world. My own initiations were rapid, as
became an old sailor, and so it seemed were Miss Mavis's, for when I
mounted to the deck at the end of half an hour I found her there alone,
in the stern of the ship, looking back at the dwindling continent. It
dwindled very fast for so big a place. I accosted her, having had no
conversation with her amid the crowd of leave-takers and the muddle of
farewells before we put off; we talked a little about the boat, our
fellow-passengers and our prospects, and then I said--'I think you
mentioned last night a name I know--that of Mr. Porterfield.'

'Oh no, I never uttered it,' she replied, smiling at me through her
closely-drawn veil.

'Then it was your mother.'

'Very likely it was my mother.' And she continued to smile, as if I
ought to have known the difference.

'I venture to allude to him because I have an idea I used to know him,'
I went on.

'Oh, I see.' Beyond this remark she manifested no interest in my having
known him.

'That is if it's the same one.' It seemed to me it would be silly to say
nothing more; so I added 'My Mr. Porterfield was called David.'

'Well, so is ours.' 'Ours' struck me as clever.

'I suppose I shall see him again if he is to meet you at Liverpool,' I
continued.

'Well, it will be bad if he doesn't.'

It was too soon for me to have the idea that it would be bad if he did:
that only came later. So I remarked that I had not seen him for so many
years that it was very possible I should not know him.'

'Well, I have not seen him for a great many years, but I expect I shall
know him all the same.'

'Oh, with you it's different,' I rejoined, smiling at her. 'Hasn't he
been back since those days?'

'I don't know what days you mean.'

'When I knew him in Paris--ages ago. He was a pupil of the École des
Beaux Arts. He was studying architecture.'

'Well, he is studying it still,' said Grace Mavis.

'Hasn't he learned it yet?'

'I don't know what he has learned. I shall see.' Then she added:
'Architecture is very difficult and he is tremendously thorough.'

'Oh, yes, I remember that. He was an admirable worker. But he must have
become quite a foreigner, if it's so many years since he has been at
home.'

'Oh, he is not changeable. If he were changeable----' But here my
interlocutress paused. I suspect she had been going to say that if he
were changeable he would have given her up long ago. After an instant
she went on: 'He wouldn't have stuck so to his profession. You can't
make much by it.'

'You can't make much?'

'It doesn't make you rich.'

'Oh, of course you have got to practise it--and to practise it long.'

'Yes--so Mr. Porterfield says.'

Something in the way she uttered these words made me laugh--they were so
serene an implication that the gentleman in question did not live up to
his principles. But I checked myself, asking my companion if she
expected to remain in Europe long--to live there.

'Well, it will be a good while if it takes me as long to come back as it
has taken me to go out.'

'And I think your mother said last night that it was your first visit.'

Miss Mavis looked at me a moment. 'Didn't mother talk!'

'It was all very interesting.'

She continued to look at me. 'You don't think that.'

'What have I to gain by saying it if I don't?'

'Oh, men have always something to gain.'

'You make me feel a terrible failure, then! I hope at any rate that it
gives you pleasure--the idea of seeing foreign lands.'

'Mercy--I should think so.'

'It's a pity our ship is not one of the fast ones, if you are
impatient.'

She was silent a moment; then she exclaimed, 'Oh, I guess it will be
fast enough!'

That evening I went in to see Mrs. Nettlepoint and sat on her sea-trunk,
which was pulled out from under the berth to accommodate me. It was nine
o'clock but not quite dark, as our northward course had already taken us
into the latitude of the longer days. She had made her nest admirably
and lay upon her sofa in a becoming dressing-gown and cap, resting from
her labours. It was her regular practice to spend the voyage in her
cabin, which smelt good (such was the refinement of her art), and she
had a secret peculiar to herself for keeping her port open without
shipping seas. She hated what she called the mess of the ship and the
idea, if she should go above, of meeting stewards with plates of
supererogatory food. She professed to be content with her situation (we
promised to lend each other books and I assured her familiarly that I
should be in and out of her room a dozen times a day), and pitied me for
having to mingle in society. She judged this to be a limited privilege,
for on the deck before we left the wharf she had taken a view of our
fellow-passengers.

'Oh, I'm an inveterate, almost a professional observer,' I replied, 'and
with that vice I am as well occupied as an old woman in the sun with her
knitting. It puts it in my power, in any situation, to _see_ things. I
shall see them even here and I shall come down very often and tell you
about them. You are not interested to-day, but you will be to-morrow,
for a ship is a great school of gossip. You won't believe the number of
researches and problems you will be engaged in by the middle of the
voyage.'

'I? Never in the world--lying here with my nose in a book and never
seeing anything.'

'You will participate at second hand. You will see through my eyes, hang
upon my lips, take sides, feel passions, all sorts of sympathies and
indignations. I have an idea that your young lady is the person on board
who will interest me most.'

'Mine, indeed! She has not been near me since we left the dock.'

'Well, she is very curious.'

'You have such cold-blooded terms,' Mrs. Nettlepoint murmured. '_Elle ne
sait pas se conduire_; she ought to have come to ask about me.'

'Yes, since you are under her care,' I said, smiling. 'As for her not
knowing how to behave--well, that's exactly what we shall see.'

'You will, but not I! I wash my hands of her.'

'Don't say that--don't say that.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint looked at me a moment. 'Why do you speak so solemnly?'

In return I considered her. 'I will tell you before we land. And have
you seen much of your son?'

'Oh yes, he has come in several times. He seems very much pleased. He
has got a cabin to himself.'

'That's great luck,' I said, 'but I have an idea he is always in luck. I
was sure I should have to offer him the second berth in my room.'

'And you wouldn't have enjoyed that, because you don't like him,' Mrs.
Nettlepoint took upon herself to say.

'What put that into your head?'

'It isn't in my head--it's in my heart, my _coeur de mère_. We guess
those things. You think he's selfish--I could see it last night.'

'Dear lady,' I said, 'I have no general ideas about him at all. He is
just one of the phenomena I am going to observe. He seems to me a very
fine young man. However,' I added, 'since you have mentioned last night
I will admit that I thought he rather tantalised you. He played with
your suspense.'

'Why, he came at the last just to please me,' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

I was silent a moment. 'Are you sure it was for your sake?'

'Ah, perhaps it was for yours!'

'When he went out on the balcony with that girl perhaps she asked him to
come,' I continued.

'Perhaps she did. But why should he do everything she asks him?'

'I don't know yet, but perhaps I shall know later. Not that he will tell
me--for he will never tell me anything: he is not one of those who
tell.'

'If she didn't ask him, what you say is a great wrong to her,' said Mrs.
Nettlepoint.

'Yes, if she didn't. But you say that to protect Jasper, not to protect
her,' I continued, smiling.

'You _are_ cold-blooded--it's uncanny!' my companion exclaimed.

'Ah, this is nothing yet! Wait a while--you'll see. At sea in general
I'm awful--I pass the limits. If I have outraged her in thought I will
jump overboard. There are ways of asking (a man doesn't need to tell a
woman that) without the crude words.'

'I don't know what you suppose between them,' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

'Nothing but what was visible on the surface. It transpired, as the
newspapers say, that they were old friends.'

'He met her at some promiscuous party--I asked him about it afterwards.
She is not a person he could ever think of seriously.'

'That's exactly what I believe.'

'You don't observe--you imagine,' Mrs. Nettlepoint pursued.' How do you
reconcile her laying a trap for Jasper with her going out to Liverpool
on an errand of love?'

'I don't for an instant suppose she laid a trap; I believe she acted on
the impulse of the moment. She is going out to Liverpool on an errand of
marriage; that is not necessarily the same thing as an errand of love,
especially for one who happens to have had a personal impression of the
gentleman she is engaged to.'

'Well, there are certain decencies which in such a situation the most
abandoned of her sex would still observe. You apparently judge her
capable--on no evidence--of violating them.'

'Ah, you don't understand the shades of things,' I rejoined. 'Decencies
and violations--there is no need for such heavy artillery! I can
perfectly imagine that without the least immodesty she should have said
to Jasper on the balcony, in fact if not in words--"I'm in dreadful
spirits, but if you come I shall feel better, and that will be pleasant
for you too."'

'And why is she in dreadful spirits?'

'She isn't!' I replied, laughing.

'What is she doing?'

'She is walking with your son.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint said nothing for a moment; then she broke out,
inconsequently--'Ah, she's horrid!'

'No, she's charming!' I protested.

'You mean she's "curious"?'

'Well, for me it's the same thing!'

This led my friend of course to declare once more that I was
cold-blooded. On the afternoon of the morrow we had another talk, and
she told me that in the morning Miss Mavis had paid her a long visit.
She knew nothing about anything, but her intentions were good and she
was evidently in her own eyes conscientious and decorous. And Mrs.
Nettlepoint concluded these remarks with the exclamation 'Poor young
thing!'

'You think she is a good deal to be pitied, then?'

'Well, her story sounds dreary--she told me a great deal of it. She fell
to talking little by little and went from one thing to another. She's in
that situation when a girl _must_ open herself--to some woman.'

'Hasn't she got Jasper?' I inquired.

'He isn't a woman. You strike me as jealous of him,' my companion added.

'I daresay _he_ thinks so--or will before the end. Ah no--ah no!' And I
asked Mrs. Nettlepoint if our young lady struck her as a flirt. She gave
me no answer, but went on to remark that it was odd and interesting to
her to see the way a girl like Grace Mavis resembled the girls of the
kind she herself knew better, the girls of 'society,' at the same time
that she differed from them; and the way the differences and
resemblances were mixed up, so that on certain questions you couldn't
tell where you would find her. You would think she would feel as you did
because you had found her feeling so, and then suddenly, in regard to
some other matter (which was yet quite the same) she would be terribly
wanting. Mrs. Nettlepoint proceeded to observe (to such idle
speculations does the vanity of a sea-voyage give encouragement) that
she wondered whether it were better to be an ordinary girl very well
brought up or an extraordinary girl not brought up at all.

'Oh, I go in for the extraordinary girl under all circumstances.'

'It is true that if you are _very_ well brought up you are not
ordinary,' said Mrs. Nettlepoint, smelling her strong salts. 'You are a
lady, at any rate. _C'est toujours ça._'

'And Miss Mavis isn't one--is that what you mean?'

'Well--you have seen her mother.'

'Yes, but I think your contention would be that among such people the
mother doesn't count.'

'Precisely; and that's bad.'

'I see what you mean. But isn't it rather hard? If your mother doesn't
know anything it is better you should be independent of her, and yet if
you are that constitutes a bad note.' I added that Mrs. Mavis had
appeared to count sufficiently two nights before. She had said and done
everything she wanted, while the girl sat silent and respectful. Grace's
attitude (so far as her mother was concerned) had been eminently decent.

'Yes, but she couldn't bear it,' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

'Ah, if you know it I may confess that she has told me as much.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint stared. 'Told you? There's one of the things they do!'

'Well, it was only a word. Won't you let me know whether you think she's
a flirt?'

'Find out for yourself, since you pretend to study folks.'

'Oh, your judgment would probably not at all determine mine. It's in
regard to yourself that I ask it.'

'In regard to myself?'

'To see the length of maternal immorality.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint continued to repeat my words. 'Maternal immorality?'

'You desire your son to have every possible distraction on his voyage,
and if you can make up your mind in the sense I refer to that will make
it all right. He will have no responsibility.'

'Heavens, how you analyse! I haven't in the least your passion for
making up my mind.'

'Then if you chance it you'll be more immoral still.'

'Your reasoning is strange,' said the poor lady; 'when it was you who
tried to put it into my head yesterday that she had asked him to come.'

'Yes, but in good faith.'

'How do you mean in good faith?'

'Why, as girls of that sort do. Their allowance and measure in such
matters is much larger than that of young ladies who have been, as you
say, _very_ well brought up; and yet I am not sure that on the whole I
don't think them the more innocent. Miss Mavis is engaged, and she's to
be married next week, but it's an old, old story, and there's no more
romance in it than if she were going to be photographed. So her usual
life goes on, and her usual life consists (and that of ces demoiselles
in general) in having plenty of gentlemen's society. Having it I mean
without having any harm from it.'

'Well, if there is no harm from it what are you talking about and why
am I immoral?'

I hesitated, laughing. 'I retract--you are sane and clear. I am sure she
thinks there won't be any harm,' I added. 'That's the great point.'

'The great point?'

'I mean, to be settled.'

'Mercy, we are not trying them! How can _we_ settle it?'

'I mean of course in our minds. There will be nothing more interesting
for the next ten days for our minds to exercise themselves upon.'

'They will get very tired of it,' said Mrs. Nettlepoint.

'No, no, because the interest will increase and the plot will thicken.
It can't help it.' She looked at me as if she thought me slightly
Mephistophelean, and I went on--'So she told you everything in her life
was dreary?'

'Not everything but most things. And she didn't tell me so much as I
guessed it. She'll tell me more the next time. She will behave properly
now about coming in to see me; I told her she ought to.'

'I am glad of that,' I said. 'Keep her with you as much as possible.'

'I don't follow you much,' Mrs. Nettlepoint replied, 'but so far as I do
I don't think your remarks are in very good taste.'

'I'm too excited, I lose my head, cold-blooded as you think me. Doesn't
she like Mr. Porterfield?'

'Yes, that's the worst of it.'

'The worst of it?'

'He's so good--there's no fault to be found with him. Otherwise she
would have thrown it all up. It has dragged on since she was eighteen:
she became engaged to him before he went abroad to study. It was one of
those childish muddles which parents in America might prevent so much
more than they do. The thing is to insist on one's daughter's waiting,
on the engagement's being long; and then after you have got that started
to take it on every occasion as little seriously as possible--to make it
die out. You can easily tire it out. However, Mr. Porterfield has taken
it seriously for some years. He has done his part to keep it alive. She
says he adores her.'

'His part? Surely his part would have been to marry her by this time.'

'He has absolutely no money.'

'He ought to have got some, in seven years.'

'So I think she thinks. There are some sorts of poverty that are
contemptible. But he has a little more now. That's why he won't wait any
longer. His mother has come out, she has something--a little--and she is
able to help him. She will live with them and bear some of the expenses,
and after her death the son will have what there is.'

'How old is she?' I asked, cynically.

'I haven't the least idea. But it doesn't sound very inspiring. He has
not been to America since he first went out.'

'That's an odd way of adoring her.'

'I made that objection mentally, but I didn't express it to her. She met
it indeed a little by telling me that he had had other chances to
marry.'

'That surprises me,' I remarked. 'And did she say that _she_ had had?'

'No, and that's one of the things I thought nice in her; for she must
have had. She didn't try to make out that he had spoiled her life. She
has three other sisters and there is very little money at home. She has
tried to make money; she has written little things and painted little
things, but her talent is apparently not in that direction. Her father
has had a long illness and has lost his place--he was in receipt of a
salary in connection with some waterworks--and one of her sisters has
lately become a widow, with children and without means. And so as in
fact she never has married any one else, whatever opportunities she may
have encountered, she appears to have just made up her mind to go out to
Mr. Porterfield as the least of her evils. But it isn't very amusing.'

'That only makes it the more honourable. She will go through with it,
whatever it costs, rather than disappoint him after he has waited so
long. It is true,' I continued, 'that when a woman acts from a sense of
honour----'

'Well, when she does?' said Mrs. Nettlepoint, for I hesitated
perceptibly.

'It is so extravagant a course that some one has to pay for it.'

'You are very impertinent. We all have to pay for each other, all the
while; and for each other's virtues as well as vices.'

'That's precisely why I shall be sorry for Mr. Porterfield when she
steps off the ship with her little bill. I mean with her teeth
clenched.'

'Her teeth are not in the least clenched. She is in perfect
good-humour.'

'Well, we must try and keep her so,' I said. 'You must take care that
Jasper neglects nothing.'

I know not what reflection this innocent pleasantry of mine provoked on
the good lady's part; the upshot of them at all events was to make her
say--'Well, I never asked her to come; I'm very glad of that. It is all
their own doing.'

'Their own--you mean Jasper's and hers?'

'No indeed. I mean her mother's and Mrs. Allen's; the girl's too of
course. They put themselves upon us.'

'Oh yes, I can testify to that. Therefore I'm glad too. We should have
missed it, I think.'

'How seriously you take it!' Mrs. Nettlepoint exclaimed.

'Ah, wait a few days!' I replied, getting up to leave her.




III


The _Patagonia_ was slow, but she was spacious and comfortable, and
there was a kind of motherly decency in her long, nursing rock and her
rustling, old-fashioned gait. It was as if she wished not to present
herself in port with the splashed eagerness of a young creature. We were
not numerous enough to squeeze each other and yet we were not too few to
entertain--with that familiarity and relief which figures and objects
acquire on the great bare field of the ocean, beneath the great bright
glass of the sky. I had never liked the sea so much before, indeed I had
never liked it at all; but now I had a revelation of how, in a midsummer
mood, it could please. It was darkly and magnificently blue and
imperturbably quiet--save for the great regular swell of its
heart-beats, the pulse of its life, and there grew to be something so
agreeable in the sense of floating there in infinite isolation and
leisure that it was a positive satisfaction the _Patagonia_ was not a
racer. One had never thought of the sea as the great place of safety,
but now it came over one that there is no place so safe from the land.
When it does not give you trouble it takes it away--takes away letters
and telegrams and newspapers and visits and duties and efforts, all the
complications, all the superfluities and superstitions that we have
stuffed into our terrene life. The simple absence of the post, when the
particular conditions enable you to enjoy the great fact by which it is
produced, becomes in itself a kind of bliss, and the clean stage of the
deck shows you a play that amuses, the personal drama of the voyage, the
movement and interaction, in the strong sea-light, of figures that end
by representing something--something moreover of which the interest is
never, even in its keenness, too great to suffer you to go to sleep. I,
at any rate, dozed a great deal, lying on my rug with a French novel,
and when I opened my eyes I generally saw Jasper Nettlepoint passing
with his mother's _protégée_ on his arm. Somehow at these moments,
between sleeping and waking, I had an inconsequent sense that they were
a part of the French novel. Perhaps this was because I had fallen into
the trick, at the start, of regarding Grace Mavis almost as a married
woman, which, as every one knows, is the necessary status of the heroine
of such a work. Every revolution of our engine at any rate would
contribute to the effect of making her one.

In the saloon, at meals, my neighbour on the right was a certain little
Mrs. Peck, a very short and very round person whose head was enveloped
in a 'cloud' (a cloud of dirty white wool) and who promptly let me know
that she was going to Europe for the education of her children. I had
already perceived (an hour after we left the dock) that some energetic
step was required in their interest, but as we were not in Europe yet
the business could not be said to have begun. The four little Pecks, in
the enjoyment of untrammelled leisure, swarmed about the ship as if
they had been pirates boarding her, and their mother was as powerless to
check their license as if she had been gagged and stowed away in the
hold. They were especially to be trusted to run between the legs of the
stewards when these attendants arrived with bowls of soup for the
languid ladies. Their mother was too busy recounting to her
fellow-passengers how many years Miss Mavis had been engaged. In the
blank of a marine existence things that are nobody's business very soon
become everybody's, and this was just one of those facts that are
propagated with a mysterious and ridiculous rapidity. The whisper that
carries them is very small, in the great scale of things, of air and
space and progress, but it is also very safe, for there is no
compression, no sounding-board, to make speakers responsible. And then
repetition at sea is somehow not repetition; monotony is in the air, the
mind is flat and everything recurs--the bells, the meals, the stewards'
faces, the romp of children, the walk, the clothes, the very shoes and
buttons of passengers taking their exercise. These things grow at last
so insipid that, in comparison, revelations as to the personal history
of one's companions have a taste, even when one cares little about the
people.

Jasper Nettlepoint sat on my left hand when he was not upstairs seeing
that Miss Mavis had her repast comfortably on deck. His mother's place
would have been next mine had she shown herself, and then that of the
young lady under her care. The two ladies, in other words, would have
been between us, Jasper marking the limit of the party on that side.
Miss Mavis was present at luncheon the first day, but dinner passed
without her coming in, and when it was half over Jasper remarked that he
would go up and look after her.

'Isn't that young lady coming--the one who was here to lunch?' Mrs. Peck
asked of me as he left the saloon.

'Apparently not. My friend tells me she doesn't like the saloon.'

'You don't mean to say she's sick, do you?'

'Oh no, not in this weather. But she likes to be above.'

'And is that gentleman gone up to her?'

'Yes, she's under his mother's care.'

'And is his mother up there, too?' asked Mrs. Peck, whose processes were
homely and direct.

'No, she remains in her cabin. People have different tastes. Perhaps
that's one reason why Miss Mavis doesn't come to table,' I added--'her
chaperon not being able to accompany her.'

'Her chaperon?'

'Mrs. Nettlepoint--the lady under whose protection she is.'

'Protection?' Mrs. Peck stared at me a moment, moving some valued morsel
in her mouth; then she exclaimed, familiarly, 'Pshaw!' I was struck with
this and I was on the point of asking her what she meant by it when she
continued: 'Are we not going to see Mrs. Nettlepoint?'

'I am afraid not. She vows that she won't stir from her sofa.'

'Pshaw!' said Mrs. Peck again. 'That's quite a disappointment.'

'Do you know her then?'

'No, but I know all about her.' Then my companion added--'You don't
meant to say she's any relation?'

'Do you mean to me?'

'No, to Grace Mavis.'

'None at all. They are very new friends, as I happen to know. Then you
are acquainted with our young lady?' I had not noticed that any
recognition passed between them at luncheon.

'Is she yours too?' asked Mrs. Peck, smiling at me.

'Ah, when people are in the same boat--literally--they belong a little
to each other.'

'That's so,' said Mrs. Peck. 'I don't know Miss Mavis but I know all
about her--I live opposite to her on Merrimac Avenue. I don't know
whether you know that part.'

'Oh yes--it's very beautiful.'

The consequence of this remark was another 'Pshaw!' But Mrs. Peck went
on--'When you've lived opposite to people like that for a long time you
feel as if you were acquainted. But she didn't take it up to-day; she
didn't speak to me. She knows who I am as well as she knows her own
mother.'

'You had better speak to her first--she's shy,' I remarked.

'Shy? Why she's nearly thirty years old. I suppose you know where she's
going.'

'Oh yes--we all take an interest in that.'

'That young man, I suppose, particularly.'

'That young man?'

'The handsome one, who sits there. Didn't you tell me he is Mrs.
Nettlepoint's son?'

'Oh yes; he acts as her deputy. No doubt he does all he can to carry out
her function.'

Mrs. Peck was silent a moment. I had spoken jocosely, but she received
my pleasantry with a serious face. 'Well, she might let him eat his
dinner in peace!' she presently exclaimed.

'Oh, he'll come back!' I said, glancing at his place. The repast
continued and when it was finished I screwed my chair round to leave the
table. Mrs. Peck performed the same movement and we quitted the saloon
together. Outside of it was a kind of vestibule, with several seats,
from which you could descend to the lower cabins or mount to the
promenade-deck. Mrs. Peck appeared to hesitate as to her course and then
solved the problem by going neither way. She dropped upon one of the
benches and looked up at me.

'I thought you said he would come back.'

'Young Nettlepoint? I see he didn't. Miss Mavis then has given him half
of her dinner.'

'It's very kind of her! She has been engaged for ages.'

'Yes, but that will soon be over.'

'So I suppose--as quick as we land. Every one knows it on Merrimac
Avenue. Every one there takes a great interest in it.'

'Ah, of course, a girl like that: she has many friends.'

'I mean even people who don't know her.'

'I see,' I went on: 'she is so handsome that she attracts attention,
people enter into her affairs.'

'She _used_ to be pretty, but I can't say I think she's anything
remarkable to-day. Anyhow, if she attracts attention she ought to be all
the more careful what she does. You had better tell her that.'

'Oh, it's none of my business!' I replied, leaving Mrs. Peck and going
above. The exclamation, I confess, was not perfectly in accordance with
my feeling, or rather my feeling was not perfectly in harmony with the
exclamation. The very first thing I did on reaching the deck was to
notice that Miss Mavis was pacing it on Jasper Nettlepoint's arm and
that whatever beauty she might have lost, according to Mrs. Peck's
insinuation, she still kept enough to make one's eyes follow her. She
had put on a sort of crimson hood, which was very becoming to her and
which she wore for the rest of the voyage. She walked very well, with
long steps, and I remember that at this moment the ocean had a gentle
evening swell which made the great ship dip slowly, rhythmically, giving
a movement that was graceful to graceful pedestrians and a more awkward
one to the awkward. It was the loveliest hour of a fine day, the clear
early evening, with the glow of the sunset in the air and a purple
colour in the sea. I always thought that the waters ploughed by the
Homeric heroes must have looked like that. I perceived on that
particular occasion moreover that Grace Mavis would for the rest of the
voyage be the most visible thing on the ship; the figure that would
count most in the composition of groups. She couldn't help it, poor
girl; nature had made her conspicuous--important, as the painters say.
She paid for it by the exposure it brought with it--the danger that
people would, as I had said to Mrs. Peck, enter into her affairs.

Jasper Nettlepoint went down at certain times to see his mother, and I
watched for one of these occasions (on the third day out) and took
advantage of it to go and sit by Miss Mavis. She wore a blue veil drawn
tightly over her face, so that if the smile with which she greeted me
was dim I could account for it partly by that.

'Well, we are getting on--we are getting on,' I said, cheerfully,
looking at the friendly, twinkling sea.

'Are we going very fast?'

'Not fast, but steadily. _Ohne Hast, ohne Rast_--do you know German?'

'Well, I've studied it--some.'

'It will be useful to you over there when you travel.'

'Well yes, if we do. But I don't suppose we shall much. Mr. Nettlepoint
says we ought,' my interlocutress added in a moment.

'Ah, of course _he_ thinks so. He has been all over the world.'

'Yes, he has described some of the places. That's what I should like. I
didn't know I should like it so much.'

'Like what so much?'

'Going on this way. I could go on for ever, for ever and ever.'

'Ah, you know it's not always like this,' I rejoined.

'Well, it's better than Boston.'

'It isn't so good as Paris,' I said, smiling.

'Oh, I know all about Paris. There is no freshness in that. I feel as if
I had been there.'

'You mean you have heard so much about it?'

'Oh yes, nothing else for ten years.'

I had come to talk with Miss Mavis because she was attractive, but I had
been rather conscious of the absence of a good topic, not feeling at
liberty to revert to Mr. Porterfield. She had not encouraged me, when I
spoke to her as we were leaving Boston, to go on with the history of my
acquaintance with this gentleman; and yet now, unexpectedly, she
appeared to imply (it was doubtless one of the disparities mentioned by
Mrs. Nettlepoint) that he might be glanced at without indelicacy.

'I see, you mean by letters,' I remarked.

'I shan't live in a good part. I know enough to know that,' she went on.

'Dear young lady, there are no bad parts,' I answered, reassuringly.

'Why, Mr. Nettlepoint says it's horrid.'

'It's horrid?'

'Up there in the Batignolles. It's worse than Merrimac Avenue.'

'Worse--in what way?'

'Why, even less where the nice people live.'

'He oughtn't to say that,' I returned. 'Don't you call Mr. Porterfield a
nice person?' I ventured to subjoin.

'Oh, it doesn't make any difference.' She rested her eyes on me a moment
through her veil, the texture of which gave them a suffused prettiness.
'Do you know him very well?' she asked.

'Mr. Porterfield?'

'No, Mr. Nettlepoint.'

'Ah, very little. He's a good deal younger than I.'

She was silent a moment; after which she said: 'He's younger than me,
too.' I know not what drollery there was in this but it was unexpected
and it made me laugh. Neither do I know whether Miss Mavis took offence
at my laughter, though I remember thinking at the moment with
compunction that it had brought a certain colour to her cheek. At all
events she got up, gathering her shawl and her books into her arm. 'I'm
going down--I'm tired.'

'Tired of me, I'm afraid.'

'No, not yet.'

'I'm like you,' I pursued. 'I should like it to go on and on.'

She had begun to walk along the deck to the companion-way and I went
with her. 'Oh, no, I shouldn't, after all!'

I had taken her shawl from her to carry it, but at the top of the steps
that led down to the cabins I had to give it back. 'Your mother would be
glad if she could know,' I observed as we parted.

'If she could know?'

'How well you are getting on. And that good Mrs. Allen.'

'Oh, mother, mother! She made me come, she pushed me off.' And almost as
if not to say more she went quickly below.

I paid Mrs. Nettlepoint a morning visit after luncheon and another in
the evening, before she 'turned in.' That same day, in the evening, she
said to me suddenly, 'Do you know what I have done? I have asked
Jasper.'

'Asked him what?'

'Why, if _she_ asked him, you know.'

'I don't understand.'

'You do perfectly. If that girl really asked him--on the balcony--to
sail with us.'

'My dear friend, do you suppose that if she did he would tell you?'

'That's just what he says. But he says she didn't.'

'And do you consider the statement valuable?' I asked, laughing out.
'You had better ask Miss Gracie herself.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint stared. 'I couldn't do that.'

'Incomparable friend, I am only joking. What does it signify now?'

'I thought you thought everything signified. You were so full of
signification!'

'Yes, but we are farther out now, and somehow in mid-ocean everything
becomes absolute.'

'What else _can_ he do with decency?' Mrs. Nettlepoint went on. 'If, as
my son, he were never to speak to her it would be very rude and you
would think that stranger still. Then _you_ would do what he does, and
where would be the difference?'

'How do you know what he does? I haven't mentioned him for twenty-four
hours.'

'Why, she told me herself: she came in this afternoon.'

'What an odd thing to tell you!' I exclaimed.

'Not as she says it. She says he's full of attention, perfectly
devoted--looks after her all the while. She seems to want me to know it,
so that I may commend him for it.'

'That's charming; it shows her good conscience.'

'Yes, or her great cleverness.'

Something in the tone in which Mrs. Nettlepoint said this caused me to
exclaim in real surprise, 'Why, what do you suppose she has in her
mind?'

'To get hold of him, to make him go so far that he can't retreat, to
marry him, perhaps.'

'To marry him? And what will she do with Mr. Porterfield?'

'She'll ask me just to explain to him--or perhaps you.'

'Yes, as an old friend!' I replied, laughing. But I asked more
seriously, 'Do you see Jasper caught like that?'

'Well, he's only a boy--he's younger at least than she.'

'Precisely; she regards him as a child.'

'As a child?'

'She remarked to me herself to-day that he is so much younger.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint stared. 'Does she talk of it with you? That shows she
has a plan, that she has thought it over!'

I have sufficiently betrayed that I deemed Grace Mavis a singular girl,
but I was far from judging her capable of laying a trap for our young
companion. Moreover my reading of Jasper was not in the least that he
was catchable--could be made to do a thing if he didn't want to do it.
Of course it was not impossible that he might be inclined, that he might
take it (or already have taken it) into his head to marry Miss Mavis;
but to believe this I should require still more proof than his always
being with her. He wanted at most to marry her for the voyage. 'If you
have questioned him perhaps you have tried to make him feel
responsible,' I said to his mother.

'A little, but it's very difficult. Interference makes him perverse. One
has to go gently. Besides, it's too absurd--think of her age. If she
can't take care of herself!' cried Mrs. Nettlepoint.

'Yes, let us keep thinking of her age, though it's not so prodigious.
And if things get very bad you have one resource left,' I added.

'What is that?'

'You can go upstairs.'

'Ah, never, never! If it takes that to save her she must be lost.
Besides, what good would it do? If I were to go up she could come down
here.'

'Yes, but you could keep Jasper with you.'

'Could I?' Mrs. Nettlepoint demanded, in the manner of a woman who knew
her son.

In the saloon the next day, after dinner, over the red cloth of the
tables, beneath the swinging lamps and the racks of tumblers, decanters
and wine-glasses, we sat down to whist, Mrs. Peck, among others, taking
a hand in the game. She played very badly and talked too much, and when
the rubber was over assuaged her discomfiture (though not mine--we had
been partners) with a Welsh rabbit and a tumbler of something hot. We
had done with the cards, but while she waited for this refreshment she
sat with her elbows on the table shuffling a pack.

'She hasn't spoken to me yet--she won't do it,' she remarked in a
moment.

'Is it possible there is any one on the ship who hasn't spoken to you?'

'Not that girl--she knows too well!' Mrs. Peck looked round our little
circle with a smile of intelligence--she had familiar, communicative
eyes. Several of our company had assembled, according to the wont, the
last thing in the evening, of those who are cheerful at sea, for the
consumption of grilled sardines and devilled bones.

'What then does she know?'

'Oh, she knows that I know.'

'Well, we know what Mrs. Peck knows,' one of the ladies of the group
observed to me, with an air of privilege.

'Well, you wouldn't know if I hadn't told you--from the way she acts,'
said Mrs. Peck, with a small laugh.

'She is going out to a gentleman who lives over there--he's waiting
there to marry her,' the other lady went on, in the tone of authentic
information. I remember that her name was Mrs. Gotch and that her mouth
looked always as if she were whistling.

'Oh, he knows--I've told him,' said Mrs. Peck.

'Well, I presume every one knows,' Mrs. Gotch reflected.

'Dear madam, is it every one's business?' I asked.

'Why, don't you think it's a peculiar way to act?' Mrs. Gotch was
evidently surprised at my little protest.

'Why, it's right there--straight in front of you, like a play at the
theatre--as if you had paid to see it,' said Mrs. Peck. 'If you don't
call it public----!'

'Aren't you mixing things up? What do you call public?'

'Why, the way they go on. They are up there now.'

'They cuddle up there half the night,' said Mrs. Gotch. 'I don't know
when they come down. Any hour you like--when all the lights are out they
are up there still.'

'Oh, you can't tire them out. They don't want relief--like the watch!'
laughed one of the gentlemen.

'Well, if they enjoy each other's society what's the harm?' another
asked. 'They'd do just the same on land.'

'They wouldn't do it on the public streets, I suppose,' said Mrs. Peck.
'And they wouldn't do it if Mr. Porterfield was round!'

'Isn't that just where your confusion comes in?' I inquired. 'It's
public enough that Miss Mavis and Mr. Nettlepoint are always together,
but it isn't in the least public that she is going to be married.'

'Why, how can you say--when the very sailors know it! The captain knows
it and all the officers know it; they see them there--especially at
night, when they're sailing the ship.'

'I thought there was some rule----' said Mrs. Gotch.

'Well, there is--that you've got to behave yourself,' Mrs. Peck
rejoined. 'So the captain told me--he said they have some rule. He said
they have to have, when people are too demonstrative.'

'Too demonstrative?'

'When they attract so much attention.'

'Ah, it's we who attract the attention--by talking about what doesn't
concern us and about what we really don't know,' I ventured to declare.

'She said the captain said he would tell on her as soon as we arrive,'
Mrs. Gotch interposed.

'_She_ said----?' I repeated, bewildered.

'Well, he did say so, that he would think it his duty to inform Mr.
Porterfield, when he comes on to meet her--if they keep it up in the
same way,' said Mrs. Peck.

'Oh, they'll keep it up, don't you fear!' one of the gentlemen
exclaimed.

'Dear madam, the captain is laughing at you.'

'No, he ain't--he's right down scandalised. He says he regards us all
as a real family and wants the family to be properly behaved.' I could
see Mrs. Peck was irritated by my controversial tone: she challenged me
with considerable spirit. 'How can you say I don't know it when all the
street knows it and has known it for years--for years and years?' She
spoke as if the girl had been engaged at least for twenty. 'What is she
going out for, if not to marry him?'

'Perhaps she is going to see how he looks,' suggested one of the
gentlemen.

'He'd look queer--if he knew.'

'Well, I guess he'll know,' said Mrs. Gotch.

'She'd tell him herself--she wouldn't be afraid,' the gentleman went on.

'Well, she might as well kill him. He'll jump overboard.'

'Jump overboard?' cried Mrs. Gotch, as if she hoped then that Mr.
Porterfield would be told.

'He has just been waiting for this--for years,' said Mrs. Peck.

'Do you happen to know him?' I inquired.

Mrs. Peck hesitated a moment. 'No, but I know a lady who does. Are you
going up?'

I had risen from my place--I had not ordered supper. 'I'm going to take
a turn before going to bed.'

'Well then, you'll see!'

Outside the saloon I hesitated, for Mrs. Peck's admonition made me feel
for a moment that if I ascended to the deck I should have entered in a
manner into her little conspiracy. But the night was so warm and
splendid that I had been intending to smoke a cigar in the air before
going below, and I did not see why I should deprive myself of this
pleasure in order to seem not to mind Mrs. Peck. I went up and saw a few
figures sitting or moving about in the darkness. The ocean looked black
and small, as it is apt to do at night, and the long mass of the ship,
with its vague dim wings, seemed to take up a great part of it. There
were more stars than one saw on land and the heavens struck one more
than ever as larger than the earth. Grace Mavis and her companion were
not, so far as I perceived at first, among the few passengers who were
lingering late, and I was glad, because I hated to hear her talked about
in the manner of the gossips I had left at supper. I wished there had
been some way to prevent it, but I could think of no way but to
recommend her privately to change her habits. That would be a very
delicate business, and perhaps it would be better to begin with Jasper,
though that would be delicate too. At any rate one might let him know,
in a friendly spirit, to how much remark he exposed the young
lady--leaving this revelation to work its way upon him. Unfortunately I
could not altogether believe that the pair were unconscious of the
observation and the opinion of the passengers. They were not a boy and a
girl; they had a certain social perspective in their eye. I was not very
clear as to the details of that behaviour which had made them (according
to the version of my good friends in the saloon) a scandal to the ship,
for though I looked at them a good deal I evidently had not looked at
them so continuously and so hungrily as Mrs. Peck. Nevertheless the
probability was that they knew what was thought of them--what naturally
would be--and simply didn't care. That made Miss Mavis out rather
cynical and even a little immodest; and yet, somehow, if she had such
qualities I did not dislike her for them. I don't know what strange,
secret excuses I found for her. I presently indeed encountered a need
for them on the spot, for just as I was on the point of going below
again, after several restless turns and (within the limit where smoking
was allowed) as many puffs at a cigar as I cared for, I became aware
that a couple of figures were seated behind one of the lifeboats that
rested on the deck. They were so placed as to be visible only to a
person going close to the rail and peering a little sidewise. I don't
think I peered, but as I stood a moment beside the rail my eye was
attracted by a dusky object which protruded beyond the boat and which,
as I saw at a second glance, was the tail of a lady's dress. I bent
forward an instant, but even then I saw very little more; that scarcely
mattered, however, for I took for granted on the spot that the persons
concealed in so snug a corner were Jasper Nettlepoint and Mr.
Porterfield's intended. Concealed was the word, and I thought it a real
pity; there was bad taste in it. I immediately turned away and the next
moment I found myself face to face with the captain of the ship. I had
already had some conversation with him (he had been so good as to invite
me, as he had invited Mrs. Nettlepoint and her son and the young lady
travelling with them, and also Mrs. Peck, to sit at his table) and had
observed with pleasure that he had the art, not universal on the
Atlantic liners, of mingling urbanity with seamanship.

'They don't waste much time--your friends in there,' he said, nodding
in the direction in which he had seen me looking.

'Ah well, they haven't much to lose.'

'That's what I mean. I'm told _she_ hasn't.'

I wanted to say something exculpatory but I scarcely knew what note to
strike. I could only look vaguely about me at the starry darkness and
the sea that seemed to sleep. 'Well, with these splendid nights, this
perfection of weather, people are beguiled into late hours.'

'Yes. We want a nice little blow,' the captain said.

'A nice little blow?'

'That would clear the decks!'

The captain was rather dry and he went about his business. He had made
me uneasy and instead of going below I walked a few steps more. The
other walkers dropped off pair by pair (they were all men) till at last
I was alone. Then, after a little, I quitted the field. Jasper and his
companion were still behind their lifeboat. Personally I greatly
preferred good weather, but as I went down I found myself vaguely
wishing, in the interest of I scarcely knew what, unless of decorum,
that we might have half a gale.

Miss Mavis turned out, in sea-phrase, early; for the next morning I saw
her come up only a little while after I had finished my breakfast, a
ceremony over which I contrived not to dawdle. She was alone and Jasper
Nettlepoint, by a rare accident, was not on deck to help her. I went to
meet her (she was encumbered as usual with her shawl, her sun-umbrella
and a book) and laid my hands on her chair, placing it near the stern of
the ship, where she liked best to be. But I proposed to her to walk a
little before she sat down and she took my arm after I had put her
accessories into the chair. The deck was clear at that hour and the
morning light was gay; one got a sort of exhilarated impression of fair
conditions and an absence of hindrance. I forget what we spoke of first,
but it was because I felt these things pleasantly, and not to torment my
companion nor to test her, that I could not help exclaiming cheerfully,
after a moment, as I have mentioned having done the first day, 'Well, we
are getting on, we are getting on!'

'Oh yes, I count every hour.'

'The last days always go quicker,' I said, 'and the last hours----'

'Well, the last hours?' she asked; for I had instinctively checked
myself.

'Oh, one is so glad then that it is almost the same as if one had
arrived. But we ought to be grateful when the elements have been so kind
to us,' I added. 'I hope you will have enjoyed the voyage.'

She hesitated a moment, then she said, 'Yes, much more than I expected.'

'Did you think it would be very bad?'

'Horrible, horrible!'

The tone of these words was strange but I had not much time to reflect
upon it, for turning round at that moment I saw Jasper Nettlepoint come
towards us. He was separated from us by the expanse of the white deck
and I could not help looking at him from head to foot as he drew nearer.
I know not what rendered me on this occasion particularly sensitive to
the impression, but it seemed to me that I saw him as I had never seen
him before--saw him inside and out, in the intense sea-light, in his
personal, his moral totality. It was a quick, vivid revelation; if it
only lasted a moment it had a simplifying, certifying effect. He was
intrinsically a pleasing apparition, with his handsome young face and a
certain absence of compromise in his personal arrangements which, more
than any one I have ever seen, he managed to exhibit on shipboard. He
had none of the appearance of wearing out old clothes that usually
prevails there, but dressed straight, as I heard some one say. This gave
him a practical, successful air, as of a young man who would come best
out of any predicament. I expected to feel my companion's hand loosen
itself on my arm, as indication that now she must go to him, and was
almost surprised she did not drop me. We stopped as we met and Jasper
bade us a friendly good-morning. Of course the remark was not slow to be
made that we had another lovely day, which led him to exclaim, in the
manner of one to whom criticism came easily, 'Yes, but with this sort of
thing consider what one of the others would do!'

'One of the other ships?'

'We should be there now, or at any rate to-morrow.'

'Well then, I'm glad it isn't one of the others,' I said, smiling at the
young lady on my arm. My remark offered her a chance to say something
appreciative and gave him one even more; but neither Jasper nor Grace
Mavis took advantage of the opportunity. What they did do, I perceived,
was to look at each other for an instant; after which Miss Mavis turned
her eyes silently to the sea. She made no movement and uttered no word,
contriving to give me the sense that she had all at once become
perfectly passive, that she somehow declined responsibility. We remained
standing there with Jasper in front of us, and if the touch of her arm
did not suggest that I should give her up, neither did it intimate that
we had better pass on. I had no idea of giving her up, albeit one of the
things that I seemed to discover just then in Jasper's physiognomy was
an imperturbable implication that she was his property. His eye met mine
for a moment, and it was exactly as if he had said to me, 'I know what
you think, but I don't care a rap.' What I really thought was that he
was selfish beyond the limits: that was the substance of my little
revelation. Youth is almost always selfish, just as it is almost always
conceited, and, after all, when it is combined with health and good
parts, good looks and good spirits, it has a right to be, and I easily
forgive it if it be really youth. Still it is a question of degree, and
what stuck out of Jasper Nettlepoint (if one felt that sort of thing)
was that his egotism had a hardness, his love of his own way an avidity.
These elements were jaunty and prosperous, they were accustomed to
triumph. He was fond, very fond, of women; they were necessary to him
and that was in his type; but he was not in the least in love with Grace
Mavis. Among the reflections I quickly made this was the one that was
most to the point. There was a degree of awkwardness, after a minute, in
the way we were planted there, though the apprehension of it was
doubtless not in the least with him.

'How is your mother this morning?' I asked.

'You had better go down and see.'

'Not till Miss Mavis is tired of me.'

She said nothing to this and I made her walk again. For some minutes she
remained silent; then, rather unexpectedly, she began: 'I've seen you
talking to that lady who sits at our table--the one who has so many
children.'

'Mrs. Peck? Oh yes, I have talked with her.'

'Do you know her very well?'

'Only as one knows people at sea. An acquaintance makes itself. It
doesn't mean very much.'

'She doesn't speak to me--she might if she wanted.'

'That's just what she says of you--that you might speak to her.'

'Oh, if she's waiting for that----!' said my companion, with a laugh.
Then she added--'She lives in our street, nearly opposite.'

'Precisely. That's the reason why she thinks you might speak; she has
seen you so often and seems to know so much about you.'

'What does she know about me?'

'Ah, you must ask her--I can't tell you!'

'I don't care what she knows,' said my young lady. After a moment she
went on--'She must have seen that I'm not very sociable.' And
then--'What are you laughing at?'

My laughter was for an instant irrepressible--there was something so
droll in the way she had said that.

'Well, you are not sociable and yet you are. Mrs. Peck is, at any rate,
and thought that ought to make it easy for you to enter into
conversation with her.'

'Oh, I don't care for her conversation--I know what it amounts to.' I
made no rejoinder--I scarcely knew what rejoinder to make--and the girl
went on, 'I know what she thinks and I know what she says.' Still I was
silent, but the next moment I saw that my delicacy had been wasted, for
Miss Mavis asked, 'Does she make out that she knows Mr. Porterfield?'

'No, she only says that she knows a lady who knows him.'

'Yes, I know--Mrs. Jeremie. Mrs. Jeremie's an idiot!' I was not in a
position to controvert this, and presently my young lady said she would
sit down. I left her in her chair--I saw that she preferred it--and
wandered to a distance. A few minutes later I met Jasper again, and he
stopped of his own accord and said to me--

'We shall be in about six in the evening, on the eleventh day--they
promise it.'

'If nothing happens, of course.'

'Well, what's going to happen?'

'That's just what I'm wondering!' And I turned away and went below with
the foolish but innocent satisfaction of thinking that I had mystified
him.




IV


'I don't know what to do, and you must help me,' Mrs. Nettlepoint said
to me that evening, as soon as I went in to see her.

'I'll do what I can--but what's the matter?'

'She has been crying here and going on--she has quite upset me.'

'Crying? She doesn't look like that.'

'Exactly, and that's what startled me. She came in to see me this
afternoon, as she has done before, and we talked about the weather and
the run of the ship and the manners of the stewardess and little
commonplaces like that, and then suddenly, in the midst of it, as she
sat there, _à propos_ of nothing, she burst into tears. I asked her what
ailed her and tried to comfort her, but she didn't explain; she only
said it was nothing, the effect of the sea, of leaving home. I asked her
if it had anything to do with her prospects, with her marriage; whether
she found as that drew near that her heart was not in it; I told her
that she mustn't be nervous, that I could enter into that--in short I
said what I could. All that she replied was that she _was_ nervous, very
nervous, but that it was already over; and then she jumped up and kissed
me and went away. Does she look as if she had been crying?' Mrs.
Nettlepoint asked.

'How can I tell, when she never quits that horrid veil? It's as if she
were ashamed to show her face.'

'She's keeping it for Liverpool. But I don't like such incidents,' said
Mrs. Nettlepoint. 'I shall go upstairs.'

'And is that where you want me to help you?'

'Oh, your arm and that sort of thing, yes. But something more. I feel as
if something were going to happen.'

'That's exactly what I said to Jasper this morning.'

'And what did he say?'

'He only looked innocent, as if he thought I meant a fog or a storm.'

'Heaven forbid--it isn't that! I shall never be good-natured again,'
Mrs. Nettlepoint went on; 'never have a girl put upon me that way. You
always pay for it, there are always tiresome complications. What I am
afraid of is after we get there. She'll throw up her engagement; there
will be dreadful scenes; I shall be mixed up with them and have to look
after her and keep her with me. I shall have to stay there with her till
she can be sent back, or even take her up to London. _Voyez-vous ça?_'

I listened respectfully to this and then I said: 'You are afraid of your
son.'

'Afraid of him?'

'There are things you might say to him--and with your manner; because
you have one when you choose.'

'Very likely, but what is my manner to his? Besides, I have said
everything to him. That is I have said the great thing, that he is
making her immensely talked about.'

'And of course in answer to that he has asked you how you know, and you
have told him I have told you.'

'I had to; and he says it's none of your business.'

'I wish he would say that to my face.'

'He'll do so perfectly, if you give him a chance. That's where you can
help me. Quarrel with him--he's rather good at a quarrel, and that will
divert him and draw him off.'

'Then I'm ready to discuss the matter with him for the rest of the
voyage.'

'Very well; I count on you. But he'll ask you, as he asks me, what the
deuce you want him to do.'

'To go to bed,' I replied, laughing.

'Oh, it isn't a joke.'

'That's exactly what I told you at first.'

'Yes, but don't exult; I hate people who exult. Jasper wants to know why
he should mind her being talked about if she doesn't mind it herself.'

'I'll tell him why,' I replied; and Mrs. Nettlepoint said she should be
exceedingly obliged to me and repeated that she would come upstairs.

I looked for Jasper above that same evening, but circumstances did not
favour my quest. I found him--that is I discovered that he was again
ensconced behind the lifeboat with Miss Mavis; but there was a needless
violence in breaking into their communion, and I put off our interview
till the next day. Then I took the first opportunity, at breakfast, to
make sure of it. He was in the saloon when I went in and was preparing
to leave the table; but I stopped him and asked if he would give me a
quarter of an hour on deck a little later--there was something
particular I wanted to say to him. He said, 'Oh yes, if you like,' with
just a visible surprise, but no look of an uncomfortable consciousness.
When I had finished my breakfast I found him smoking on the forward-deck
and I immediately began: 'I am going to say something that you won't at
all like; to ask you a question that you will think impertinent.'

'Impertinent? that's bad.'

'I am a good deal older than you and I am a friend--of many years--of
your mother. There's nothing I like less than to be meddlesome, but I
think these things give me a certain right--a sort of privilege. For the
rest, my inquiry will speak for itself.'

'Why so many preliminaries?' the young man asked, smiling.

We looked into each other's eyes a moment. What indeed was his mother's
manner--her best manner--compared with his? 'Are you prepared to be
responsible?'

'To you?'

'Dear no--to the young lady herself. I am speaking of course of Miss
Mavis.'

'Ah yes, my mother tells me you have her greatly on your mind.'

'So has your mother herself--now.'

'She is so good as to say so--to oblige you.'

'She would oblige me a great deal more by reassuring me. I am aware that
you know I have told her that Miss Mavis is greatly talked about.'

'Yes, but what on earth does it matter?'

'It matters as a sign.'

'A sign of what?'

'That she is in a false position.'

Jasper puffed his cigar, with his eyes on the horizon. 'I don't know
whether it's _your_ business, what you are attempting to discuss; but it
really appears to me it is none of mine. What have I to do with the
tattle with which a pack of old women console themselves for not being
sea-sick?'

'Do you call it tattle that Miss Mavis is in love with you?'

'Drivelling.'

'Then you are very ungrateful. The tattle of a pack of old women has
this importance, that she suspects or knows that it exists, and that
nice girls are for the most part very sensitive to that sort of thing.
To be prepared not to heed it in this case she must have a reason, and
the reason must be the one I have taken the liberty to call your
attention to.'

'In love with me in six days, just like that?' said Jasper, smoking.

'There is no accounting for tastes, and six days at sea are equivalent
to sixty on land. I don't want to make you too proud. Of course if you
recognise your responsibility it's all right and I have nothing to say.'

'I don't see what you mean,' Jasper went on.

'Surely you ought to have thought of that by this time. She's engaged to
be married and the gentleman she is engaged to is to meet her at
Liverpool. The whole ship knows it (I didn't tell them!) and the whole
ship is watching her. It's impertinent if you like, just as I am, but we
make a little world here together and we can't blink its conditions.
What I ask you is whether you are prepared to allow her to give up the
gentleman I have just mentioned for your sake.'

'For my sake?'

'To marry her if she breaks with him.'

Jasper turned his eyes from the horizon to my own, and I found a strange
expression in them. 'Has Miss Mavis commissioned you to make this
inquiry?'

'Never in the world.'

'Well then, I don't understand it.'

'It isn't from another I make it. Let it come from yourself--_to_
yourself.'

'Lord, you must think I lead myself a life! That's a question the young
lady may put to me any moment that it pleases her.'

'Let me then express the hope that she will. But what will you answer?'

'My dear sir, it seems to me that in spite of all the titles you have
enumerated you have no reason to expect I will tell you.' He turned away
and I exclaimed, sincerely, 'Poor girl!' At this he faced me again and,
looking at me from head to foot, demanded: 'What is it you want me to
do?'

'I told your mother that you ought to go to bed.'

'You had better do that yourself!'

This time he walked off, and I reflected rather dolefully that the only
clear result of my experiment would probably have been to make it vivid
to him that she was in love with him. Mrs. Nettlepoint came up as she
had announced, but the day was half over: it was nearly three o'clock.
She was accompanied by her son, who established her on deck, arranged
her chair and her shawls, saw that she was protected from sun and wind,
and for an hour was very properly attentive. While this went on Grace
Mavis was not visible, nor did she reappear during the whole afternoon.
I had not observed that she had as yet been absent from the deck for so
long a period. Jasper went away, but he came back at intervals to see
how his mother got on, and when she asked him where Miss Mavis was he
said he had not the least idea. I sat with Mrs. Nettlepoint at her
particular request: she told me she knew that if I left her Mrs. Peck
and Mrs. Gotch would come to speak to her. She was flurried and fatigued
at having to make an effort, and I think that Grace Mavis's choosing
this occasion for retirement suggested to her a little that she had been
made a fool of. She remarked that the girl's not being there showed her
complete want of breeding and that she was really very good to have put
herself out for her so; she was a common creature and that was the end
of it. I could see that Mrs. Nettlepoint's advent quickened the
speculative activity of the other ladies; they watched her from the
opposite side of the deck, keeping their eyes fixed on her very much as
the man at the wheel kept his on the course of the ship. Mrs. Peck
plainly meditated an approach, and it was from this danger that Mrs.
Nettlepoint averted her face.

'It's just as we said,' she remarked to me as we sat there. 'It is like
the bucket in the well. When I come up that girl goes down.'

'Yes, but you've succeeded, since Jasper remains here.'

'Remains? I don't see him.'

'He comes and goes--it's the same thing.'

'He goes more than he comes. But _n'en parlons plus_; I haven't gained
anything. I don't admire the sea at all--what is it but a magnified
water-tank? I shan't come up again.'

'I have an idea she'll stay in her cabin now,' I said. 'She tells me
she has one to herself.' Mrs. Nettlepoint replied that she might do as
she liked, and I repeated to her the little conversation I had had with
Jasper.

She listened with interest, but 'Marry her? mercy!' she exclaimed. 'I
like the manner in which you give my son away.'

'You wouldn't accept that.'

'Never in the world.'

'Then I don't understand your position.'

'Good heavens, I have none! It isn't a position to be bored to death.'

'You wouldn't accept it even in the case I put to him--that of her
believing she had been encouraged to throw over poor Porterfield?'

'Not even--not even. Who knows what she believes?'

'Then you do exactly what I said you would--you show me a fine example
of maternal immorality.'

'Maternal fiddlesticks! It was she began it.'

'Then why did you come up to-day?'

'To keep you quiet.'

Mrs. Nettlepoint's dinner was served on deck, but I went into the
saloon. Jasper was there but not Grace Mavis, as I had half expected. I
asked him what had become of her, if she were ill (he must have thought
I had an ignoble pertinacity), and he replied that he knew nothing
whatever about her. Mrs. Peck talked to me about Mrs. Nettlepoint and
said it had been a great interest to her to see her; only it was a pity
she didn't seem more sociable. To this I replied that she had to beg to
be excused--she was not well.

'You don't mean to say she's sick, on this pond?'

'No, she's unwell in another way.'

'I guess I know the way!' Mrs. Peck laughed. And then she added, 'I
suppose she came up to look after her charge.'

'Her charge?'

'Why, Miss Mavis. We've talked enough about that.'

'Quite enough. I don't know what that had to do with it. Miss Mavis
hasn't been there to-day.'

'Oh, it goes on all the same.'

'It goes on?'

'Well, it's too late.'

'Too late?'

'Well, you'll see. There'll be a row.'

This was not comforting, but I did not repeat it above. Mrs. Nettlepoint
returned early to her cabin, professing herself much tired. I know not
what 'went on,' but Grace Mavis continued not to show. I went in late,
to bid Mrs. Nettlepoint good-night, and learned from her that the girl
had not been to her. She had sent the stewardess to her room for news,
to see if she were ill and needed assistance, and the stewardess came
back with the information that she was not there. I went above after
this; the night was not quite so fair and the deck was almost empty. In
a moment Jasper Nettlepoint and our young lady moved past me together.
'I hope you are better!' I called after her; and she replied, over her
shoulder--

'Oh, yes, I had a headache; but the air now does me good!'

I went down again--I was the only person there but they, and I wished to
not appear to be watching them--and returning to Mrs. Nettlepoint's
room found (her door was open into the little passage) that she was
still sitting up.

'She's all right!' I said. 'She's on the deck with Jasper.'

The old lady looked up at me from her book. 'I didn't know you called
that all right.'

'Well, it's better than something else.'

'Something else?'

'Something I was a little afraid of.' Mrs. Nettlepoint continued to look
at me; she asked me what that was. 'I'll tell you when we are ashore,' I
said.

The next day I went to see her, at the usual hour of my morning visit,
and found her in considerable agitation. 'The scenes have begun,' she
said; 'you know I told you I shouldn't get through without them! You
made me nervous last night--I haven't the least idea what you meant; but
you made me nervous. She came in to see me an hour ago, and I had the
courage to say to her, "I don't know why I shouldn't tell you frankly
that I have been scolding my son about you." Of course she asked me what
I meant by that, and I said--"It seems to me he drags you about the ship
too much, for a girl in your position. He has the air of not remembering
that you belong to some one else. There is a kind of want of taste and
even of want of respect in it." That produced an explosion; she became
very violent.'

'Do you mean angry?'

'Not exactly angry, but very hot and excited--at my presuming to think
her relations with my son were not the simplest in the world. I might
scold him as much as I liked--that was between ourselves; but she didn't
see why I should tell her that I had done so. Did I think she allowed
him to treat her with disrespect? That idea was not very complimentary
to her! He had treated her better and been kinder to her than most other
people--there were very few on the ship that hadn't been insulting. She
should be glad enough when she got off it, to her own people, to some
one whom no one would have a right to say anything about. What was there
in her position that was not perfectly natural? What was the idea of
making a fuss about her position? Did I mean that she took it too
easily--that she didn't think as much as she ought about Mr.
Porterfield? Didn't I believe she was attached to him--didn't I believe
she was just counting the hours until she saw him? That would be the
happiest moment of her life. It showed how little I knew her, if I
thought anything else.'

'All that must have been rather fine--I should have liked to hear it,' I
said. 'And what did you reply?'

'Oh, I grovelled; I told her that I accused her (as regards my son) of
nothing worse than an excess of good nature. She helped him to pass his
time--he ought to be immensely obliged. Also that it would be a very
happy moment for me too when I should hand her over to Mr. Porterfield.'

'And will you come up to-day?'

'No indeed--she'll do very well now.'

I gave a sigh of relief. 'All's well that ends well!'

Jasper, that day, spent a great deal of time with his mother. She had
told me that she really had had no proper opportunity to talk over with
him their movements after disembarking. Everything changes a little,
the last two or three days of a voyage; the spell is broken and new
combinations take place. Grace Mavis was neither on deck nor at dinner,
and I drew Mrs. Peck's attention to the extreme propriety with which she
now conducted herself. She had spent the day in meditation and she
judged it best to continue to meditate.

'Ah, she's afraid,' said my implacable neighbour.

'Afraid of what?'

'Well, that we'll tell tales when we get there.'

'Whom do you mean by "we"?'

'Well, there are plenty, on a ship like this.'

'Well then, we won't.'

'Maybe we won't have the chance,' said the dreadful little woman.

'Oh, at that moment a universal geniality reigns.'

'Well, she's afraid, all the same.'

'So much the better.'

'Yes, so much the better.'

All the next day, too, the girl remained invisible and Mrs. Nettlepoint
told me that she had not been in to see her. She had inquired by the
stewardess if she would receive her in her own cabin, and Grace Mavis
had replied that it was littered up with things and unfit for visitors:
she was packing a trunk over. Jasper made up for his devotion to his
mother the day before by now spending a great deal of his time in the
smoking-room. I wanted to say to him 'This is much better,' but I
thought it wiser to hold my tongue. Indeed I had begun to feel the
emotion of prospective arrival (I was delighted to be almost back in my
dear old Europe again) and had less to spare for other matters. It will
doubtless appear to the critical reader that I had already devoted far
too much to the little episode of which my story gives an account, but
to this I can only reply that the event justified me. We sighted land,
the dim yet rich coast of Ireland, about sunset and I leaned on the edge
of the ship and looked at it. 'It doesn't look like much, does it?' I
heard a voice say, beside me; and, turning, I found Grace Mavis was
there. Almost for the first time she had her veil up, and I thought her
very pale.

'It will be more to-morrow,' I said.

'Oh yes, a great deal more.'

'The first sight of land, at sea, changes everything,' I went on. 'I
always think it's like waking up from a dream. It's a return to
reality.'

For a moment she made no response to this; then she said, 'It doesn't
look very real yet.'

'No, and meanwhile, this lovely evening, the dream is still present.'

She looked up at the sky, which had a brightness, though the light of
the sun had left it and that of the stars had not come out. 'It _is_ a
lovely evening.'

'Oh yes, with this we shall do.'

She stood there a while longer, while the growing dusk effaced the line
of the land more rapidly than our progress made it distinct. She said
nothing more, she only looked in front of her; but her very quietness
made me want to say something suggestive of sympathy and service. I was
unable to think what to say--some things seemed too wide of the mark and
others too importunate. At last, unexpectedly, she appeared to give me
my chance. Irrelevantly, abruptly she broke out:

'Didn't you tell me that you knew Mr. Porterfield?'

'Dear me, yes--I used to see him. I have often wanted to talk to you
about him.'

She turned her face upon me and in the deepened evening I fancied she
looked whiter. 'What good would that do?'

'Why, it would be a pleasure,' I replied, rather foolishly.

'Do you mean for you?'

'Well, yes--call it that,' I said, smiling.

'Did you know him so well?'

My smile became a laugh and I said--'You are not easy to make speeches
to.'

'I hate speeches!' The words came from her lips with a violence that
surprised me; they were loud and hard. But before I had time to wonder
at it she went on--'Shall you know him when you see him?'

'Perfectly, I think.' Her manner was so strange that one had to notice
it in some way, and it appeared to me the best way was to notice it
jocularly; so I added, 'Shan't you?'

'Oh, perhaps you'll point him out!' And she walked quickly away. As I
looked after her I had a singular, a perverse and rather an embarrassed
sense of having, during the previous days, and especially in speaking to
Jasper Nettlepoint, interfered with her situation to her loss. I had a
sort of pang in seeing her move about alone; I felt somehow responsible
for it and asked myself why I could not have kept my hands off. I had
seen Jasper in the smoking-room more than once that day, as I passed it,
and half an hour before this I had observed, through the open door,
that he was there. He had been with her so much that without him she had
a bereaved, forsaken air. It was better, no doubt, but superficially it
made her rather pitiable. Mrs. Peck would have told me that their
separation was gammon; they didn't show together on deck and in the
saloon, but they made it up elsewhere. The secret places on shipboard
are not numerous; Mrs. Peck's 'elsewhere' would have been vague and I
know not what license her imagination took. It was distinct that Jasper
had fallen off, but of course what had passed between them on this
subject was not so and could never be. Later, through his mother, I had
_his_ version of that, but I may remark that I didn't believe it. Poor
Mrs. Nettlepoint did, of course. I was almost capable, after the girl
had left me, of going to my young man and saying, 'After all, do return
to her a little, just till we get in! It won't make any difference after
we land.' And I don't think it was the fear he would tell me I was an
idiot that prevented me. At any rate the next time I passed the door of
the smoking-room I saw that he had left it. I paid my usual visit to
Mrs. Nettlepoint that night, but I troubled her no further about Miss
Mavis. She had made up her mind that everything was smooth and settled
now, and it seemed to me that I had worried her and that she had worried
herself enough. I left her to enjoy the foretaste of arrival, which had
taken possession of her mind. Before turning in I went above and found
more passengers on deck than I had ever seen so late. Jasper was walking
about among them alone, but I forebore to join him. The coast of Ireland
had disappeared, but the night and the sea were perfect. On the way to
my cabin, when I came down, I met the stewardess in one of the passages
and the idea entered my head to say to her--'Do you happen to know where
Miss Mavis is?'

'Why, she's in her room, sir, at this hour.'

'Do you suppose I could speak to her?' It had come into my mind to ask
her why she had inquired of me whether I should recognise Mr.
Porterfield.

'No, sir,' said the stewardess; 'she has gone to bed.'

'That's all right.' And I followed the young lady's excellent example.

The next morning, while I was dressing, the steward of my side of the
ship came to me as usual to see what I wanted. But the first thing he
said to me was--'Rather a bad job, sir--a passenger missing.'

'A passenger--missing?'

'A lady, sir. I think you knew her. Miss Mavis, sir.'

'_Missing?_' I cried--staring at him, horror-stricken.

'She's not on the ship. They can't find her.'

'Then where to God is she?'

I remember his queer face. 'Well sir, I suppose you know that as well as
I.'

'Do you mean she has jumped overboard?'

'Some time in the night, sir--on the quiet. But it's beyond every one,
the way she escaped notice. They usually sees 'em, sir. It must have
been about half-past two. Lord, but she was clever, sir. She didn't so
much as make a splash. They say she _'ad_ come against her will, sir.'

I had dropped upon my sofa--I felt faint. The man went on, liking to
talk, as persons of his class do when they have something horrible to
tell. She usually rang for the stewardess early, but this morning of
course there had been no ring. The stewardess had gone in all the same
about eight o'clock and found the cabin empty. That was about an hour
ago. Her things were there in confusion--the things she usually wore
when she went above. The stewardess thought she had been rather strange
last night, but she waited a little and then went back. Miss Mavis
hadn't turned up--and she didn't turn up. The stewardess began to look
for her--she hadn't been seen on deck or in the saloon. Besides, she
wasn't dressed--not to show herself; all her clothes were in her room.
There was another lady, an old lady, Mrs. Nettlepoint--I would know
her--that she was sometimes with, but the stewardess had been with _her_
and she knew Miss Mavis had not come near her that morning. She had
spoken to _him_ and they had taken a quiet look--they had hunted
everywhere. A ship's a big place, but you do come to the end of it, and
if a person ain't there why they ain't. In short an hour had passed and
the young lady was not accounted for: from which I might judge if she
ever would be. The watch couldn't account for her, but no doubt the
fishes in the sea could--poor miserable lady! The stewardess and he,
they had of course thought it their duty very soon to speak to the
doctor, and the doctor had spoken immediately to the captain. The
captain didn't like it--they never did. But he would try to keep it
quiet--they always did.

By the time I succeeded in pulling myself together and getting on, after
a fashion, the rest of my clothes I had learned that Mrs. Nettlepoint
had not yet been informed, unless the stewardess had broken it to her
within the previous few minutes. Her son knew, the young gentleman on
the other side of the ship (he had the other steward); my man had seen
him come out of his cabin and rush above, just before he came in to me.
He _had_ gone above, my man was sure; he had not gone to the old lady's
cabin. I remember a queer vision when the steward told me this--the wild
flash of a picture of Jasper Nettlepoint leaping with a mad compunction
in his young agility over the side of the ship. I hasten to add that no
such incident was destined to contribute its horror to poor Grace
Mavis's mysterious tragic act. What followed was miserable enough, but I
can only glance at it. When I got to Mrs. Nettlepoint's door she was
there in her dressing-gown; the stewardess had just told her and she was
rushing out to come to me. I made her go back--I said I would go for
Jasper. I went for him but I missed him, partly no doubt because it was
really, at first, the captain I was after. I found this personage and
found him highly scandalised, but he gave me no hope that we were in
error, and his displeasure, expressed with seamanlike plainness, was a
definite settlement of the question. From the deck, where I merely
turned round and looked, I saw the light of another summer day, the
coast of Ireland green and near and the sea a more charming colour than
it had been at all. When I came below again Jasper had passed back; he
had gone to his cabin and his mother had joined him there. He remained
there till we reached Liverpool--I never saw him. His mother, after a
little, at his request, left him alone. All the world went above to
look at the land and chatter about our tragedy, but the poor lady spent
the day, dismally enough, in her room. It seemed to me intolerably long;
I was thinking so of vague Porterfield and of my prospect of having to
face him on the morrow. Now of course I knew why she had asked me if I
should recognise him; she had delegated to me mentally a certain
pleasant office. I gave Mrs. Peck and Mrs. Gotch a wide berth--I
couldn't talk to them. I could, or at least I did a little, to Mrs.
Nettlepoint, but with too many reserves for comfort on either side, for
I foresaw that it would not in the least do now to mention Jasper to
her. I was obliged to assume by my silence that he had had nothing to do
with what had happened; and of course I never really ascertained what he
_had_ had to do. The secret of what passed between him and the strange
girl who would have sacrificed her marriage to him on so short an
acquaintance remains shut up in his breast. His mother, I know, went to
his door from time to time, but he refused her admission. That evening,
to be human at a venture, I requested the steward to go in and ask him
if he should care to see me, and the attendant returned with an answer
which he candidly transmitted. 'Not in the least!' Jasper apparently was
almost as scandalised as the captain.

At Liverpool, at the dock, when we had touched, twenty people came on
board and I had already made out Mr. Porterfield at a distance. He was
looking up at the side of the great vessel with disappointment written
(to my eyes) in his face--disappointment at not seeing the woman he
loved lean over it and wave her handkerchief to him. Every one was
looking at him, every one but she (his identity flew about in a moment)
and I wondered if he did not observe it. He used to be lean, he had
grown almost fat. The interval between us diminished--he was on the
plank and then on the deck with the jostling officers of the
customs--all too soon for my equanimity. I met him instantly however,
laid my hand on him and drew him away, though I perceived that he had no
impression of having seen me before. It was not till afterwards that I
thought this a little stupid of him. I drew him far away (I was
conscious of Mrs. Peck and Mrs. Gotch looking at us as we passed) into
the empty, stale smoking-room; he remained speechless, and that struck
me as like him. I had to speak first, he could not even relieve me by
saying 'Is anything the matter?' I told him first that she was ill. It
was an odious moment.




THE LIAR




I


The train was half an hour late and the drive from the station longer
than he had supposed, so that when he reached the house its inmates had
dispersed to dress for dinner and he was conducted straight to his room.
The curtains were drawn in this asylum, the candles were lighted, the
fire was bright, and when the servant had quickly put out his clothes
the comfortable little place became suggestive--seemed to promise a
pleasant house, a various party, talks, acquaintances, affinities, to
say nothing of very good cheer. He was too occupied with his profession
to pay many country visits, but he had heard people who had more time
for them speak of establishments where 'they do you very well.' He
foresaw that the proprietors of Stayes would do him very well. In his
bedroom at a country house he always looked first at the books on the
shelf and the prints on the walls; he considered that these things gave
a sort of measure of the culture and even of the character of his hosts.
Though he had but little time to devote to them on this occasion a
cursory inspection assured him that if the literature, as usual, was
mainly American and humorous the art consisted neither of the
water-colour studies of the children nor of 'goody' engravings. The
walls were adorned with old-fashioned lithographs, principally portraits
of country gentlemen with high collars and riding gloves: this
suggested--and it was encouraging--that the tradition of portraiture was
held in esteem. There was the customary novel of Mr. Le Fanu, for the
bedside; the ideal reading in a country house for the hours after
midnight. Oliver Lyon could scarcely forbear beginning it while he
buttoned his shirt.

Perhaps that is why he not only found every one assembled in the hall
when he went down, but perceived from the way the move to dinner was
instantly made that they had been waiting for him. There was no delay,
to introduce him to a lady, for he went out in a group of unmatched men,
without this appendage. The men, straggling behind, sidled and edged as
usual at the door of the dining-room, and the _dénouement_ of this
little comedy was that he came to his place last of all. This made him
think that he was in a sufficiently distinguished company, for if he had
been humiliated (which he was not), he could not have consoled himself
with the reflection that such a fate was natural to an obscure,
struggling young artist. He could no longer think of himself as very
young, alas, and if his position was not so brilliant as it ought to be
he could no longer justify it by calling it a struggle. He was something
of a celebrity and he was apparently in a society of celebrities. This
idea added to the curiosity with which he looked up and down the long
table as he settled himself in his place.

It was a numerous party--five and twenty people; rather an odd occasion
to have proposed to him, as he thought. He would not be surrounded by
the quiet that ministers to good work; however, it had never interfered
with his work to see the spectacle of human life before him in the
intervals. And though he did not know it, it was never quiet at Stayes.
When he was working well he found himself in that happy state--the
happiest of all for an artist--in which things in general contribute to
the particular idea and fall in with it, help it on and justify it, so
that he feels for the hour as if nothing in the world can happen to him,
even if it come in the guise of disaster or suffering, that will not be
an enhancement of his subject. Moreover there was an exhilaration (he
had felt it before) in the rapid change of scene--the jump, in the dusk
of the afternoon, from foggy London and his familiar studio to a centre
of festivity in the middle of Hertfordshire and a drama half acted, a
drama of pretty women and noted men and wonderful orchids in silver
jars. He observed as a not unimportant fact that one of the pretty women
was beside him: a gentleman sat on his other hand. But he went into his
neighbours little as yet: he was busy looking out for Sir David, whom he
had never seen and about whom he naturally was curious.

Evidently, however, Sir David was not at dinner, a circumstance
sufficiently explained by the other circumstance which constituted our
friend's principal knowledge of him--his being ninety years of age.
Oliver Lyon had looked forward with great pleasure to the chance of
painting a nonagenarian, and though the old man's absence from table was
something of a disappointment (it was an opportunity the less to
observe him before going to work), it seemed a sign that he was rather a
sacred and perhaps therefore an impressive relic. Lyon looked at his son
with the greater interest--wondered whether the glazed bloom of his
cheek had been transmitted from Sir David. That would be jolly to paint,
in the old man--the withered ruddiness of a winter apple, especially if
the eye were still alive and the white hair carried out the frosty look.
Arthur Ashmore's hair had a midsummer glow, but Lyon was glad his
commission had been to delineate the father rather than the son, in
spite of his never having seen the one and of the other being seated
there before him now in the happy expansion of liberal hospitality.

Arthur Ashmore was a fresh-coloured, thick-necked English gentleman, but
he was just not a subject; he might have been a farmer and he might have
been a banker: you could scarcely paint him in characters. His wife did
not make up the amount; she was a large, bright, negative woman, who had
the same air as her husband of being somehow tremendously new; a sort of
appearance of fresh varnish (Lyon could scarcely tell whether it came
from her complexion or from her clothes), so that one felt she ought to
sit in a gilt frame, suggesting reference to a catalogue or a
price-list. It was as if she were already rather a bad though expensive
portrait, knocked off by an eminent hand, and Lyon had no wish to copy
that work. The pretty woman on his right was engaged with her neighbour
and the gentleman on his other side looked shrinking and scared, so that
he had time to lose himself in his favourite diversion of watching face
after face. This amusement gave him the greatest pleasure he knew, and
he often thought it a mercy that the human mask did interest him and
that it was not less vivid than it was (sometimes it ran its success in
this line very close), since he was to make his living by reproducing
it. Even if Arthur Ashmore would not be inspiring to paint (a certain
anxiety rose in him lest if he should make a hit with her father-in-law
Mrs. Arthur should take it into her head that he had now proved himself
worthy to _aborder_ her husband); even if he had looked a little less
like a page (fine as to print and margin) without punctuation, he would
still be a refreshing, iridescent surface. But the gentleman four
persons off--what was he? Would he be a subject, or was his face only
the legible door-plate of his identity, burnished with punctual washing
and shaving--the least thing that was decent that you would know him by?

This face arrested Oliver Lyon: it struck him at first as very handsome.
The gentleman might still be called young, and his features were
regular: he had a plentiful, fair moustache that curled up at the ends,
a brilliant, gallant, almost adventurous air, and a big shining
breastpin in the middle of his shirt. He appeared a fine satisfied soul,
and Lyon perceived that wherever he rested his friendly eye there fell
an influence as pleasant as the September sun--as if he could make
grapes and pears or even human affection ripen by looking at them. What
was odd in him was a certain mixture of the correct and the extravagant:
as if he were an adventurer imitating a gentleman with rare perfection
or a gentleman who had taken a fancy to go about with hidden arms. He
might have been a dethroned prince or the war-correspondent of a
newspaper: he represented both enterprise and tradition, good manners
and bad taste. Lyon at length fell into conversation with the lady
beside him--they dispensed, as he had had to dispense at dinner-parties
before, with an introduction--by asking who this personage might be.

'Oh, he's Colonel Capadose, don't you know?' Lyon didn't know and he
asked for further information. His neighbour had a sociable manner and
evidently was accustomed to quick transitions; she turned from her other
interlocutor with a methodical air, as a good cook lifts the cover of
the next saucepan. 'He has been a great deal in India--isn't he rather
celebrated?' she inquired. Lyon confessed he had never heard of him, and
she went on, 'Well, perhaps he isn't; but he says he is, and if you
think it, that's just the same, isn't it?'

'If _you_ think it?'

'I mean if he thinks it--that's just as good, I suppose.'

'Do you mean that he says that which is not?'

'Oh dear, no--because I never know. He is exceedingly clever and
amusing--quite the cleverest person in the house, unless indeed you are
more so. But that I can't tell yet, can I? I only know about the people
I know; I think that's celebrity enough!'

'Enough for them?'

'Oh, I see you're clever. Enough for me! But I have heard of you,' the
lady went on. 'I know your pictures; I admire them. But I don't think
you look like them.'

'They are mostly portraits,' Lyon said; 'and what I usually try for is
not my own resemblance.'

'I see what you mean. But they have much more colour. And now you are
going to do some one here?'

'I have been invited to do Sir David. I'm rather disappointed at not
seeing him this evening.'

'Oh, he goes to bed at some unnatural hour--eight o'clock or something
of that sort. You know he's rather an old mummy.'

'An old mummy?' Oliver Lyon repeated.

'I mean he wears half a dozen waistcoats, and that sort of thing. He's
always cold.'

'I have never seen him and never seen any portrait or photograph of
him,' Lyon said. 'I'm surprised at his never having had anything
done--at their waiting all these years.'

'Ah, that's because he was afraid, you know; it was a kind of
superstition. He was sure that if anything were done he would die
directly afterwards. He has only consented to-day.'

'He's ready to die then?'

'Oh, now he's so old he doesn't care.'

'Well, I hope I shan't kill him,' said Lyon. 'It was rather unnatural in
his son to send for me.'

'Oh, they have nothing to gain--everything is theirs already!' his
companion rejoined, as if she took this speech quite literally. Her
talkativeness was systematic--she fraternised as seriously as she might
have played whist. 'They do as they like--they fill the house with
people--they have _carte blanche_.'

'I see--but there's still the title.'

'Yes, but what is it?'

Our artist broke into laughter at this, whereat his companion stared.
Before he had recovered himself she was scouring the plain with her
other neighbour. The gentleman on his left at last risked an
observation, and they had some fragmentary talk. This personage played
his part with difficulty: he uttered a remark as a lady fires a pistol,
looking the other way. To catch the ball Lyon had to bend his ear, and
this movement led to his observing a handsome creature who was seated on
the same side, beyond his interlocutor. Her profile was presented to him
and at first he was only struck with its beauty; then it produced an
impression still more agreeable--a sense of undimmed remembrance and
intimate association. He had not recognised her on the instant only
because he had so little expected to see her there; he had not seen her
anywhere for so long, and no news of her ever came to him. She was often
in his thoughts, but she had passed out of his life. He thought of her
twice a week; that may be called often in relation to a person one has
not seen for twelve years. The moment after he recognised her he felt
how true it was that it was only she who could look like that: of the
most charming head in the world (and this lady had it) there could never
be a replica. She was leaning forward a little; she remained in profile,
apparently listening to some one on the other side of her. She was
listening, but she was also looking, and after a moment Lyon followed
the direction of her eyes. They rested upon the gentleman who had been
described to him as Colonel Capadose--rested, as it appeared to him,
with a kind of habitual, visible complacency. This was not strange, for
the Colonel was unmistakably formed to attract the sympathetic gaze of
woman; but Lyon was slightly disappointed that she could let _him_ look
at her so long without giving him a glance. There was nothing between
them to-day and he had no rights, but she must have known he was coming
(it was of course not such a tremendous event, but she could not have
been staying in the house without hearing of it), and it was not natural
that that should absolutely fail to affect her.

She was looking at Colonel Capadose as if she were in love with him--a
queer accident for the proudest, most reserved of women. But doubtless
it was all right, if her husband liked it or didn't notice it: he had
heard indefinitely, years before, that she was married, and he took for
granted (as he had not heard that she had become a widow) the presence
of the happy man on whom she had conferred what she had refused to
_him_, the poor art-student at Munich. Colonel Capadose appeared to be
aware of nothing, and this circumstance, incongruously enough, rather
irritated Lyon than gratified him. Suddenly the lady turned her head,
showing her full face to our hero. He was so prepared with a greeting
that he instantly smiled, as a shaken jug overflows; but she gave him no
response, turned away again and sank back in her chair. All that her
face said in that instant was, 'You see I'm as handsome as ever.' To
which he mentally subjoined, 'Yes, and as much good it does me!' He
asked the young man beside him if he knew who that beautiful being
was--the fifth person beyond him. The young man leaned forward,
considered and then said, 'I think she's Mrs. Capadose.'

'Do you mean his wife--that fellow's?' And Lyon indicated the subject
of the information given him by his other neighbour.

'Oh, is _he_ Mr. Capadose?' said the young man, who appeared very vague.
He admitted his vagueness and explained it by saying that there were so
many people and he had come only the day before. What was definite to
Lyon was that Mrs. Capadose was in love with her husband; so that he
wished more than ever that he had married her.

'She's very faithful,' he found himself saying three minutes later to
the lady on his right. He added that he meant Mrs. Capadose.

'Ah, you know her then?'

'I knew her once upon a time--when I was living abroad.'

'Why then were you asking me about her husband?'

'Precisely for that reason. She married after that--I didn't even know
her present name.'

'How then do you know it now?'

'This gentleman has just told me--he appears to know.'

'I didn't know he knew anything,' said the lady, glancing forward.

'I don't think he knows anything but that.'

'Then you have found out for yourself that she is faithful. What do you
mean by that?'

'Ah, you mustn't question me--I want to question you,' Lyon said. 'How
do you all like her here?'

'You ask too much! I can only speak for myself. I think she's hard.'

'That's only because she's honest and straightforward.'

'Do you mean I like people in proportion as they deceive?'

'I think we all do, so long as we don't find them out,' Lyon said. 'And
then there's something in her face--a sort of Roman type, in spite of
her having such an English eye. In fact she's English down to the
ground; but her complexion, her low forehead and that beautiful close
little wave in her dark hair make her look like a glorified
_contadina_.'

'Yes, and she always sticks pins and daggers into her head, to increase
that effect. I must say I like her husband better: he is so clever.'

'Well, when I knew her there was no comparison that could injure her.
She was altogether the most delightful thing in Munich.'

'In Munich?'

'Her people lived there; they were not rich--in pursuit of economy in
fact, and Munich was very cheap. Her father was the younger son of some
noble house; he had married a second time and had a lot of little mouths
to feed. She was the child of the first wife and she didn't like her
stepmother, but she was charming to her little brothers and sisters. I
once made a sketch of her as Werther's Charlotte, cutting bread and
butter while they clustered all round her. All the artists in the place
were in love with her but she wouldn't look at 'the likes' of us. She
was too proud--I grant you that; but she wasn't stuck up nor young
ladyish; she was simple and frank and kind about it. She used to remind
me of Thackeray's Ethel Newcome. She told me she must marry well: it was
the one thing she could do for her family. I suppose you would say that
she _has_ married well.'

'She told _you_?' smiled Lyon's neighbour.

'Oh, of course I proposed to her too. But she evidently thinks so
herself!' he added.

When the ladies left the table the host as usual bade the gentlemen draw
together, so that Lyon found himself opposite to Colonel Capadose. The
conversation was mainly about the 'run,' for it had apparently been a
great day in the hunting-field. Most of the gentlemen communicated their
adventures and opinions, but Colonel Capadose's pleasant voice was the
most audible in the chorus. It was a bright and fresh but masculine
organ, just such a voice as, to Lyon's sense, such a 'fine man' ought to
have had. It appeared from his remarks that he was a very straight
rider, which was also very much what Lyon would have expected. Not that
he swaggered, for his allusions were very quietly and casually made; but
they were all too dangerous experiments and close shaves. Lyon perceived
after a little that the attention paid by the company to the Colonel's
remarks was not in direct relation to the interest they seemed to offer;
the result of which was that the speaker, who noticed that _he_ at least
was listening, began to treat him as his particular auditor and to fix
his eyes on him as he talked. Lyon had nothing to do but to look
sympathetic and assent--Colonel Capadose appeared to take so much
sympathy and assent for granted. A neighbouring squire had had an
accident; he had come a cropper in an awkward place--just at the
finish--with consequences that looked grave. He had struck his head; he
remained insensible, up to the last accounts: there had evidently been
concussion of the brain. There was some exchange of views as to his
recovery--how soon it would take place or whether it would take place at
all; which led the Colonel to confide to our artist across the table
that _he_ shouldn't despair of a fellow even if he didn't come round for
weeks--for weeks and weeks and weeks--for months, almost for years. He
leaned forward; Lyon leaned forward to listen, and Colonel Capadose
mentioned that he knew from personal experience that there was really no
limit to the time one might lie unconscious without being any the worse
for it. It had happened to him in Ireland, years before; he had been
pitched out of a dogcart, had turned a sheer somersault and landed on
his head. They thought he was dead, but he wasn't; they carried him
first to the nearest cabin, where he lay for some days with the pigs,
and then to an inn in a neighbouring town--it was a near thing they
didn't put him under ground. He had been completely insensible--without
a ray of recognition of any human thing--for three whole months; had not
a glimmer of consciousness of any blessed thing. It was touch and go to
that degree that they couldn't come near him, they couldn't feed him,
they could scarcely look at him. Then one day he had opened his eyes--as
fit as a flea!

'I give you my honour it had done me good--it rested my brain.' He
appeared to intimate that with an intelligence so active as his these
periods of repose were providential. Lyon thought his story very
striking, but he wanted to ask him whether he had not shammed a
little--not in relating it, but in keeping so quiet. He hesitated
however, in time, to imply a doubt--he was so impressed with the tone in
which Colonel Capadose said that it was the turn of a hair that they
hadn't buried him alive. That had happened to a friend of his in
India--a fellow who was supposed to have died of jungle fever--they
clapped him into a coffin. He was going on to recite the further fate of
this unfortunate gentleman when Mr. Ashmore made a move and every one
got up to adjourn to the drawing-room. Lyon noticed that by this time no
one was heeding what his new friend said to him. They came round on
either side of the table and met while the gentlemen dawdled before
going out.

'And do you mean that your friend was literally buried alive?' asked
Lyon, in some suspense.

Colonel Capadose looked at him a moment, as if he had already lost the
thread of the conversation. Then his face brightened--and when it
brightened it was doubly handsome. 'Upon my soul he was chucked into the
ground!'

'And was he left there?'

'He was left there till I came and hauled him out.'

'_You_ came?'

'I dreamed about him--it's the most extraordinary story: I heard him
calling to me in the night. I took upon myself to dig him up. You know
there are people in India--a kind of beastly race, the ghouls--who
violate graves. I had a sort of presentiment that they would get at him
first. I rode straight, I can tell you; and, by Jove, a couple of them
had just broken ground! Crack--crack, from a couple of barrels, and they
showed me their heels, as you may believe. Would you credit that I took
him out myself? The air brought him to and he was none the worse. He
has got his pension--he came home the other day; he would do anything
for me.'

'He called to you in the night?' said Lyon, much startled.

'That's the interesting point. Now _what was it_? It wasn't his ghost,
because he wasn't dead. It wasn't himself, because he couldn't. It was
something or other! You see India's a strange country--there's an
element of the mysterious: the air is full of things you can't explain.'

They passed out of the dining-room, and Colonel Capadose, who went among
the first, was separated from Lyon; but a minute later, before they
reached the drawing-room, he joined him again. 'Ashmore tells me who you
are. Of course I have often heard of you--I'm very glad to make your
acquaintance; my wife used to know you.'

'I'm glad she remembers me. I recognised her at dinner and I was afraid
she didn't.'

'Ah, I daresay she was ashamed,' said the Colonel, with indulgent
humour.

'Ashamed of me?' Lyon replied, in the same key.

'Wasn't there something about a picture? Yes; you painted her portrait.'

'Many times,' said the artist; 'and she may very well have been ashamed
of what I made of her.'

'Well, I wasn't, my dear sir; it was the sight of that picture, which
you were so good as to present to her, that made me first fall in love
with her.'

'Do you mean that one with the children--cutting bread and butter?'

'Bread and butter? Bless me, no--vine leaves and a leopard skin--a kind
of Bacchante.'

'Ah, yes,' said Lyon; 'I remember. It was the first decent portrait I
painted. I should be curious to see it to-day.'

'Don't ask her to show it to you--she'll be mortified!' the Colonel
exclaimed.

'Mortified?'

'We parted with it--in the most disinterested manner,' he laughed. 'An
old friend of my wife's--her family had known him intimately when they
lived in Germany--took the most extraordinary fancy to it: the Grand
Duke of Silberstadt-Schreckenstein, don't you know? He came out to
Bombay while we were there and he spotted your picture (you know he's
one of the greatest collectors in Europe), and made such eyes at it
that, upon my word--it happened to be his birthday--she told him he
might have it, to get rid of him. He was perfectly enchanted--but we
miss the picture.'

'It is very good of you,' Lyon said. 'If it's in a great collection--a
work of my incompetent youth--I am infinitely honoured.'

'Oh, he has got it in one of his castles; I don't know which--you know
he has so many. He sent us, before he left India--to return the
compliment--a magnificent old vase.'

'That was more than the thing was worth,' Lyon remarked.

Colonel Capadose gave no heed to this observation; he seemed to be
thinking of something. After a moment he said, 'If you'll come and see
us in town she'll show you the vase.' And as they passed into the
drawing-room he gave the artist a friendly propulsion. 'Go and speak to
her; there she is--she'll be delighted.'

Oliver Lyon took but a few steps into the wide saloon; he stood there a
moment looking at the bright composition of the lamplit group of fair
women, the single figures, the great setting of white and gold, the
panels of old damask, in the centre of each of which was a single
celebrated picture. There was a subdued lustre in the scene and an air
as of the shining trains of dresses tumbled over the carpet. At the
furthest end of the room sat Mrs. Capadose, rather isolated; she was on
a small sofa, with an empty place beside her. Lyon could not flatter
himself she had been keeping it for him; her failure to respond to his
recognition at table contradicted that, but he felt an extreme desire to
go and occupy it. Moreover he had her husband's sanction; so he crossed
the room, stepping over the tails of gowns, and stood before his old
friend.

'I hope you don't mean to repudiate me,' he said.

She looked up at him with an expression of unalloyed pleasure. 'I am so
glad to see you. I was delighted when I heard you were coming.'

'I tried to get a smile from you at dinner--but I couldn't.'

'I didn't see--I didn't understand. Besides, I hate smirking and
telegraphing. Also I'm very shy--you won't have forgotten that. Now we
can communicate comfortably.' And she made a better place for him on the
little sofa. He sat down and they had a talk that he enjoyed, while the
reason for which he used to like her so came back to him, as well as a
good deal of the very same old liking. She was still the least spoiled
beauty he had ever seen, with an absence of coquetry or any insinuating
art that seemed almost like an omitted faculty; there were moments when
she struck her interlocutor as some fine creature from an asylum--a
surprising deaf-mute or one of the operative blind. Her noble pagan head
gave her privileges that she neglected, and when people were admiring
her brow she was wondering whether there were a good fire in her
bedroom. She was simple, kind and good; inexpressive but not inhuman or
stupid. Now and again she dropped something that had a sifted, selected
air--the sound of an impression at first hand. She had no imagination,
but she had added up her feelings, some of her reflections, about life.
Lyon talked of the old days in Munich, reminded her of incidents,
pleasures and pains, asked her about her father and the others; and she
told him in return that she was so impressed with his own fame, his
brilliant position in the world, that she had not felt very sure he
would speak to her or that his little sign at table was meant for her.
This was plainly a perfectly truthful speech--she was incapable of any
other--and he was affected by such humility on the part of a woman whose
grand line was unique. Her father was dead; one of her brothers was in
the navy and the other on a ranch in America; two of her sisters were
married and the youngest was just coming out and very pretty. She didn't
mention her stepmother. She asked him about his own personal history and
he said that the principal thing that had happened to him was that he
had never married.

'Oh, you ought to,' she answered. 'It's the best thing.'

'I like that--from you!' he returned.

'Why not from me? I am very happy.'

'That's just why I can't be. It's cruel of you to praise your state. But
I have had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of your husband. We
had a good bit of talk in the other room.'

'You must know him better--you must know him really well,' said Mrs.
Capadose.

'I am sure that the further you go the more you find. But he makes a
fine show, too.'

She rested her good gray eyes on Lyon. 'Don't you think he's handsome?'

'Handsome and clever and entertaining. You see I'm generous.'

'Yes; you must know him well,' Mrs. Capadose repeated.

'He has seen a great deal of life,' said her companion.

'Yes, we have been in so many places. You must see my little girl. She
is nine years old--she's too beautiful.'

'You must bring her to my studio some day--I should like to paint her.'

'Ah, don't speak of that,' said Mrs. Capadose. 'It reminds me of
something so distressing.'

'I hope you don't mean when _you_ used to sit to me--though that may
well have bored you.'

'It's not what you did--it's what we have done. It's a confession I must
make--it's a weight on my mind! I mean about that beautiful picture you
gave me--it used to be so much admired. When you come to see me in
London (I count on your doing that very soon) I shall see you looking
all round. I can't tell you I keep it in my own room because I love it
so, for the simple reason----' And she paused a moment.

'Because you can't tell wicked lies,' said Lyon.

'No, I can't. So before you ask for it----'

'Oh, I know you parted with it--the blow has already fallen,' Lyon
interrupted.

'Ah then, you have heard? I was sure you would! But do you know what we
got for it? Two hundred pounds.'

'You might have got much more,' said Lyon, smiling.

'That seemed a great deal at the time. We were in want of the money--it
was a good while ago, when we first married. Our means were very small
then, but fortunately that has changed rather for the better. We had the
chance; it really seemed a big sum, and I am afraid we jumped at it. My
husband had expectations which have partly come into effect, so that now
we do well enough. But meanwhile the picture went.'

'Fortunately the original remained. But do you mean that two hundred was
the value of the vase?' Lyon asked.

'Of the vase?'

'The beautiful old Indian vase--the Grand Duke's offering.'

'The Grand Duke?'

'What's his name?--Silberstadt-Schreckenstein. Your husband mentioned
the transaction.'

'Oh, my husband,' said Mrs. Capadose; and Lyon saw that she coloured a
little.

Not to add to her embarrassment, but to clear up the ambiguity, which
he perceived the next moment he had better have left alone, he went on:
'He tells me it's now in his collection.'

'In the Grand Duke's? Ah, you know its reputation? I believe it contains
treasures.' She was bewildered, but she recovered herself, and Lyon made
the mental reflection that for some reason which would seem good when he
knew it the husband and the wife had prepared different versions of the
same incident. It was true that he did not exactly see Everina Brant
preparing a version; that was not her line of old, and indeed it was not
in her eyes to-day. At any rate they both had the matter too much on
their conscience. He changed the subject, said Mrs. Capadose must really
bring the little girl. He sat with her some time longer and
thought--perhaps it was only a fancy--that she was rather absent, as if
she were annoyed at their having been even for a moment at
cross-purposes. This did not prevent him from saying to her at the last,
just as the ladies began to gather themselves together to go to bed:
'You seem much impressed, from what you say, with my renown and my
prosperity, and you are so good as greatly to exaggerate them. Would you
have married me if you had known that I was destined to success?'

'I did know it.'

'Well, I didn't'

'You were too modest.'

'You didn't think so when I proposed to you.'

'Well, if I had married you I couldn't have married _him_--and he's so
nice,' Mrs. Capadose said. Lyon knew she thought it--he had learned that
at dinner--but it vexed him a little to hear her say it. The gentleman
designated by the pronoun came up, amid the prolonged handshaking for
good-night, and Mrs. Capadose remarked to her husband as she turned
away, 'He wants to paint Amy.'

'Ah, she's a charming child, a most interesting little creature,' the
Colonel said to Lyon. 'She does the most remarkable things.'

Mrs. Capadose stopped, in the rustling procession that followed the
hostess out of the room. 'Don't tell him, please don't,' she said.

'Don't tell him what?'

'Why, what she does. Let him find out for himself.' And she passed on.

'She thinks I swagger about the child--that I bore people,' said the
Colonel. 'I hope you smoke.' He appeared ten minutes later in the
smoking-room, in a brilliant equipment, a suit of crimson foulard
covered with little white spots. He gratified Lyon's eye, made him feel
that the modern age has its splendour too and its opportunities for
costume. If his wife was an antique he was a fine specimen of the period
of colour: he might have passed for a Venetian of the sixteenth century.
They were a remarkable couple, Lyon thought, and as he looked at the
Colonel standing in bright erectness before the chimney-piece while he
emitted great smoke-puffs he did not wonder that Everina could not
regret she had not married _him_. All the gentlemen collected at Stayes
were not smokers and some of them had gone to bed. Colonel Capadose
remarked that there probably would be a smallish muster, they had had
such a hard day's work. That was the worst of a hunting-house--the men
were so sleepy after dinner; it was devilish stupid for the ladies,
even for those who hunted themselves--for women were so extraordinary,
they never showed it. But most fellows revived under the stimulating
influences of the smoking-room, and some of them, in this confidence,
would turn up yet. Some of the grounds of their confidence--not all of
them--might have been seen in a cluster of glasses and bottles on a
table near the fire, which made the great salver and its contents
twinkle sociably. The others lurked as yet in various improper corners
of the minds of the most loquacious. Lyon was alone with Colonel
Capadose for some moments before their companions, in varied
eccentricities of uniform, straggled in, and he perceived that this
wonderful man had but little loss of vital tissue to repair.

They talked about the house, Lyon having noticed an oddity of
construction in the smoking-room; and the Colonel explained that it
consisted of two distinct parts, one of which was of very great
antiquity. They were two complete houses in short, the old one and the
new, each of great extent and each very fine in its way. The two formed
together an enormous structure--Lyon must make a point of going all over
it. The modern portion had been erected by the old man when he bought
the property; oh yes, he had bought it, forty years before--it hadn't
been in the family: there hadn't been any particular family for it to be
in. He had had the good taste not to spoil the original house--he had
not touched it beyond what was just necessary for joining it on. It was
very curious indeed--a most irregular, rambling, mysterious pile, where
they every now and then discovered a walled-up room or a secret
staircase. To his mind it was essentially gloomy, however; even the
modern additions, splendid as they were, failed to make it cheerful.
There was some story about a skeleton having been found years before,
during some repairs, under a stone slab of the floor of one of the
passages; but the family were rather shy of its being talked about. The
place they were in was of course in the old part, which contained after
all some of the best rooms: he had an idea it had been the primitive
kitchen, half modernised at some intermediate period.

'My room is in the old part too then--I'm very glad,' Lyon said. 'It's
very comfortable and contains all the latest conveniences, but I
observed the depth of the recess of the door and the evident antiquity
of the corridor and staircase--the first short one--after I came out.
That panelled corridor is admirable; it looks as if it stretched away,
in its brown dimness (the lamps didn't seem to me to make much
impression on it), for half a mile.'

'Oh, don't go to the end of it!' exclaimed the Colonel, smiling.

'Does it lead to the haunted room?' Lyon asked.

His companion looked at him a moment. 'Ah, you know about that?'

'No, I don't speak from knowledge, only from hope. I have never had any
luck--I have never stayed in a dangerous house. The places I go to are
always as safe as Charing Cross. I want to see--whatever there is, the
regular thing. _Is_ there a ghost here?'

'Of course there is--a rattling good one.'

'And have you seen him?'

'Oh, don't ask me what _I've_ seen--I should tax your credulity. I don't
like to talk of these things. But there are two or three as bad--that
is, as good!--rooms as you'll find anywhere.'

'Do you mean in my corridor?' Lyon asked.

'I believe the worst is at the far end. But you would be ill-advised to
sleep there.'

'Ill-advised?'

'Until you've finished your job. You'll get letters of importance the
next morning, and you'll take the 10.20.'

'Do you mean I will invent a pretext for running away?'

'Unless you are braver than almost any one has ever been. They don't
often put people to sleep there, but sometimes the house is so crowded
that they have to. The same thing always happens--ill-concealed
agitation at the breakfast-table and letters of the greatest importance.
Of course it's a bachelor's room, and my wife and I are at the other end
of the house. But we saw the comedy three days ago--the day after we got
here. A young fellow had been put there--I forget his name--the house
was so full; and the usual consequence followed. Letters at
breakfast--an awfully queer face--an urgent call to town--so very sorry
his visit was cut short. Ashmore and his wife looked at each other, and
off the poor devil went.'

'Ah, that wouldn't suit me; I must paint my picture,' said Lyon. 'But do
they mind your speaking of it? Some people who have a good ghost are
very proud of it, you know.'

What answer Colonel Capadose was on the point of making to this inquiry
our hero was not to learn, for at that moment their host had walked into
the room accompanied by three or four gentlemen. Lyon was conscious
that he was partly answered by the Colonel's not going on with the
subject. This however on the other hand was rendered natural by the fact
that one of the gentlemen appealed to him for an opinion on a point
under discussion, something to do with the everlasting history of the
day's run. To Lyon himself Mr. Ashmore began to talk, expressing his
regret at having had so little direct conversation with him as yet. The
topic that suggested itself was naturally that most closely connected
with the motive of the artist's visit. Lyon remarked that it was a great
disadvantage to him not to have had some preliminary acquaintance with
Sir David--in most cases he found that so important. But the present
sitter was so far advanced in life that there was doubtless no time to
lose. 'Oh, I can tell you all about him,' said Mr. Ashmore; and for half
an hour he told him a good deal. It was very interesting as well as very
eulogistic, and Lyon could see that he was a very nice old man, to have
endeared himself so to a son who was evidently not a gusher. At last he
got up--he said he must go to bed if he wished to be fresh for his work
in the morning. To which his host replied, 'Then you must take your
candle; the lights are out; I don't keep my servants up.'

In a moment Lyon had his glimmering taper in hand, and as he was leaving
the room (he did not disturb the others with a good-night; they were
absorbed in the lemon-squeezer and the soda-water cork) he remembered
other occasions on which he had made his way to bed alone through a
darkened country-house; such occasions had not been rare, for he was
almost always the first to leave the smoking-room. If he had not stayed
in houses conspicuously haunted he had, none the less (having the
artistic temperament), sometimes found the great black halls and
staircases rather 'creepy': there had been often a sinister effect, to
his imagination, in the sound of his tread in the long passages or the
way the winter moon peeped into tall windows on landings. It occurred to
him that if houses without supernatural pretensions could look so wicked
at night, the old corridors of Stayes would certainly give him a
sensation. He didn't know whether the proprietors were sensitive; very
often, as he had said to Colonel Capadose, people enjoyed the
impeachment. What determined him to speak, with a certain sense of the
risk, was the impression that the Colonel told queer stories. As he had
his hand on the door he said to Arthur Ashmore, 'I hope I shan't meet
any ghosts.'

'Any ghosts?'

'You ought to have some--in this fine old part.'

'We do our best, but _que voulez-vous_?' said Mr. Ashmore. 'I don't
think they like the hot-water pipes.'

'They remind them too much of their own climate? But haven't you a
haunted room--at the end of my passage?'

'Oh, there are stories--we try to keep them up.'

'I should like very much to sleep there,' Lyon said.

'Well, you can move there to-morrow if you like.'

'Perhaps I had better wait till I have done my work.'

'Very good; but you won't work there, you know. My father will sit to
you in his own apartments.'

'Oh, it isn't that; it's the fear of running away, like that gentleman
three days ago.'

'Three days ago? What gentleman?' Mr. Ashmore asked.

'The one who got urgent letters at breakfast and fled by the 10.20. Did
he stand more than one night?'

'I don't know what you are talking about. There was no such
gentleman--three days ago.'

'Ah, so much the better,' said Lyon, nodding good-night and departing.
He took his course, as he remembered it, with his wavering candle, and,
though he encountered a great many gruesome objects, safely reached the
passage out of which his room opened. In the complete darkness it seemed
to stretch away still further, but he followed it, for the curiosity of
the thing, to the end. He passed several doors with the name of the room
painted upon them, but he found nothing else. He was tempted to try the
last door--to look into the room of evil fame; but he reflected that
this would be indiscreet, since Colonel Capadose handled the brush--as a
_raconteur_--with such freedom. There might be a ghost and there might
not; but the Colonel himself, he inclined to think, was the most
mystifying figure in the house.




II


Lyon found Sir David Ashmore a capital subject and a very comfortable
sitter into the bargain. Moreover he was a very agreeable old man,
tremendously puckered but not in the least dim; and he wore exactly the
furred dressing-gown that Lyon would have chosen. He was proud of his
age but ashamed of his infirmities, which however he greatly exaggerated
and which did not prevent him from sitting there as submissive as if
portraiture in oils had been a branch of surgery. He demolished the
legend of his having feared the operation would be fatal, giving an
explanation which pleased our friend much better. He held that a
gentleman should be painted but once in his life--that it was eager and
fatuous to be hung up all over the place. That was good for women, who
made a pretty wall-pattern; but the male face didn't lend itself to
decorative repetition. The proper time for the likeness was at the last,
when the whole man was there--you got the totality of his experience.
Lyon could not reply that that period was not a real compendium--you had
to allow so for leakage; for there had been no crack in Sir David's
crystallisation. He spoke of his portrait as a plain map of the
country, to be consulted by his children in a case of uncertainty. A
proper map could be drawn up only when the country had been travelled.
He gave Lyon his mornings, till luncheon, and they talked of many
things, not neglecting, as a stimulus to gossip, the people in the
house. Now that he did not 'go out,' as he said, he saw much less of the
visitors at Stayes: people came and went whom he knew nothing about, and
he liked to hear Lyon describe them. The artist sketched with a fine
point and did not caricature, and it usually befell that when Sir David
did not know the sons and daughters he had known the fathers and
mothers. He was one of those terrible old gentlemen who are a repository
of antecedents. But in the case of the Capadose family, at whom they
arrived by an easy stage, his knowledge embraced two, or even three,
generations. General Capadose was an old crony, and he remembered his
father before him. The general was rather a smart soldier, but in
private life of too speculative a turn--always sneaking into the City to
put his money into some rotten thing. He married a girl who brought him
something and they had half a dozen children. He scarcely knew what had
become of the rest of them, except that one was in the Church and had
found preferment--wasn't he Dean of Rockingham? Clement, the fellow who
was at Stayes, had some military talent; he had served in the East, he
had married a pretty girl. He had been at Eton with his son, and he used
to come to Stayes in his holidays. Lately, coming back to England, he
had turned up with his wife again; that was before he--the old man--had
been put to grass. He was a taking dog, but he had a monstrous foible.

'A monstrous foible?' said Lyon.

'He's a thumping liar.'

Lyon's brush stopped short, while he repeated, for somehow the formula
startled him, 'A thumping liar?'

'You are very lucky not to have found it out.'

'Well, I confess I have noticed a romantic tinge----'

'Oh, it isn't always romantic. He'll lie about the time of day, about
the name of his hatter. It appears there are people like that.'

'Well, they are precious scoundrels,' Lyon declared, his voice trembling
a little with the thought of what Everina Brant had done with herself.

'Oh, not always,' said the old man. 'This fellow isn't in the least a
scoundrel. There is no harm in him and no bad intention; he doesn't
steal nor cheat nor gamble nor drink; he's very kind--he sticks to his
wife, is fond of his children. He simply can't give you a straight
answer.'

'Then everything he told me last night, I suppose, was mendacious: he
delivered himself of a series of the stiffest statements. They stuck,
when I tried to swallow them, but I never thought of so simple an
explanation.'

'No doubt he was in the vein,' Sir David went on. 'It's a natural
peculiarity--as you might limp or stutter or be left-handed. I believe
it comes and goes, like intermittent fever. My son tells me that his
friends usually understand it and don't haul him up--for the sake of his
wife.'

'Oh, his wife--his wife!' Lyon murmured, painting fast.

'I daresay she's used to it.'

'Never in the world, Sir David. How can she be used to it?'

'Why, my dear sir, when a woman's fond!--And don't they mostly handle
the long bow themselves? They are connoisseurs--they have a sympathy for
a fellow-performer.'

Lyon was silent a moment; he had no ground for denying that Mrs.
Capadose was attached to her husband. But after a little he rejoined:
'Oh, not this one! I knew her years ago--before her marriage; knew her
well and admired her. She was as clear as a bell.'

'I like her very much,' Sir David said, 'but I have seen her back him
up.'

Lyon considered Sir David for a moment, not in the light of a model.
'Are you very sure?'

The old man hesitated; then he answered, smiling, 'You're in love with
her.'

'Very likely. God knows I used to be!'

'She must help him out--she can't expose him.'

'She can hold her tongue,' Lyon remarked.

'Well, before you probably she will.'

'That's what I am curious to see.' And Lyon added, privately, 'Mercy on
us, what he must have made of her!' He kept this reflection to himself,
for he considered that he had sufficiently betrayed his state of mind
with regard to Mrs. Capadose. None the less it occupied him now
immensely, the question of how such a woman would arrange herself in
such a predicament. He watched her with an interest deeply quickened
when he mingled with the company; he had had his own troubles in life,
but he had rarely been so anxious about anything as he was now to see
what the loyalty of a wife and the infection of an example would have
made of an absolutely truthful mind. Oh, he held it as immutably
established that whatever other women might be prone to do she, of old,
had been perfectly incapable of a deviation. Even if she had not been
too simple to deceive she would have been too proud; and if she had not
had too much conscience she would have had too little eagerness. It was
the last thing she would have endured or condoned--the particular thing
she would not have forgiven. Did she sit in torment while her husband
turned his somersaults, or was she now too so perverse that she thought
it a fine thing to be striking at the expense of one's honour? It would
have taken a wondrous alchemy--working backwards, as it were--to produce
this latter result. Besides these two alternatives (that she suffered
tortures in silence and that she was so much in love that her husband's
humiliating idiosyncrasy seemed to her only an added richness--a proof
of life and talent), there was still the possibility that she had not
found him out, that she took his false pieces at his own valuation. A
little reflection rendered this hypothesis untenable; it was too evident
that the account he gave of things must repeatedly have contradicted her
own knowledge. Within an hour or two of his meeting them Lyon had seen
her confronted with that perfectly gratuitous invention about the profit
they had made off his early picture. Even then indeed she had not, so
far as he could see, smarted, and--but for the present he could only
contemplate the case.

Even if it had not been interfused, through his uneradicated tenderness
for Mrs. Capadose, with an element of suspense, the question would still
have presented itself to him as a very curious problem, for he had not
painted portraits during so many years without becoming something of a
psychologist. His inquiry was limited for the moment to the opportunity
that the following three days might yield, as the Colonel and his wife
were going on to another house. It fixed itself largely of course upon
the Colonel too--this gentleman was such a rare anomaly. Moreover it had
to go on very quickly. Lyon was too scrupulous to ask other people what
they thought of the business--he was too afraid of exposing the woman he
once had loved. It was probable also that light would come to him from
the talk of the rest of the company: the Colonel's queer habit, both as
it affected his own situation and as it affected his wife, would be a
familiar theme in any house in which he was in the habit of staying.
Lyon had not observed in the circles in which he visited any marked
abstention from comment on the singularities of their members. It
interfered with his progress that the Colonel hunted all day, while he
plied his brushes and chatted with Sir David; but a Sunday intervened
and that partly made it up. Mrs. Capadose fortunately did not hunt, and
when his work was over she was not inaccessible. He took a couple of
longish walks with her (she was fond of that), and beguiled her at tea
into a friendly nook in the hall. Regard her as he might he could not
make out to himself that she was consumed by a hidden shame; the sense
of being married to a man whose word had no worth was not, in her
spirit, so far as he could guess, the canker within the rose. Her mind
appeared to have nothing on it but its own placid frankness, and when he
looked into her eyes (deeply, as he occasionally permitted himself to
do), they had no uncomfortable consciousness. He talked to her again and
still again of the dear old days--reminded her of things that he had not
(before this reunion) the least idea that he remembered. Then he spoke
to her of her husband, praised his appearance, his talent for
conversation, professed to have felt a quick friendship for him and
asked (with an inward audacity at which he trembled a little) what
manner of man he was. 'What manner?' said Mrs. Capadose. 'Dear me, how
can one describe one's husband? I like him very much.'

'Ah, you have told me that already!' Lyon exclaimed, with exaggerated
ruefulness.

'Then why do you ask me again?' She added in a moment, as if she were so
happy that she could afford to take pity on him, 'He is everything
that's good and kind. He's a soldier--and a gentleman--and a dear! He
hasn't a fault. And he has great ability.'

'Yes; he strikes one as having great ability. But of course I can't
think him a dear.'

'I don't care what you think him!' said Mrs. Capadose, looking, it
seemed to him, as she smiled, handsomer than he had ever seen her. She
was either deeply cynical or still more deeply impenetrable, and he had
little prospect of winning from her the intimation that he longed
for--some hint that it had come over her that after all she had better
have married a man who was not a by-word for the most contemptible, the
least heroic, of vices. Had she not seen--had she not felt--the smile go
round when her husband executed some especially characteristic
conversational caper? How could a woman of her quality endure that day
after day, year after year, except by her quality's altering? But he
would believe in the alteration only when he should have heard _her_
lie. He was fascinated by his problem and yet half exasperated, and he
asked himself all kinds of questions. Did she not lie, after all, when
she let his falsehoods pass without a protest? Was not her life a
perpetual complicity, and did she not aid and abet him by the simple
fact that she was not disgusted with him? Then again perhaps she _was_
disgusted and it was the mere desperation of her pride that had given
her an inscrutable mask. Perhaps she protested in private, passionately;
perhaps every night, in their own apartments, after the day's hideous
performance, she made him the most scorching scene. But if such scenes
were of no avail and he took no more trouble to cure himself, how could
she regard him, and after so many years of marriage too, with the
perfectly artless complacency that Lyon had surprised in her in the
course of the first day's dinner? If our friend had not been in love
with her he could have taken the diverting view of the Colonel's
delinquencies; but as it was they turned to the tragical in his mind,
even while he had a sense that his solicitude might also have been
laughed at.

The observation of these three days showed him that if Capadose was an
abundant he was not a malignant liar and that his fine faculty exercised
itself mainly on subjects of small direct importance. 'He is the liar
platonic,' he said to himself; 'he is disinterested, he doesn't operate
with a hope of gain or with a desire to injure. It is art for art and he
is prompted by the love of beauty. He has an inner vision of what might
have been, of what ought to be, and he helps on the good cause by the
simple substitution of a _nuance_. He paints, as it were, and so do I!'
His manifestations had a considerable variety, but a family likeness ran
through them, which consisted mainly of their singular futility. It was
this that made them offensive; they encumbered the field of
conversation, took up valuable space, converted it into a sort of
brilliant sun-shot fog. For a fib told under pressure a convenient place
can usually be found, as for a person who presents himself with an
author's order at the first night of a play. But the supererogatory lie
is the gentleman without a voucher or a ticket who accommodates himself
with a stool in the passage.

In one particular Lyon acquitted his successful rival; it had puzzled
him that irrepressible as he was he had not got into a mess in the
service. But he perceived that he respected the service--that august
institution was sacred from his depredations. Moreover though there was
a great deal of swagger in his talk it was, oddly enough, rarely swagger
about his military exploits. He had a passion for the chase, he had
followed it in far countries and some of his finest flowers were
reminiscences of lonely danger and escape. The more solitary the scene
the bigger of course the flower. A new acquaintance, with the Colonel,
always received the tribute of a bouquet: that generalisation Lyon very
promptly made. And this extraordinary man had inconsistencies and
unexpected lapses--lapses into flat veracity. Lyon recognised what Sir
David had told him, that his aberrations came in fits or periods--that
he would sometimes keep the truce of God for a month at a time. The
muse breathed upon him at her pleasure; she often left him alone. He
would neglect the finest openings and then set sail in the teeth of the
breeze. As a general thing he affirmed the false rather than denied the
true; yet this proportion was sometimes strikingly reversed. Very often
he joined in the laugh against himself--he admitted that he was trying
it on and that a good many of his anecdotes had an experimental
character. Still he never completely retracted nor retreated--he dived
and came up in another place. Lyon divined that he was capable at
intervals of defending his position with violence, but only when it was
a very bad one. Then he might easily be dangerous--then he would hit out
and become calumnious. Such occasions would test his wife's
equanimity--Lyon would have liked to see her there. In the smoking-room
and elsewhere the company, so far as it was composed of his familiars,
had an hilarious protest always at hand; but among the men who had known
him long his rich tone was an old story, so old that they had ceased to
talk about it, and Lyon did not care, as I have said, to elicit the
judgment of those who might have shared his own surprise.

The oddest thing of all was that neither surprise nor familiarity
prevented the Colonel's being liked; his largest drafts on a sceptical
attention passed for an overflow of life and gaiety--almost of good
looks. He was fond of portraying his bravery and used a very big brush,
and yet he was unmistakably brave. He was a capital rider and shot, in
spite of his fund of anecdote illustrating these accomplishments: in
short he was very nearly as clever and his career had been very nearly
as wonderful as he pretended. His best quality however remained that
indiscriminate sociability which took interest and credulity for granted
and about which he bragged least. It made him cheap, it made him even in
a manner vulgar; but it was so contagious that his listener was more or
less on his side as against the probabilities. It was a private
reflection of Oliver Lyon's that he not only lied but made one feel
one's self a bit of a liar, even (or especially) if one contradicted
him. In the evening, at dinner and afterwards, our friend watched his
wife's face to see if some faint shade or spasm never passed over it.
But she showed nothing, and the wonder was that when he spoke she almost
always listened. That was her pride: she wished not to be even suspected
of not facing the music. Lyon had none the less an importunate vision of
a veiled figure coming the next day in the dusk to certain places to
repair the Colonel's ravages, as the relatives of kleptomaniacs
punctually call at the shops that have suffered from their pilferings.

'I must apologise, of course it wasn't true, I hope no harm is done, it
is only his incorrigible----' Oh, to hear that woman's voice in that
deep abasement! Lyon had no nefarious plan, no conscious wish to
practise upon her shame or her loyalty; but he did say to himself that
he should like to bring her round to feel that there would have been
more dignity in a union with a certain other person. He even dreamed of
the hour when, with a burning face, she would ask _him_ not to take it
up. Then he should be almost consoled--he would be magnanimous.

Lyon finished his picture and took his departure, after having worked
in a glow of interest which made him believe in his success, until he
found he had pleased every one, especially Mr. and Mrs. Ashmore, when he
began to be sceptical. The party at any rate changed: Colonel and Mrs.
Capadose went their way. He was able to say to himself however that his
separation from the lady was not so much an end as a beginning, and he
called on her soon after his return to town. She had told him the hours
she was at home--she seemed to like him. If she liked him why had she
not married him or at any rate why was she not sorry she had not? If she
was sorry she concealed it too well. Lyon's curiosity on this point may
strike the reader as fatuous, but something must be allowed to a
disappointed man. He did not ask much after all; not that she should
love him to-day or that she should allow him to tell her that he loved
her, but only that she should give him some sign she was sorry. Instead
of this, for the present, she contented herself with exhibiting her
little daughter to him. The child was beautiful and had the prettiest
eyes of innocence he had ever seen: which did not prevent him from
wondering whether she told horrid fibs. This idea gave him much
entertainment--the picture of the anxiety with which her mother would
watch as she grew older for the symptoms of heredity. That was a nice
occupation for Everina Brant! Did she lie to the child herself, about
her father--was that necessary, when she pressed her daughter to her
bosom, to cover up his tracks? Did he control himself before the little
girl--so that she might not hear him say things she knew to be other
than he said? Lyon doubted this: his genius would be too strong for
him, and the only safety for the child would be in her being too stupid
to analyse. One couldn't judge yet--she was too young. If she should
grow up clever she would be sure to tread in his steps--a delightful
improvement in her mother's situation! Her little face was not shifty,
but neither was her father's big one: so that proved nothing.

Lyon reminded his friends more than once of their promise that Amy
should sit to him, and it was only a question of his leisure. The desire
grew in him to paint the Colonel also--an operation from which he
promised himself a rich private satisfaction. He would draw him out, he
would set him up in that totality about which he had talked with Sir
David, and none but the initiated would know. They, however, would rank
the picture high, and it would be indeed six rows deep--a masterpiece of
subtle characterisation, of legitimate treachery. He had dreamed for
years of producing something which should bear the stamp of the
psychologist as well as of the painter, and here at last was his
subject. It was a pity it was not better, but that was not _his_ fault.
It was his impression that already no one drew the Colonel out more than
he, and he did it not only by instinct but on a plan. There were moments
when he was almost frightened at the success of his plan--the poor
gentleman went so terribly far. He would pull up some day, look at Lyon
between the eyes--guess he was being played upon--which would lead to
his wife's guessing it also. Not that Lyon cared much for that however,
so long as she failed to suppose (as she must) that she was a part of
his joke. He formed such a habit now of going to see her of a Sunday
afternoon that he was angry when she went out of town. This occurred
often, as the couple were great visitors and the Colonel was always
looking for sport, which he liked best when it could be had at other
people's expense. Lyon would have supposed that this sort of life was
particularly little to her taste, for he had an idea that it was in
country-houses that her husband came out strongest. To let him go off
without her, not to see him expose himself--that ought properly to have
been a relief and a luxury to her. She told Lyon in fact that she
preferred staying at home; but she neglected to say it was because in
other people's houses she was on the rack: the reason she gave was that
she liked so to be with the child. It was not perhaps criminal to draw
such a bow, but it was vulgar: poor Lyon was delighted when he arrived
at that formula. Certainly some day too he would cross the line--he
would become a noxious animal. Yes, in the meantime he was vulgar, in
spite of his talents, his fine person, his impunity. Twice, by
exception, toward the end of the winter, when he left town for a few
days' hunting, his wife remained at home. Lyon had not yet reached the
point of asking himself whether the desire not to miss two of his visits
had something to do with her immobility. That inquiry would perhaps have
been more in place later, when he began to paint the child and she
always came with her. But it was not in her to give the wrong name, to
pretend, and Lyon could see that she had the maternal passion, in spite
of the bad blood in the little girl's veins.

She came inveterately, though Lyon multiplied the sittings: Amy was
never entrusted to the governess or the maid. He had knocked off poor
old Sir David in ten days, but the portrait of the simple-faced child
bade fair to stretch over into the following year. He asked for sitting
after sitting, and it would have struck any one who might have witnessed
the affair that he was wearing the little girl out. He knew better
however and Mrs. Capadose also knew: they were present together at the
long intermissions he gave her, when she left her pose and roamed about
the great studio, amusing herself with its curiosities, playing with the
old draperies and costumes, having unlimited leave to handle. Then her
mother and Mr. Lyon sat and talked; he laid aside his brushes and leaned
back in his chair; he always gave her tea. What Mrs. Capadose did not
know was the way that during these weeks he neglected other orders:
women have no faculty of imagination with regard to a man's work beyond
a vague idea that it doesn't matter. In fact Lyon put off everything and
made several celebrities wait. There were half-hours of silence, when he
plied his brushes, during which he was mainly conscious that Everina was
sitting there. She easily fell into that if he did not insist on
talking, and she was not embarrassed nor bored by it. Sometimes she took
up a book--there were plenty of them about; sometimes, a little way off,
in her chair, she watched his progress (though without in the least
advising or correcting), as if she cared for every stroke that
represented her daughter. These strokes were occasionally a little wild;
he was thinking so much more of his heart than of his hand. He was not
more embarrassed than she was, but he was agitated: it was as if in the
sittings (for the child, too, was beautifully quiet) something was
growing between them or had already grown--a tacit confidence, an
inexpressible secret. He felt it that way; but after all he could not be
sure that she did. What he wanted her to do for him was very little; it
was not even to confess that she was unhappy. He would be
superabundantly gratified if she should simply let him know, even by a
silent sign, that she recognised that with him her life would have been
finer. Sometimes he guessed--his presumption went so far--that he might
see this sign in her contentedly sitting there.




III


At last he broached the question of painting the Colonel: it was now
very late in the season--there would be little time before the general
dispersal. He said they must make the most of it; the great thing was to
begin; then in the autumn, with the resumption of their London life,
they could go forward. Mrs. Capadose objected to this that she really
could not consent to accept another present of such value. Lyon had
given her the portrait of herself of old, and he had seen what they had
had the indelicacy to do with it. Now he had offered her this beautiful
memorial of the child--beautiful it would evidently be when it was
finished, if he could ever satisfy himself; a precious possession which
they would cherish for ever. But his generosity must stop there--they
couldn't be so tremendously 'beholden' to him. They couldn't order the
picture--of course he would understand that, without her explaining: it
was a luxury beyond their reach, for they knew the great prices he
received. Besides, what had they ever done--what above all had _she_
ever done, that he should overload them with benefits? No, he was too
dreadfully good; it was really impossible that Clement should sit. Lyon
listened to her without protest, without interruption, while he bent
forward at his work, and at last he said: 'Well, if you won't take it
why not let him sit for me for my own pleasure and profit? Let it be a
favour, a service I ask of him. It will do me a lot of good to paint him
and the picture will remain in my hands.'

'How will it do you a lot of good?' Mrs. Capadose asked.

'Why, he's such a rare model--such an interesting subject. He has such
an expressive face. It will teach me no end of things.'

'Expressive of what?' said Mrs. Capadose.

'Why, of his nature.'

'And do you want to paint his nature?'

'Of course I do. That's what a great portrait gives you, and I shall
make the Colonel's a great one. It will put me up high. So you see my
request is eminently interested.'

'How can you be higher than you are?'

'Oh, I'm insatiable! Do consent,' said Lyon.

'Well, his nature is very noble,' Mrs. Capadose remarked.

'Ah, trust me, I shall bring it out!' Lyon exclaimed, feeling a little
ashamed of himself.

Mrs. Capadose said before she went away that her husband would probably
comply with his invitation, but she added, 'Nothing would induce me to
let you pry into _me_ that way!'

'Oh, you,' Lyon laughed--'I could do you in the dark!'

The Colonel shortly afterwards placed his leisure at the painter's
disposal and by the end of July had paid him several visits. Lyon was
disappointed neither in the quality of his sitter nor in the degree to
which he himself rose to the occasion; he felt really confident that he
should produce a fine thing. He was in the humour; he was charmed with
his _motif_ and deeply interested in his problem. The only point that
troubled him was the idea that when he should send his picture to the
Academy he should not be able to give the title, for the catalogue,
simply as 'The Liar.' However, it little mattered, for he had now
determined that this character should be perceptible even to the meanest
intelligence--as overtopping as it had become to his own sense in the
living man. As he saw nothing else in the Colonel to-day, so he gave
himself up to the joy of painting nothing else. How he did it he could
not have told you, but it seemed to him that the mystery of how to do it
was revealed to him afresh every time he sat down to his work. It was in
the eyes and it was in the mouth, it was in every line of the face and
every fact of the attitude, in the indentation of the chin, in the way
the hair was planted, the moustache was twisted, the smile came and
went, the breath rose and fell. It was in the way he looked out at a
bamboozled world in short--the way he would look out for ever. There
were half a dozen portraits in Europe that Lyon rated as supreme; he
regarded them as immortal, for they were as perfectly preserved as they
were consummately painted. It was to this small exemplary group that he
aspired to annex the canvas on which he was now engaged. One of the
productions that helped to compose it was the magnificent Moroni of the
National Gallery--the young tailor, in the white jacket, at his board
with his shears. The Colonel was not a tailor, nor was Moroni's model,
unlike many tailors, a liar; but as regards the masterly clearness with
which the individual should be rendered his work would be on the same
line as that. He had to a degree in which he had rarely had it before
the satisfaction of feeling life grow and grow under his brush. The
Colonel, as it turned out, liked to sit and he liked to talk while he
was sitting: which was very fortunate, as his talk largely constituted
Lyon's inspiration. Lyon put into practice that idea of drawing him out
which he had been nursing for so many weeks: he could not possibly have
been in a better relation to him for the purpose. He encouraged,
beguiled, excited him, manifested an unfathomable credulity, and his
only interruptions were when the Colonel did not respond to it. He had
his intermissions, his hours of sterility, and then Lyon felt that the
picture also languished. The higher his companion soared, the more
gyrations he executed, in the blue, the better he painted; he couldn't
make his flights long enough. He lashed him on when he flagged; his
apprehension became great at moments that the Colonel would discover his
game. But he never did, apparently; he basked and expanded in the fine
steady light of the painter's attention. In this way the picture grew
very fast; it was astonishing what a short business it was, compared
with the little girl's. By the fifth of August it was pretty well
finished: that was the date of the last sitting the Colonel was for the
present able to give, as he was leaving town the next day with his wife.
Lyon was amply content--he saw his way so clear: he should be able to do
at his convenience what remained, with or without his friend's
attendance. At any rate, as there was no hurry, he would let the thing
stand over till his own return to London, in November, when he would
come back to it with a fresh eye. On the Colonel's asking him if his
wife might come and see it the next day, if she should find a
minute--this was so greatly her desire--Lyon begged as a special favour
that she would wait: he was so far from satisfied as yet. This was the
repetition of a proposal Mrs. Capadose had made on the occasion of his
last visit to her, and he had then asked for a delay--declared that he
was by no means content. He was really delighted, and he was again a
little ashamed of himself.

By the fifth of August the weather was very warm, and on that day, while
the Colonel sat straight and gossiped, Lyon opened for the sake of
ventilation a little subsidiary door which led directly from his studio
into the garden and sometimes served as an entrance and an exit for
models and for visitors of the humbler sort, and as a passage for
canvases, frames, packing-boxes and other professional gear. The main
entrance was through the house and his own apartments, and this approach
had the charming effect of admitting you first to a high gallery, from
which a crooked picturesque staircase enabled you to descend to the
wide, decorated, encumbered room. The view of this room, beneath them,
with all its artistic ingenuities and the objects of value that Lyon had
collected, never failed to elicit exclamations of delight from persons
stepping into the gallery. The way from the garden was plainer and at
once more practicable and more private. Lyon's domain, in St. John's
Wood, was not vast, but when the door stood open of a summer's day it
offered a glimpse of flowers and trees, you smelt something sweet and
you heard the birds. On this particular morning the side-door had been
found convenient by an unannounced visitor, a youngish woman who stood
in the room before the Colonel perceived her and whom he perceived
before she was noticed by his friend. She was very quiet, and she looked
from one of the men to the other. 'Oh, dear, here's another!' Lyon
exclaimed, as soon as his eyes rested on her. She belonged, in fact, to
a somewhat importunate class--the model in search of employment, and she
explained that she had ventured to come straight in, that way, because
very often when she went to call upon gentlemen the servants played her
tricks, turned her off and wouldn't take in her name.

'But how did you get into the garden?' Lyon asked.

'The gate was open, sir--the servants' gate. The butcher's cart was
there.'

'The butcher ought to have closed it,' said Lyon.

'Then you don't require me, sir?' the lady continued.

Lyon went on with his painting; he had given her a sharp look at first,
but now his eyes lighted on her no more. The Colonel, however, examined
her with interest. She was a person of whom you could scarcely say
whether being young she looked old or old she looked young; she had at
any rate evidently rounded several of the corners of life and had a face
that was rosy but that somehow failed to suggest freshness. Nevertheless
she was pretty and even looked as if at one time she might have sat for
the complexion. She wore a hat with many feathers, a dress with many
bugles, long black gloves, encircled with silver bracelets, and very bad
shoes. There was something about her that was not exactly of the
governess out of place nor completely of the actress seeking an
engagement, but that savoured of an interrupted profession or even of a
blighted career. She was rather soiled and tarnished, and after she had
been in the room a few moments the air, or at any rate the nostril,
became acquainted with a certain alcoholic waft. She was unpractised in
the _h_, and when Lyon at last thanked her and said he didn't want
her--he was doing nothing for which she could be useful--she replied
with rather a wounded manner, 'Well, you know you _'ave_ 'ad me!'

'I don't remember you,' Lyon answered.

'Well, I daresay the people that saw your pictures do! I haven't much
time, but I thought I would look in.'

'I am much obliged to you.'

'If ever you should require me, if you just send me a postcard----'

'I never send postcards,' said Lyon.

'Oh well, I should value a private letter! Anything to Miss Geraldine,
Mortimer Terrace Mews, Notting 'ill----'

'Very good; I'll remember,' said Lyon.

Miss Geraldine lingered. 'I thought I'd just stop, on the chance.'

'I'm afraid I can't hold out hopes, I'm so busy with portraits,' Lyon
continued.

'Yes; I see you are. I wish I was in the gentleman's place.'

'I'm afraid in that case it wouldn't look like me,' said the Colonel,
laughing.

'Oh, of course it couldn't compare--it wouldn't be so 'andsome! But I do
hate them portraits!' Miss Geraldine declared. 'It's so much bread out
of our mouths.'

'Well, there are many who can't paint them,' Lyon suggested,
comfortingly.

'Oh, I've sat to the very first--and only to the first! There's many
that couldn't do anything without me.'

'I'm glad you're in such demand.' Lyon was beginning to be bored and he
added that he wouldn't detain her--he would send for her in case of
need.

'Very well; remember it's the Mews--more's the pity! You don't sit so
well as _us_!' Miss Geraldine pursued, looking at the Colonel. 'If _you_
should require me, sir----'

'You put him out; you embarrass him,' said Lyon.

'Embarrass him, oh gracious!' the visitor cried, with a laugh which
diffused a fragrance. 'Perhaps _you_ send postcards, eh?' she went on to
the Colonel; and then she retreated with a wavering step. She passed out
into the garden as she had come.

'How very dreadful--she's drunk!' said Lyon. He was painting hard, but
he looked up, checking himself: Miss Geraldine, in the open doorway, had
thrust back her head.

'Yes, I do hate it--that sort of thing!' she cried with an explosion of
mirth which confirmed Lyon's declaration. And then she disappeared.

'What sort of thing--what does she mean?' the Colonel asked.

'Oh, my painting you, when I might be painting her.'

'And have you ever painted her?'

'Never in the world; I have never seen her. She is quite mistaken.'

The Colonel was silent a moment; then he remarked, 'She was very
pretty--ten years ago.'

'I daresay, but she's quite ruined. For me the least drop too much
spoils them; I shouldn't care for her at all.'

'My dear fellow, she's not a model,' said the Colonel, laughing.

'To-day, no doubt, she's not worthy of the name; but she has been one.'

'_Jamais de la vie!_ That's all a pretext.'

'A pretext?' Lyon pricked up his ears--he began to wonder what was
coming now.

'She didn't want you--she wanted me.'

'I noticed she paid you some attention. What does she want of you?'

'Oh, to do me an ill turn. She hates me--lots of women do. She's
watching me--she follows me.'

Lyon leaned back in his chair--he didn't believe a word of this. He was
all the more delighted with it and with the Colonel's bright, candid
manner. The story had bloomed, fragrant, on the spot. 'My dear Colonel!'
he murmured, with friendly interest and commiseration.

'I was annoyed when she came in--but I wasn't startled,' his sitter
continued.

'You concealed it very well, if you were.'

'Ah, when one has been through what I have! To-day however I confess I
was half prepared. I have seen her hanging about--she knows my
movements. She was near my house this morning--she must have followed
me.'

'But who is she then--with such a _toupet_?'

'Yes, she has that,' said the Colonel; 'but as you observe she was
primed. Still, there was a cheek, as they say, in her coming in. Oh,
she's a bad one! She isn't a model and she never was; no doubt she has
known some of those women and picked up their form. She had hold of a
friend of mine ten years ago--a stupid young gander who might have been
left to be plucked but whom I was obliged to take an interest in for
family reasons. It's a long story--I had really forgotten all about it.
She's thirty-seven if she's a day. I cut in and made him get rid of
her--I sent her about her business. She knew it was me she had to thank.
She has never forgiven me--I think she's off her head. Her name isn't
Geraldine at all and I doubt very much if that's her address.'

'Ah, what is her name?' Lyon asked, most attentive. The details always
began to multiply, to abound, when once his companion was well
launched--they flowed forth in battalions.

'It's Pearson--Harriet Pearson; but she used to call herself
Grenadine--wasn't that a rum appellation? Grenadine--Geraldine--the jump
was easy.' Lyon was charmed with the promptitude of this response, and
his interlocutor went on: 'I hadn't thought of her for years--I had
quite lost sight of her. I don't know what her idea is, but practically
she's harmless. As I came in I thought I saw her a little way up the
road. She must have found out I come here and have arrived before me. I
daresay--or rather I'm sure--she is waiting for me there now.'

'Hadn't you better have protection?' Lyon asked, laughing.

'The best protection is five shillings--I'm willing to go that length.
Unless indeed she has a bottle of vitriol. But they only throw vitriol
on the men who have deceived them, and I never deceived her--I told her
the first time I saw her that it wouldn't do. Oh, if she's there we'll
walk a little way together and talk it over and, as I say, I'll go as
far as five shillings.'

'Well,' said Lyon, 'I'll contribute another five.' He felt that this was
little to pay for his entertainment.

That entertainment was interrupted however for the time by the Colonel's
departure. Lyon hoped for a letter recounting the fictive sequel; but
apparently his brilliant sitter did not operate with the pen. At any
rate he left town without writing; they had taken a rendezvous for three
months later. Oliver Lyon always passed the holidays in the same way;
during the first weeks he paid a visit to his elder brother, the happy
possessor, in the south of England, of a rambling old house with formal
gardens, in which he delighted, and then he went abroad--usually to
Italy or Spain. This year he carried out his custom after taking a last
look at his all but finished work and feeling as nearly pleased with it
as he ever felt with the translation of the idea by the hand--always, as
it seemed to him, a pitiful compromise. One yellow afternoon, in the
country, as he was smoking his pipe on one of the old terraces he was
seized with the desire to see it again and do two or three things more
to it: he had thought of it so often while he lounged there. The impulse
was too strong to be dismissed, and though he expected to return to town
in the course of another week he was unable to face the delay. To look
at the picture for five minutes would be enough--it would clear up
certain questions which hummed in his brain; so that the next morning,
to give himself this luxury, he took the train for London. He sent no
word in advance; he would lunch at his club and probably return into
Sussex by the 5.45.

In St. John's Wood the tide of human life flows at no time very fast,
and in the first days of September Lyon found unmitigated emptiness in
the straight sunny roads where the little plastered garden-walls, with
their incommunicative doors, looked slightly Oriental. There was
definite stillness in his own house, to which he admitted himself by his
pass-key, having a theory that it was well sometimes to take servants
unprepared. The good woman who was mainly in charge and who cumulated
the functions of cook and housekeeper was, however, quickly summoned by
his step, and (he cultivated frankness of intercourse with his
domestics) received him without the confusion of surprise. He told her
that she needn't mind the place being not quite straight, he had only
come up for a few hours--he should be busy in the studio. To this she
replied that he was just in time to see a lady and a gentleman who were
there at the moment--they had arrived five minutes before. She had told
them he was away from home but they said it was all right; they only
wanted to look at a picture and would be very careful of everything. 'I
hope it is all right, sir,' the housekeeper concluded. 'The gentleman
says he's a sitter and he gave me his name--rather an odd name; I think
it's military. The lady's a very fine lady, sir; at any rate there they
are.'

'Oh, it's all right,' Lyon said, the identity of his visitors being
clear. The good woman couldn't know, for she usually had little to do
with the comings and goings; his man, who showed people in and out, had
accompanied him to the country. He was a good deal surprised at Mrs.
Capadose's having come to see her husband's portrait when she knew that
the artist himself wished her to forbear; but it was a familiar truth to
him that she was a woman of a high spirit. Besides, perhaps the lady was
not Mrs. Capadose; the Colonel might have brought some inquisitive
friend, a person who wanted a portrait of _her_ husband. What were they
doing in town, at any rate, at that moment? Lyon made his way to the
studio with a certain curiosity; he wondered vaguely what his friends
were 'up to.' He pushed aside the curtain that hung in the door of
communication--the door opening upon the gallery which it had been found
convenient to construct at the time the studio was added to the house.
When I say he pushed it aside I should amend my phrase; he laid his hand
upon it, but at that moment he was arrested by a very singular sound. It
came from the floor of the room beneath him and it startled him
extremely, consisting apparently as it did of a passionate wail--a sort
of smothered shriek--accompanied by a violent burst of tears. Oliver
Lyon listened intently a moment, and then he passed out upon the
balcony, which was covered with an old thick Moorish rug. His step was
noiseless, though he had not endeavoured to make it so, and after that
first instant he found himself profiting irresistibly by the accident of
his not having attracted the attention of the two persons in the studio,
who were some twenty feet below him. In truth they were so deeply and so
strangely engaged that their unconsciousness of observation was
explained. The scene that took place before Lyon's eyes was one of the
most extraordinary they had ever rested upon. Delicacy and the failure
to comprehend kept him at first from interrupting it--for what he saw
was a woman who had thrown herself in a flood of tears on her
companion's bosom--and these influences were succeeded after a minute
(the minutes were very few and very short) by a definite motive which
presently had the force to make him step back behind the curtain. I may
add that it also had the force to make him avail himself for further
contemplation of a crevice formed by his gathering together the two
halves of the _portière_. He was perfectly aware of what he was
about--he was for the moment an eavesdropper, a spy; but he was also
aware that a very odd business, in which his confidence had been trifled
with, was going forward, and that if in a measure it didn't concern him,
in a measure it very definitely did. His observation, his reflections,
accomplished themselves in a flash.

His visitors were in the middle of the room; Mrs. Capadose clung to her
husband, weeping, sobbing as if her heart would break. Her distress was
horrible to Oliver Lyon but his astonishment was greater than his horror
when he heard the Colonel respond to it by the words, vehemently
uttered, 'Damn him, damn him, damn him!' What in the world had happened?
Why was she sobbing and whom was he damning? What had happened, Lyon saw
the next instant, was that the Colonel had finally rummaged out his
unfinished portrait (he knew the corner where the artist usually placed
it, out of the way, with its face to the wall) and had set it up before
his wife on an empty easel. She had looked at it a few moments and
then--apparently--what she saw in it had produced an explosion of dismay
and resentment. She was too busy sobbing and the Colonel was too busy
holding her and reiterating his objurgation, to look round or look up.
The scene was so unexpected to Lyon that he could not take it, on the
spot, as a proof of the triumph of his hand--of a tremendous hit: he
could only wonder what on earth was the matter. The idea of the triumph
came a little later. Yet he could see the portrait from where he stood;
he was startled with its look of life--he had not thought it so
masterly. Mrs. Capadose flung herself away from her husband--she dropped
into the nearest chair, buried her face in her arms, leaning on a table.
Her weeping suddenly ceased to be audible, but she shuddered there as if
she were overwhelmed with anguish and shame. Her husband remained a
moment staring at the picture; then he went to her, bent over her, took
hold of her again, soothed her. 'What is it, darling, what the devil is
it?' he demanded.

Lyon heard her answer. 'It's cruel--oh, it's too cruel!'

'Damn him--damn him--damn him!' the Colonel repeated.

'It's all there--it's all there!' Mrs. Capadose went on.

'Hang it, what's all there?'

'Everything there oughtn't to be--everything he has seen--it's too
dreadful!'

'Everything he has seen? Why, ain't I a good-looking fellow? He has made
me rather handsome.'

Mrs. Capadose had sprung up again; she had darted another glance at the
painted betrayal. 'Handsome? Hideous, hideous! Not that--never, never!'

'Not _what_, in heaven's name?' the Colonel almost shouted. Lyon could
see his flushed, bewildered face.

'What he has made of you--what you know! _He_ knows--he has seen. Every
one will know--every one will see. Fancy that thing in the Academy!'

'You're going wild, darling; but if you hate it so it needn't go.'

'Oh, he'll send it--it's so good! Come away--come away!' Mrs. Capadose
wailed, seizing her husband.

'It's so good?' the poor man cried.

'Come away--come away,' she only repeated; and she turned toward the
staircase that ascended to the gallery.

'Not that way--not through the house, in the state you're in,' Lyon
heard the Colonel object. 'This way--we can pass,' he added; and he drew
his wife to the small door that opened into the garden. It was bolted,
but he pushed the bolt and opened the door. She passed out quickly, but
he stood there looking back into the room. 'Wait for me a moment!' he
cried out to her; and with an excited stride he re-entered the studio.
He came up to the picture again, and again he stood looking at it. 'Damn
him--damn him--damn him!' he broke out once more. It was not clear to
Lyon whether this malediction had for its object the original or the
painter of the portrait. The Colonel turned away and moved rapidly about
the room, as if he were looking for something; Lyon was unable for the
instant to guess his intention. Then the artist said to himself, below
his breath, 'He's going to do it a harm!' His first impulse was to rush
down and stop him; but he paused, with the sound of Everina Brant's sobs
still in his ears. The Colonel found what he was looking for--found it
among some odds and ends on a small table and rushed back with it to the
easel. At one and the same moment Lyon perceived that the object he had
seized was a small Eastern dagger and that he had plunged it into the
canvas. He seemed animated by a sudden fury, for with extreme vigour of
hand he dragged the instrument down (Lyon knew it to have no very fine
edge) making a long, abominable gash. Then he plucked it out and dashed
it again several times into the face of the likeness, exactly as if he
were stabbing a human victim: it had the oddest effect--that of a sort
of figurative suicide. In a few seconds more the Colonel had tossed the
dagger away--he looked at it as he did so, as if he expected it to reek
with blood--and hurried out of the place, closing the door after him.

The strangest part of all was--as will doubtless appear--that Oliver
Lyon made no movement to save his picture. But he did not feel as if he
were losing it or cared not if he were, so much more did he feel that he
was gaining a certitude. His old friend _was_ ashamed of her husband,
and he had made her so, and he had scored a great success, even though
the picture had been reduced to rags. The revelation excited him so--as
indeed the whole scene did--that when he came down the steps after the
Colonel had gone he trembled with his happy agitation; he was dizzy and
had to sit down a moment. The portrait had a dozen jagged wounds--the
Colonel literally had hacked it to death. Lyon left it where it was,
never touched it, scarcely looked at it; he only walked up and down his
studio, still excited, for an hour. At the end of this time his good
woman came to recommend that he should have some luncheon; there was a
passage under the staircase from the offices.

'Ah, the lady and gentleman have gone, sir? I didn't hear them.'

'Yes; they went by the garden.'

But she had stopped, staring at the picture on the easel. 'Gracious, how
you _'ave_ served it, sir!'

Lyon imitated the Colonel. 'Yes, I cut it up--in a fit of disgust.'

'Mercy, after all your trouble! Because they weren't pleased, sir?'

'Yes; they weren't pleased.'

'Well, they must be very grand! Blessed if I would!'

'Have it chopped up; it will do to light fires,' Lyon said.

He returned to the country by the 3.30 and a few days later passed over
to France. During the two months that he was absent from England he
expected something--he could hardly have said what; a manifestation of
some sort on the Colonel's part. Wouldn't he write, wouldn't he explain,
wouldn't he take for granted Lyon had discovered the way he had, as the
cook said, served him and deem it only decent to take pity in some
fashion or other on his mystification? Would he plead guilty or would he
repudiate suspicion? The latter course would be difficult and make a
considerable draft upon his genius, in view of the certain testimony of
Lyon's housekeeper, who had admitted the visitors and would establish
the connection between their presence and the violence wrought. Would
the Colonel proffer some apology or some amends, or would any word from
him be only a further expression of that destructive petulance which our
friend had seen his wife so suddenly and so potently communicate to him?
He would have either to declare that he had not touched the picture or
to admit that he had, and in either case he would have to tell a fine
story. Lyon was impatient for the story and, as no letter came,
disappointed that it was not produced. His impatience however was much
greater in respect to Mrs. Capadose's version, if version there was to
be; for certainly that would be the real test, would show how far she
would go for her husband, on the one side, or for him, Oliver Lyon, on
the other. He could scarcely wait to see what line she would take;
whether she would simply adopt the Colonel's, whatever it might be. He
wanted to draw her out without waiting, to get an idea in advance. He
wrote to her, to this end, from Venice, in the tone of their
established friendship, asking for news, narrating his wanderings,
hoping they should soon meet in town and not saying a word about the
picture. Day followed day, after the time, and he received no answer;
upon which he reflected that she couldn't trust herself to write--was
still too much under the influence of the emotion produced by his
'betrayal.' Her husband had espoused that emotion and she had espoused
the action he had taken in consequence of it, and it was a complete
rupture and everything was at an end. Lyon considered this prospect
rather ruefully, at the same time that he thought it deplorable that
such charming people should have put themselves so grossly in the wrong.
He was at last cheered, though little further enlightened, by the
arrival of a letter, brief but breathing good-humour and hinting neither
at a grievance nor at a bad conscience. The most interesting part of it
to Lyon was the postscript, which consisted of these words: 'I have a
confession to make to you. We were in town for a couple of days, the 1st
of September, and I took the occasion to defy your authority--it was
very bad of me but I couldn't help it. I made Clement take me to your
studio--I wanted so dreadfully to see what you had done with him, your
wishes to the contrary notwithstanding. We made your servants let us in
and I took a good look at the picture. It is really wonderful!'
'Wonderful' was non-committal, but at least with this letter there was
no rupture.

The third day after Lyon's return to London was a Sunday, so that he
could go and ask Mrs. Capadose for luncheon. She had given him in the
spring a general invitation to do so and he had availed himself of it
several times. These had been the occasions (before he sat to him) when
he saw the Colonel most familiarly. Directly after the meal his host
disappeared (he went out, as he said, to call on _his_ women) and the
second half-hour was the best, even when there were other people. Now,
in the first days of December, Lyon had the luck to find the pair alone,
without even Amy, who appeared but little in public. They were in the
drawing-room, waiting for the repast to be announced, and as soon as he
came in the Colonel broke out, 'My dear fellow, I'm delighted to see
you! I'm so keen to begin again.'

'Oh, do go on, it's so beautiful,' Mrs. Capadose said, as she gave him
her hand.

Lyon looked from one to the other; he didn't know what he had expected,
but he had not expected this. 'Ah, then, you think I've got something?'

'You've got everything,' said Mrs. Capadose, smiling from her
golden-brown eyes.

'She wrote you of our little crime?' her husband asked. 'She dragged me
there--I had to go.' Lyon wondered for a moment whether he meant by
their little crime the assault on the canvas; but the Colonel's next
words didn't confirm this interpretation. 'You know I like to sit--it
gives such a chance to my _bavardise_. And just now I have time.'

'You must remember I had almost finished,' Lyon remarked.

'So you had. More's the pity. I should like you to begin again.'

'My dear fellow, I shall have to begin again!' said Oliver Lyon with a
laugh, looking at Mrs. Capadose. She did not meet his eyes--she had got
up to ring for luncheon. 'The picture has been smashed,' Lyon
continued.

'Smashed? Ah, what did you do that for?' Mrs. Capadose asked, standing
there before him in all her clear, rich beauty. Now that she looked at
him she was impenetrable.

'I didn't--I found it so--with a dozen holes punched in it!'

'I say!' cried the Colonel.

Lyon turned his eyes to him, smiling. 'I hope _you_ didn't do it?'

'Is it ruined?' the Colonel inquired. He was as brightly true as his
wife and he looked simply as if Lyon's question could not be serious.
'For the love of sitting to you? My dear fellow, if I had thought of it
I would!'

'Nor you either?' the painter demanded of Mrs. Capadose.

Before she had time to reply her husband had seized her arm, as if a
highly suggestive idea had come to him. 'I say, my dear, that
woman--that woman!'

'That woman?' Mrs. Capadose repeated; and Lyon too wondered what woman
he meant.

'Don't you remember when we came out, she was at the door--or a little
way from it? I spoke to you of her--I told you about her.
Geraldine--Grenadine--the one who burst in that day,' he explained to
Lyon. 'We saw her hanging about--I called Everina's attention to her.'

'Do you mean she got at my picture?'

'Ah yes, I remember,' said Mrs. Capadose, with a sigh.

'She burst in again--she had learned the way--she was waiting for her
chance,' the Colonel continued. 'Ah, the little brute!'

Lyon looked down; he felt himself colouring. This was what he had been
waiting for--the day the Colonel should wantonly sacrifice some innocent
person. And could his wife be a party to that final atrocity? Lyon had
reminded himself repeatedly during the previous weeks that when the
Colonel perpetrated his misdeed she had already quitted the room; but he
had argued none the less--it was a virtual certainty--that he had on
rejoining her immediately made his achievement plain to her. He was in
the flush of performance; and even if he had not mentioned what he had
done she would have guessed it. He did not for an instant believe that
poor Miss Geraldine had been hovering about his door, nor had the
account given by the Colonel the summer before of his relations with
this lady deceived him in the slightest degree. Lyon had never seen her
before the day she planted herself in his studio; but he knew her and
classified her as if he had made her. He was acquainted with the London
female model in all her varieties--in every phase of her development and
every step of her decay. When he entered his house that September
morning just after the arrival of his two friends there had been no
symptoms whatever, up and down the road, of Miss Geraldine's
reappearance. That fact had been fixed in his mind by his recollecting
the vacancy of the prospect when his cook told him that a lady and a
gentleman were in his studio: he had wondered there was not a carriage
nor a cab at his door. Then he had reflected that they would have come
by the underground railway; he was close to the Marlborough Road
station and he knew the Colonel, coming to his sittings, more than once
had availed himself of that convenience. 'How in the world did she get
in?' He addressed the question to his companions indifferently.

'Let us go down to luncheon,' said Mrs. Capadose, passing out of the
room.

'We went by the garden--without troubling your servant--I wanted to show
my wife.' Lyon followed his hostess with her husband and the Colonel
stopped him at the top of the stairs. 'My dear fellow, I _can't_ have
been guilty of the folly of not fastening the door?'

'I am sure I don't know, Colonel,' Lyon said as they went down. 'It was
a very determined hand--a perfect wild-cat.'

'Well, she _is_ a wild-cat--confound her! That's why I wanted to get him
away from her.'

'But I don't understand her motive.'

'She's off her head--and she hates me; that was her motive.'

'But she doesn't hate me, my dear fellow!' Lyon said, laughing.

'She hated the picture--don't you remember she said so? The more
portraits there are the less employment for such as her.'

'Yes; but if she is not really the model she pretends to be, how can
that hurt her?' Lyon asked.

The inquiry baffled the Colonel an instant--but only an instant. 'Ah,
she was in a vicious muddle! As I say, she's off her head.'

They went into the dining-room, where Mrs. Capadose was taking her
place. 'It's too bad, it's too horrid!' she said. 'You see the fates
are against you. Providence won't let you be so disinterested--painting
masterpieces for nothing.'

'Did _you_ see the woman?' Lyon demanded, with something like a
sternness that he could not mitigate.

Mrs. Capadose appeared not to perceive it or not to heed it if she did.
'There was a person, not far from your door, whom Clement called my
attention to. He told me something about her but we were going the other
way.'

'And do you think she did it?'

'How can I tell? If she did she was mad, poor wretch.'

'I should like very much to get hold of her,' said Lyon. This was a
false statement, for he had no desire for any further conversation with
Miss Geraldine. He had exposed his friends to himself, but he had no
desire to expose them to any one else, least of all to themselves.

'Oh, depend upon it she will never show again. You're safe!' the Colonel
exclaimed.

'But I remember her address--Mortimer Terrace Mews, Notting Hill.'

'Oh, that's pure humbug; there isn't any such place.'

'Lord, what a deceiver!' said Lyon.

'Is there any one else you suspect?' the Colonel went on.

'Not a creature.'

'And what do your servants say?'

'They say it wasn't _them_, and I reply that I never said it was. That's
about the substance of our conferences.'

'And when did they discover the havoc?'

'They never discovered it at all. I noticed it first--when I came back.'

'Well, she could easily have stepped in,' said the Colonel. 'Don't you
remember how she turned up that day, like the clown in the ring?'

'Yes, yes; she could have done the job in three seconds, except that the
picture wasn't out.'

'My dear fellow, don't curse me!--but of course I dragged it out.'

'You didn't put it back?' Lyon asked tragically.

'Ah, Clement, Clement, didn't I tell you to?' Mrs. Capadose exclaimed in
a tone of exquisite reproach.

The Colonel groaned, dramatically; he covered his face with his hands.
His wife's words were for Lyon the finishing touch; they made his whole
vision crumble--his theory that she had secretly kept herself true. Even
to her old lover she wouldn't be so! He was sick; he couldn't eat; he
knew that he looked very strange. He murmured something about it being
useless to cry over spilled milk--he tried to turn the conversation to
other things. But it was a horrid effort and he wondered whether they
felt it as much as he. He wondered all sorts of things: whether they
guessed he disbelieved them (that he had seen them of course they would
never guess); whether they had arranged their story in advance or it was
only an inspiration of the moment; whether she had resisted, protested,
when the Colonel proposed it to her, and then had been borne down by
him; whether in short she didn't loathe herself as she sat there. The
cruelty, the cowardice of fastening their unholy act upon the wretched
woman struck him as monstrous--no less monstrous indeed than the levity
that could make them run the risk of her giving them, in her righteous
indignation, the lie. Of course that risk could only exculpate her and
not inculpate them--the probabilities protected them so perfectly; and
what the Colonel counted on (what he would have counted upon the day he
delivered himself, after first seeing her, at the studio, if he had
thought about the matter then at all and not spoken from the pure
spontaneity of his genius) was simply that Miss Geraldine had really
vanished for ever into her native unknown. Lyon wanted so much to quit
the subject that when after a little Mrs. Capadose said to him, 'But can
nothing be done, can't the picture be repaired? You know they do such
wonders in that way now,' he only replied, 'I don't know, I don't care,
it's all over, _n'en parlons plus_!' Her hypocrisy revolted him. And
yet, by way of plucking off the last veil of her shame, he broke out to
her again, shortly afterward, 'And you _did_ like it, really?' To which
she returned, looking him straight in his face, without a blush, a
pallor, an evasion, 'Oh, I loved it!' Truly her husband had trained her
well. After that Lyon said no more and his companions forbore
temporarily to insist, like people of tact and sympathy aware that the
odious accident had made him sore.

When they quitted the table the Colonel went away without coming
upstairs; but Lyon returned to the drawing-room with his hostess,
remarking to her however on the way that he could remain but a moment.
He spent that moment--it prolonged itself a little--standing with her
before the chimney-piece. She neither sat down nor asked him to; her
manner denoted that she intended to go out. Yes, her husband had trained
her well; yet Lyon dreamed for a moment that now he was alone with her
she would perhaps break down, retract, apologise, confide, say to him,
'My dear old friend, forgive this hideous comedy--you understand!' And
then how he would have loved her and pitied her, guarded her, helped her
always! If she were not ready to do something of that sort why had she
treated him as if he were a dear old friend; why had she let him for
months suppose certain things--or almost; why had she come to his studio
day after day to sit near him on the pretext of her child's portrait, as
if she liked to think what might have been? Why had she come so near a
tacit confession, in a word, if she was not willing to go an inch
further? And she was not willing--she was not; he could see that as he
lingered there. She moved about the room a little, rearranging two or
three objects on the tables, but she did nothing more. Suddenly he said
to her: 'Which way was she going, when you came out?'

'She--the woman we saw?'

'Yes, your husband's strange friend. It's a clew worth following.' He
had no desire to frighten her; he only wanted to communicate the impulse
which would make her say, 'Ah, spare me--and spare _him_! There was no
such person.'

Instead of this Mrs. Capadose replied, 'She was going away from us--she
crossed the road. We were coming towards the station.'

'And did she appear to recognise the Colonel--did she look round?'

'Yes; she looked round, but I didn't notice much. A hansom came along
and we got into it. It was not till then that Clement told me who she
was: I remember he said that she was there for no good. I suppose we
ought to have gone back.'

'Yes; you would have saved the picture.'

For a moment she said nothing; then she smiled. 'For you, I am very
sorry. But you must remember that I possess the original!'

At this Lyon turned away. 'Well, I must go,' he said; and he left her
without any other farewell and made his way out of the house. As he went
slowly up the street the sense came back to him of that first glimpse of
her he had had at Stayes--the way he had seen her gaze across the table
at her husband. Lyon stopped at the corner, looking vaguely up and down.
He would never go back--he couldn't. She was still in love with the
Colonel--he had trained her too well.




MRS. TEMPERLY




I


'Why, Cousin Raymond, how can you suppose? Why, she's only sixteen!'

'She told me she was seventeen,' said the young man, as if it made a
great difference.

'Well, only _just_!' Mrs. Temperly replied, in the tone of graceful,
reasonable concession.

'Well, that's a very good age for me. I'm very young.'

'You are old enough to know better,' the lady remarked, in her soft,
pleasant voice, which always drew the sting from a reproach, and enabled
you to swallow it as you would a cooked plum, without the stone. 'Why,
she hasn't finished her education!'

'That's just what I mean,' said her interlocutor. 'It would finish it
beautifully for her to marry me.'

'Have you finished yours, my dear?' Mrs. Temperly inquired. 'The way you
young people talk about marrying!' she exclaimed, looking at the
itinerant functionary with the long wand who touched into a flame the
tall gas-lamp on the other side of the Fifth Avenue. The pair were
standing, in the recess of a window, in one of the big public rooms of
an immense hotel, and the October day was turning to dusk.

'Well, would you have us leave it to the old?' Raymond asked. 'That's
just what I think--she would be such a help to me,' he continued. 'I
want to go back to Paris to study more. I have come home too soon. I
don't know half enough; they know more here than I thought. So it would
be perfectly easy, and we should all be together.'

'Well, my dear, when you do come back to Paris we will talk about it,'
said Mrs. Temperly, turning away from the window.

'I should like it better, Cousin Maria, if you trusted me a little
more,' Raymond sighed, observing that she was not really giving her
thoughts to what he said. She irritated him somehow; she was so full of
her impending departure, of her arrangements, her last duties and
memoranda. She was not exactly important, any more than she was humble;
she was too conciliatory for the one and too positive for the other. But
she bustled quietly and gave one the sense of being 'up to' everything;
the successive steps of her enterprise were in advance perfectly clear
to her, and he could see that her imagination (conventional as she was
she had plenty of that faculty) had already taken up its abode on one of
those fine _premiers_ which she had never seen, but which by instinct
she seemed to know all about, in the very best part of the quarter of
the Champs Elysées. If she ruffled him envy had perhaps something to do
with it: she was to set sail on the morrow for the city of his affection
and he was to stop in New York, where the fact that he was but half
pleased did not alter the fact that he had his studio on his hands and
that it was a bad one (though perhaps as good as any use he should put
it to), which no one would be in a hurry to relieve him of.

It was easy for him to talk to Mrs. Temperly in that airy way about
going back, but he couldn't go back unless the old gentleman gave him
the means. He had already given him a great many things in the past, and
with the others coming on (Marian's marriage-outfit, within three
months, had cost literally thousands), Raymond had not at present the
face to ask for more. He must sell some pictures first, and to sell them
he must first paint them. It was his misfortune that he saw what he
wanted to do so much better than he could do it. But he must really try
and please himself--an effort that appeared more possible now that the
idea of following Dora across the ocean had become an incentive. In
spite of secret aspirations and even intentions, however, it was not
encouraging to feel that he made really no impression at all on Cousin
Maria. This certitude was so far from agreeable to him that he almost
found it in him to drop the endearing title by which he had hitherto
addressed her. It was only that, after all, her husband had been
distantly related to his mother. It was not as a cousin that he was
interested in Dora, but as something very much more intimate. I know not
whether it occurred to him that Mrs. Temperly herself would never give
his displeasure the benefit of dropping the affectionate form. She might
shut her door to him altogether, but he would always be her kinsman and
her dear. She was much addicted to these little embellishments of human
intercourse--the friendly apostrophe and even the caressing hand--and
there was something homely and cosy, a rustic, motherly _bonhomie_, in
her use of them. She was as lavish of them as she was really careful in
the selection of her friends.

She stood there with her hand in her pocket, as if she were feeling for
something; her little plain, pleasant face was presented to him with a
musing smile, and he vaguely wondered whether she were fumbling for a
piece of money to buy him off from wishing to marry her daughter. Such
an idea would be quite in keeping with the disguised levity with which
she treated his state of mind. If her levity was wrapped up in the air
of tender solicitude for everything that related to the feelings of her
child, that only made her failure to appreciate his suit more
deliberate. She struck him almost as impertinent (at the same time that
he knew this was never her intention) as she looked up at him--her tiny
proportions always made her throw back her head and set something
dancing in her cap--and inquired whether he had noticed if she gave two
keys, tied together by a blue ribbon, to Susan Winkle, when that
faithful but flurried domestic met them in the lobby. She was thinking
only of questions of luggage, and the fact that he wished to marry Dora
was the smallest incident in their getting off.

'I think you ask me that only to change the subject,' he said. 'I don't
believe that ever in your life you have been unconscious of what you
have done with your keys.'

'Not often, but you make me nervous,' she answered, with her patient,
honest smile.

'Oh, Cousin Maria!' the young man exclaimed, ambiguously, while Mrs.
Temperly looked humanely at some totally uninteresting people who came
straggling into the great hot, frescoed, velvety drawing-room, where it
was as easy to see you were in an hotel as it was to see that, if you
were, you were in one of the very best. Mrs. Temperly, since her
husband's death, had passed much of her life at hotels, where she
flattered herself that she preserved the tone of domestic life free from
every taint and promoted the refined development of her children; but
she selected them as well as she selected her friends. Somehow they
became better from the very fact of her being there, and her children
were smuggled in and out in the most extraordinary way; one never met
them racing and whooping, as one did hundreds of others, in the lobbies.
Her frequentation of hotels, where she paid enormous bills, was part of
her expensive but practical way of living, and also of her theory that,
from one week to another, she was going to Europe for a series of years
as soon as she had wound up certain complicated affairs which had
devolved upon her at her husband's death. If these affairs had dragged
on it was owing to their inherent troublesomeness and implied no doubt
of her capacity to bring them to a solution and to administer the very
considerable fortune that Mr. Temperly had left. She used, in a
superior, unprejudiced way, every convenience that the civilisation of
her time offered her, and would have lived without hesitation in a
lighthouse if this had contributed to her general scheme. She was now,
in the interest of this scheme, preparing to use Europe, which she had
not yet visited and with none of whose foreign tongues she was
acquainted. This time she was certainly embarking.

She took no notice of the discredit which her young friend appeared to
throw on the idea that she had nerves, and betrayed no suspicion that he
believed her to have them in about the same degree as a sound,
productive Alderney cow. She only moved toward one of the numerous doors
of the room, as if to remind him of all she had still to do before
night. They passed together into the long, wide corridor of the hotel--a
vista of soft carpet, numbered doors, wandering women and perpetual
gaslight--and approached the staircase by which she must ascend again to
her domestic duties. She counted over, serenely, for his enlightenment,
those that were still to be performed; but he could see that everything
would be finished by nine o'clock--the time she had fixed in advance.
The heavy luggage was then to go to the steamer; she herself was to be
on board, with the children and the smaller things, at eleven o'clock
the next morning. They had thirty pieces, but this was less than they
had when they came from California five years before. She wouldn't have
done that again. It was true that at that time she had had Mr. Temperly
to help: he had died, Raymond remembered, six months after the
settlement in New York. But, on the other hand, she knew more now. It
was one of Mrs. Temperly's amiable qualities that she admitted herself
so candidly to be still susceptible of development. She never professed
to be in possession of all the knowledge requisite for her career; not
only did she let her friends know that she was always learning, but she
appealed to them to instruct her, in a manner which was in itself an
example.

When Raymond said to her that he took for granted she would let him come
down to the steamer for a last good-bye, she not only consented
graciously but added that he was free to call again at the hotel in the
evening, if he had nothing better to do. He must come between nine and
ten; she expected several other friends--those who wished to see the
last of them, yet didn't care to come to the ship. Then he would see all
of them--she meant all of themselves, Dora and Effie and Tishy, and even
Mademoiselle Bourde. She spoke exactly as if he had never approached her
on the subject of Dora and as if Tishy, who was ten years of age, and
Mademoiselle Bourde, who was the French governess and forty, were
objects of no less an interest to him. He felt what a long pull he
should have ever to get round her, and the sting of this knowledge was
in his consciousness that Dora was really in her mother's hands. In Mrs.
Temperly's composition there was not a hint of the bully; but none the
less she held her children--she would hold them for ever. It was not
simply by tenderness; but what it was by she knew best herself. Raymond
appreciated the privilege of seeing Dora again that evening as well as
on the morrow; yet he was so vexed with her mother that his vexation
betrayed him into something that almost savoured of violence--a fact
which I am ashamed to have to chronicle, as Mrs. Temperly's own urbanity
deprived such breaches of every excuse. It may perhaps serve partly as
an excuse for Raymond Bestwick that he was in love, or at least that he
thought he was. Before she parted from him at the foot of the staircase
he said to her, 'And of course, if things go as you like over there,
Dora will marry some foreign prince.'

She gave no sign of resenting this speech, but she looked at him for
the first time as if she were hesitating, as if it were not instantly
clear to her what to say. It appeared to him, on his side, for a moment,
that there was something strange in her hesitation, that abruptly, by an
inspiration, she was almost making up her mind to reply that Dora's
marriage to a prince was, considering Dora's peculiarities (he knew that
her mother deemed her peculiar, and so did he, but that was precisely
why he wished to marry her), so little probable that, after all, once
such a union was out of the question, _he_ might be no worse than
another plain man. These, however, were not the words that fell from
Mrs. Temperly's lips. Her embarrassment vanished in her clear smile. 'Do
you know what Mr. Temperly used to say? He used to say that Dora was the
pattern of an old maid--she would never make a choice.'

'I hope--because that would have been too foolish--that he didn't say
she wouldn't have a chance.'

'Oh, a chance! what do you call by that fine name?' Cousin Maria
exclaimed, laughing, as she ascended the stair.




II


When he came back, after dinner, she was again in one of the public
rooms; she explained that a lot of the things for the ship were spread
out in her own parlours: there was no space to sit down. Raymond was
highly gratified by this fact; it offered an opportunity for strolling
away a little with Dora, especially as, after he had been there ten
minutes, other people began to come in. They were entertained by the
rest, by Effie and Tishy, who was allowed to sit up a little, and by
Mademoiselle Bourde, who besought every visitor to indicate her a remedy
that was _really_ effective against the sea--some charm, some philter,
some potion or spell. 'Never mind, ma'm'selle, I've got a remedy,' said
Cousin Maria, with her cheerful decision, each time; but the French
instructress always began afresh.

As the young man was about to be parted for an indefinite period from
the girl whom he was ready to swear that he adored, it is clear that he
ought to have been equally ready to swear that she was the fairest of
her species. In point of fact, however, it was no less vivid to him than
it had been before that he loved Dora Temperly for qualities which had
nothing to do with straightness of nose or pinkness of complexion. Her
figure was straight, and so was her character, but her nose was not, and
Philistines and other vulgar people would have committed themselves,
without a blush on their own flat faces, to the assertion that she was
decidedly plain. In his artistic imagination he had analogies for her,
drawn from legend and literature; he was perfectly aware that she struck
many persons as silent, shy and angular, while his own version of her
peculiarities was that she was like a figure on the _predella_ of an
early Italian painting or a mediæval maiden wandering about a lonely
castle, with her lover gone to the Crusades. To his sense, Dora had but
one defect--her admiration for her mother was too undiscriminating. An
ardent young man may well be slightly vexed when he finds that a young
lady will probably never care for him so much as she cares for her
parent; and Raymond Bestwick had this added ground for chagrin, that
Dora had--if she chose to take it--so good a pretext for discriminating.
For she had nothing whatever in common with the others; she was not of
the same stuff as Mrs. Temperly and Effie and Tishy.

She was original and generous and uncalculating, besides being full of
perception and taste in regard to the things _he_ cared about. She knew
nothing of conventional signs or estimates, but understood everything
that might be said to her from an artistic point of view. She was formed
to live in a studio, and not in a stiff drawing-room, amid upholstery
horribly new; and moreover her eyes and her voice were both charming. It
was only a pity she was so gentle; that is, he liked it for himself, but
he deplored it for her mother. He considered that he had virtually
given that lady his word that he would not make love to her; but his
spirits had risen since his visit of three or four hours before. It
seemed to him, after thinking things over more intently, that a way
would be opened for him to return to Paris. It was not probable that in
the interval Dora would be married off to a prince; for in the first
place the foolish race of princes would be sure not to appreciate her,
and in the second she would not, in this matter, simply do her mother's
bidding--her gentleness would not go so far as that. She might remain
single by the maternal decree, but she would not take a husband who was
disagreeable to her. In this reasoning Raymond was obliged to shut his
eyes very tight to the danger that some particular prince might not be
disagreeable to her, as well as to the attraction proceeding from what
her mother might announce that she would 'do.' He was perfectly aware
that it was in Cousin Maria's power, and would probably be in her
pleasure, to settle a handsome marriage-fee upon each of her daughters.
He was equally certain that this had nothing to do with the nature of
his own interest in the eldest, both because it was clear that Mrs.
Temperly would do very little for _him_, and because he didn't care how
little she did.

Effie and Tishy sat in the circle, on the edge of rather high chairs,
while Mademoiselle Bourde surveyed in them with complacency the results
of her own superiority. Tishy was a child, but Effie was fifteen, and
they were both very nice little girls, arrayed in fresh travelling
dresses and deriving a quaintness from the fact that Tishy was already
armed, for foreign adventures, with a smart new reticule, from which
she could not be induced to part, and that Effie had her finger in her
'place' in a fat red volume of _Murray_. Raymond knew that in a general
way their mother would not have allowed them to appear in the
drawing-room with these adjuncts, but something was to be allowed to the
fever of anticipation. They were both pretty, with delicate features and
blue eyes, and would grow up into worldly, conventional young ladies,
just as Dora had not done. They looked at Mademoiselle Bourde for
approval whenever they spoke, and, in addressing their mother
alternately with that accomplished woman, kept their two languages
neatly distinct.

Raymond had but a vague idea of who the people were who had come to bid
Cousin Maria farewell, and he had no wish for a sharper one, though she
introduced him, very definitely, to the whole group. She might make
light of him in her secret soul, but she would never put herself in the
wrong by omitting the smallest form. Fortunately, however, he was not
obliged to like all her forms, and he foresaw the day when she would
abandon this particular one. She was not so well made up in advance
about Paris but that it would be in reserve for her to detest the period
when she had thought it proper to 'introduce all round.' Raymond
detested it already, and tried to make Dora understand that he wished
her to take a walk with him in the corridors. There was a gentleman with
a curl on his forehead who especially displeased him; he made childish
jokes, at which the others laughed all at once, as if they had rehearsed
for it--jokes _à la portée_ of Effie and Tishy and mainly about them.
These two joined in the merriment, as if they followed perfectly, as
indeed they might, and gave a small sigh afterward, with a little
factitious air. Dora remained grave, almost sad; it was when she was
different, in this way, that he felt how much he liked her. He hated, in
general, a large ring of people who had drawn up chairs in the public
room of an hotel: some one was sure to undertake to be funny.

He succeeded at last in drawing Dora away; he endeavoured to give the
movement a casual air. There was nothing peculiar, after all, in their
walking a little in the passage; a dozen other persons were doing the
same. The girl had the air of not suspecting in the least that he could
have anything particular to say to her--of responding to his appeal
simply out of her general gentleness. It was not in her companion's
interest that her mind should be such a blank; nevertheless his
conviction that in spite of the ministrations of Mademoiselle Bourde she
was not falsely ingenuous made him repeat to himself that he would still
make her his own. They took several turns in the hall, during which it
might still have appeared to Dora Temperly that her cousin Raymond had
nothing particular to say to her. He remarked several times that he
should certainly turn up in Paris in the spring; but when once she had
replied that she was very glad that subject seemed exhausted. The young
man cared little, however; it was not a question now of making any
declaration: he only wanted to be with her. Suddenly, when they were at
the end of the corridor furthest removed from the room they had left, he
said to her: 'Your mother is very strange. Why has she got such an idea
about Paris?'

'How do you mean, such an idea?' He had stopped, making the girl stand
there before him.

'Well, she thinks so much of it without having ever seen it, or really
knowing anything. She appears to have planned out such a great life
there.'

'She thinks it's the best place,' Dora rejoined, with the dim smile that
always charmed our young man.

'The best place for what?'

'Well, to learn French.' The girl continued to smile.

'Do you mean for her? She'll never learn it; she can't.'

'No; for us. And other things.'

'You know it already. And _you_ know other things,' said Raymond.

'She wants us to know them better--better than any girls know them.'

'I don't know what things you mean,' exclaimed the young man, rather
impatiently.

'Well, we shall see,' Dora returned, laughing.

He said nothing for a minute, at the end of which he resumed: 'I hope
you won't be offended if I say that it seems curious your mother should
have such aspirations--such Napoleonic plans. I mean being just a quiet
little lady from California, who has never seen any of the kind of thing
that she has in her head.'

'That's just why she wants to see it, I suppose; and I don't know why
her being from California should prevent. At any rate she wants us to
have the best. Isn't the best taste in Paris?'

'Yes; and the worst.' It made him gloomy when she defended the old lady,
and to change the subject he asked: 'Aren't you sorry, this last night,
to leave your own country for such an indefinite time?'

It didn't cheer him up that the girl should answer: 'Oh, I would go
anywhere with mother!'

'And with _her_?' Raymond demanded, sarcastically, as Mademoiselle
Bourde came in sight, emerging from the drawing-room. She approached
them; they met her in a moment, and she informed Dora that Mrs. Temperly
wished her to come back and play a part of that composition of
Saint-Saens--the last one she had been learning--for Mr. and Mrs.
Parminter: they wanted to judge whether their daughter could manage it.

'I don't believe she can,' said Dora, smiling; but she was moving away
to comply when her companion detained her a moment.

Are you going to bid me good-bye?'

'Won't you come back to the drawing-room?'

'I think not; I don't like it.'

'And to mamma--you'll say nothing?' the girl went on.

'Oh, we have made our farewell; we had a special interview this
afternoon.'

'And you won't come to the ship in the morning?'

Raymond hesitated a moment. 'Will Mr. and Mrs. Parminter be there?'

'Oh, surely they will!' Mademoiselle Bourde declared, surveying the
young couple with a certain tactful serenity, but standing very close to
them, as if it might be her duty to interpose.

'Well then, I won't come.'

'Well, good-bye then,' said the girl gently, holding out her hand.

'Good-bye, Dora.' He took it, while she smiled at him, but he said
nothing more--he was so annoyed at the way Mademoiselle Bourde watched
them. He only looked at Dora; she seemed to him beautiful.

'My dear child--that poor Madame Parminter,' the governess murmured.

'I shall come over very soon,' said Raymond, as his companion turned
away.

'That will be charming.' And she left him quickly, without looking back.

Mademoiselle Bourde lingered--he didn't know why, unless it was to make
him feel, with her smooth, finished French assurance, which had the
manner of extreme benignity, that she was following him up. He sometimes
wondered whether she copied Mrs. Temperly or whether Mrs. Temperly tried
to copy her. Presently she said, slowly rubbing her hands and smiling at
him:

'You will have plenty of time. We shall be long in Paris.'

'Perhaps you will be disappointed,' Raymond suggested.

'How can we be--unless _you_ disappoint us?' asked the governess,
sweetly.

He left her without ceremony: the imitation was probably on the part of
Cousin Maria.




III


'Only just ourselves,' her note had said; and he arrived, in his natural
impatience, a few moments before the hour. He remembered his Cousin
Maria's habitual punctuality, but when he entered the splendid _salon_
in the quarter of the Parc Monceau--it was there that he had found her
established--he saw that he should have it, for a little, to himself.
This was pleasing, for he should be able to look round--there were
admirable things to look at. Even to-day Raymond Bestwick was not sure
that he had learned to paint, but he had no doubt of his judgment of the
work of others, and a single glance showed him that Mrs. Temperly had
'known enough' to select, for the adornment of her walls, half a dozen
immensely valuable specimens of contemporary French art. Her choice of
other objects had been equally enlightened, and he remembered what Dora
had said to him five years before--that her mother wished them to have
the best. Evidently, now they had got it; if five years was a long time
for him to have delayed (with his original plan of getting off so soon)
to come to Paris, it was a very short one for Cousin Maria to have taken
to arrive at the highest good.

Rather to his surprise the first person to come in was Effie, now so
complete a young lady, and such a very pretty girl, that he scarcely
would have known her. She was fair, she was graceful, she was lovely,
and as she entered the room, blushing and smiling, with a little
floating motion which suggested that she was in a liquid element, she
brushed down the ribbons of a delicate Parisian _toilette de jeune
fille_. She appeared to expect that he would be surprised, and as if to
justify herself for being the first she said, 'Mamma told me to come;
she knows you are here; she said I was not to wait.' More than once,
while they conversed, during the next few moments, before any one else
arrived, she repeated that she was acting by her mamma's directions.
Raymond perceived that she had not only the costume but several other of
the attributes of a _jeune fille_. They talked, I say, but with a
certain difficulty, for Effie asked him no questions, and this made him
feel a little stiff about thrusting information upon her. Then she was
so pretty, so exquisite, that this by itself disconcerted him. It seemed
to him almost that she had falsified a prophecy, instead of bringing one
to pass. He had foretold that she would be like this; the only
difference was that she was so much more like it. She made no inquiries
about his arrival, his people in America, his plans; and they exchanged
vague remarks about the pictures, quite as if they had met for the first
time.

When Cousin Maria came in Effie was standing in front of the fire
fastening a bracelet, and he was at a distance gazing in silence at a
portrait of his hostess by Bastien-Lepage. One of his apprehensions had
been that Cousin Maria would allude ironically to the difference there
had been between his threat (because it had been really almost a
threat) of following them speedily to Paris and what had in fact
occurred; but he saw in a moment how superficial this calculation had
been. Besides, when had Cousin Maria ever been ironical? She treated him
as if she had seen him last week (which did not preclude kindness), and
only expressed her regret at having missed his visit the day before, in
consequence of which she had immediately written to him to come and
dine. He might have come from round the corner, instead of from New York
and across the wintry ocean. This was a part of her 'cosiness,' her
friendly, motherly optimism, of which, even of old, the habit had been
never to recognise nor allude to disagreeable things; so that to-day, in
the midst of so much that was not disagreeable, the custom would of
course be immensely confirmed.

Raymond was perfectly aware that it was not a pleasure, even for her,
that, for several years past, things should have gone so ill in New York
with his family and himself. His father's embarrassments, of which
Marian's silly husband had been the cause and which had terminated in
general ruin and humiliation, to say nothing of the old man's 'stroke'
and the necessity, arising from it, for a renunciation on his own part
of all present thoughts of leaving home again and even for a partial
relinquishment of present work, the old man requiring so much of his
personal attention--all this constituted an episode which could not fail
to look sordid and dreary in the light of Mrs. Temperly's high success.
The odour of success was in the warm, slightly heavy air, which seemed
distilled from rare old fabrics, from brocades and tapestries, from the
deep, mingled tones of the pictures, the subdued radiance of cabinets
and old porcelain and the jars of winter roses standing in soft circles
of lamp-light. Raymond felt himself in the presence of an effect in
regard to which he remained in ignorance of the cause--a mystery that
required a key. Cousin Maria's success was unexplained so long as she
simply stood there with her little familiar, comforting, upward gaze,
talking in coaxing cadences, with exactly the same manner she had
brought ten years ago from California, to a tall, bald, bending, smiling
young man, evidently a foreigner, who had just come in and whose name
Raymond had not caught from the lips of the _maître d'hôtel_. Was he
just one of themselves--was he there for Effie, or perhaps even for
Dora? The unexplained must preponderate till Dora came in; he found he
counted upon her, even though in her letters (it was true that for the
last couple of years they had come but at long intervals) she had told
him so little about their life. She never spoke of people; she talked of
the books she read, of the music she had heard or was studying (a whole
page sometimes about the last concert at the Conservatoire), the new
pictures and the manner of the different artists.

When she entered the room three or four minutes after the arrival of the
young foreigner, with whom her mother conversed in just the accents
Raymond had last heard at the hotel in the Fifth Avenue (he was obliged
to admit that she gave herself no airs; it was clear that her success
had not gone in the least to her head); when Dora at last appeared she
was accompanied by Mademoiselle Bourde. The presence of this lady--he
didn't know she was still in the house--Raymond took as a sign that
they were really dining _en famille_, so that the young man was either
an actual or a prospective intimate. Dora shook hands first with her
cousin, but he watched the manner of her greeting with the other visitor
and saw that it indicated extreme friendliness--on the part of the
latter. If there was a charming flush in her cheek as he took her hand,
that was the remainder of the colour that had risen there as she came
toward Raymond. It will be seen that our young man still had an eye for
the element of fascination, as he used to regard it, in this quiet,
dimly-shining maiden.

He saw that Effie was the only one who had changed (Tishy remained yet
to be judged), except that Dora really looked older, quite as much older
as the number of years had given her a right to: there was as little
difference in her as there was in her mother. Not that she was like her
mother, but she was perfectly like herself. Her meeting with Raymond was
bright, but very still; their phrases were awkward and commonplace, and
the thing was mainly a contact of looks--conscious, embarrassed,
indirect, but brightening every moment with old familiarities. Her
mother appeared to pay no attention, and neither, to do her justice, did
Mademoiselle Bourde, who, after an exchange of expressive salutations
with Raymond began to scrutinise Effie with little admiring gestures and
smiles. She surveyed her from head to foot; she pulled a ribbon
straight; she was evidently a flattering governess. Cousin Maria
explained to Cousin Raymond that they were waiting for one more
friend--a very dear lady. 'But she lives near, and when people live near
they are always late--haven't you noticed that?'

'Your hotel is far away, I know, and yet you were the first,' Dora
said, smiling to Raymond.

'Oh, even if it were round the corner I should be the first--to come to
_you_!' the young man answered, speaking loud and clear, so that his
words might serve as a notification to Cousin Maria that his sentiments
were unchanged.

'You are more French than the French,' Dora returned.

'You say that as if you didn't like them: I hope you don't,' said
Raymond, still with intentions in regard to his hostess.

'We like them more and more, the more we see of them,' this lady
interposed; but gently, impersonally, and with an air of not wishing to
put Raymond in the wrong.

'_Mais j'espère bien!_' cried Mademoiselle Bourde, holding up her head
and opening her eyes very wide. 'Such friendships as we form, and, I may
say, as we inspire! _Je m'en rapporte à Effie_', the governess
continued.

'We have received immense kindness; we have established relations that
are so pleasant for us, Cousin Raymond. We have the _entrée_ of so many
charming homes,' Mrs. Temperly remarked.

'But ours is the most charming of all; that I will say,' exclaimed
Mademoiselle Bourde. 'Isn't it so, Effie?'

'Oh yes, I think it is; especially when we are expecting the Marquise,'
Effie responded. Then she added, 'But here she comes now; I hear her
carriage in the court.'

The Marquise too was just one of themselves; she was a part of their
charming home.

'She _is_ such a love!' said Mrs. Temperly to the foreign gentleman,
with an irrepressible movement of benevolence.

To which Raymond heard the gentleman reply that, Ah, she was the most
distinguished woman in France.

'Do you know Madame de Brives?' Effie asked of Raymond, while they were
waiting for her to come in.

She came in at that moment, and the girl turned away quickly without an
answer.

'How in the world should I know her?' That was the answer he would have
been tempted to give. He felt very much out of Cousin Maria's circle.
The foreign gentleman fingered his moustache and looked at him sidewise.
The Marquise was a very pretty woman, fair and slender, of middle age,
with a smile, a complexion, a diamond necklace, of great splendour, and
a charming manner. Her greeting to her friends was sweet and familiar,
and was accompanied with much kissing, of a sisterly, motherly,
daughterly kind; and yet with this expression of simple, almost homely
sentiment there was something in her that astonished and dazzled. She
might very well have been, as the foreign young man said, the most
distinguished woman in France. Dora had not rushed forward to meet her
with nearly so much _empressement_ as Effie, and this gave him a chance
to ask the former who she was. The girl replied that she was her
mother's most intimate friend: to which he rejoined that that was not a
description; what he wanted to know was her title to this exalted
position.

'Why, can't you see it? She is beautiful and she is good.'

'I see that she is beautiful; but how can I see that she is good?'

'Good to mamma, I mean, and to Effie and Tishy.'

'And isn't she good to you?'

'Oh, I don't know her so well. But I delight to look at her.'

'Certainly, that must be a great pleasure,' said Raymond. He enjoyed it
during dinner, which was now served, though his enjoyment was diminished
by his not finding himself next to Dora. They sat at a small round table
and he had at his right his Cousin Maria, whom he had taken in. On his
left was Madame de Brives, who had the foreign gentleman for a
neighbour. Then came Effie and Mademoiselle Bourde, and Dora was on the
other side of her mother. Raymond regarded this as marked--a symbol of
the fact that Cousin Maria would continue to separate them. He remained
in ignorance of the other gentleman's identity, and remembered how he
had prophesied at the hotel in New York that his hostess would give up
introducing people. It was a friendly, easy little family repast, as she
had said it would be, with just a marquise and a secretary of
embassy--Raymond ended by guessing that the stranger was a secretary of
embassy--thrown in. So far from interfering with the family tone Madame
de Brives directly contributed to it. She eminently justified the
affection in which she was held in the house; she was in the highest
degree sociable and sympathetic, and at the same time witty (there was
no insipidity in Madame de Brives), and was the cause of Raymond's
making the reflection--as he had made it often in his earlier
years--that an agreeable Frenchwoman is a triumph of civilisation. This
did not prevent him from giving the Marquise no more than half of his
attention; the rest was dedicated to Dora, who, on her side, though in
common with Effie and Mademoiselle Bourde she bent a frequent,
interested gaze on the splendid French lady, very often met our young
man's eyes with mute, vague but, to his sense, none the less valuable
intimations. It was as if she knew what was going on in his mind (it is
true that he scarcely knew it himself), and might be trusted to clear
things up at some convenient hour.

Madame de Brives talked across Raymond, in excellent English, to Cousin
Maria, but this did not prevent her from being gracious, even
encouraging, to the young man, who was a little afraid of her and
thought her a delightful creature. She asked him more questions about
himself than any of them had done. Her conversation with Mrs. Temperly
was of an intimate, domestic order, and full of social, personal
allusions, which Raymond was unable to follow. It appeared to be
concerned considerably with the private affairs of the old French
_noblesse_, into whose councils--to judge by the tone of the
Marquise--Cousin Maria had been admitted by acclamation. Every now and
then Madame de Brives broke into French, and it was in this tongue that
she uttered an apostrophe to her hostess: 'Oh, you, _ma toute-bonne_,
you who have the genius of good sense!' And she appealed to Raymond to
know if his Cousin Maria had not the genius of good sense--the wisdom of
the ages. The old lady did not defend herself from the compliment; she
let it pass, with her motherly, tolerant smile; nor did Raymond attempt
to defend her, for he felt the justice of his neighbour's description:
Cousin Maria's good sense was incontestable, magnificent. She took an
affectionate, indulgent view of most of the persons mentioned, and yet
her tone was far from being vapid or vague. Madame de Brives usually
remarked that they were coming very soon again to see her, she did them
so much good. 'The freshness of your judgment--the freshness of your
judgment!' she repeated, with a kind of glee, and she narrated that
Eléonore (a personage unknown to Raymond) had said that she was a woman
of Plutarch. Mrs. Temperly talked a great deal about the health of their
friends; she seemed to keep the record of the influenzas and neuralgias
of a numerous and susceptible circle. He did not find it in him quite to
agree--the Marquise dropping the statement into his ear at a moment when
their hostess was making some inquiry of Mademoiselle Bourde--that she
was a nature absolutely marvellous; but he could easily see that to
world-worn Parisians her quiet charities of speech and manner, with
something quaint and rustic in their form, might be restorative and
salutary. She allowed for everything, yet she was so good, and indeed
Madame de Brives summed this up before they left the table in saying to
her, 'Oh, you, my dear, your success, more than any other that has ever
taken place, has been a _succès de bonté_! Raymond was greatly amused at
this idea of Cousin Maria's _succès de bonté_: it seemed to him
delightfully Parisian.

Before dinner was over she inquired of him how he had got on 'in his
profession' since they last met, and he was too proud, or so he thought,
to tell her anything but the simple truth, that he had not got on very
well. If he was to ask her again for Dora it would be just as he was, an
honourable but not particularly successful man, making no show of lures
and bribes. 'I am not a remarkably good painter,' he said. 'I judge
myself perfectly. And then I have been handicapped at home. I have had a
great many serious bothers and worries.'

'Ah, we were so sorry to hear about your dear father.'

The tone of these words was kind and sincere; still Raymond thought that
in this case her _bonté_ might have gone a little further. At any rate
this was the only allusion that she made to his bothers and worries.
Indeed, she always passed over such things lightly; she was an optimist
for others as well as for herself, which doubtless had a great deal to
do (Raymond indulged in the reflection) with the headway she made in a
society tired of its own pessimism.

After dinner, when they went into the drawing-room, the young man noted
with complacency that this apartment, vast in itself, communicated with
two or three others into which it would be easy to pass without
attracting attention, the doors being replaced by old tapestries, looped
up and offering no barrier. With pictures and curiosities all over the
place, there were plenty of pretexts for wandering away. He lost no time
in asking Dora whether her mother would send Mademoiselle Bourde after
them if she were to go with him into one of the other rooms, the same
way she had done--didn't she remember?--that last night in New York, at
the hotel. Dora didn't admit that she remembered (she was too loyal to
her mother for that, and Raymond foresaw that this loyalty would be a
source of irritation to him again, as it had been in the past), but he
perceived, all the same, that she had not forgotten. She raised no
difficulty, and a few moments later, while they stood in an adjacent
_salon_ (he had stopped to admire a bust of Effie, wonderfully living,
slim and juvenile, the work of one of the sculptors who are the pride of
contemporary French art), he said to her, looking about him, 'How has
she done it so fast?'

'Done what, Raymond?'

'Why, done everything. Collected all these wonderful things; become
intimate with Madame de Brives and every one else; organised her
life--the life of all of you--so brilliantly.'

'I have never seen mamma in a hurry,' Dora replied.

'Perhaps she will be, now that I have come,' Raymond suggested,
laughing.

The girl hesitated a moment 'Yes, she was, to invite you--the moment she
knew you were here.'

'She has been most kind, and I talk like a brute. But I am liable to do
worse--I give you notice. She won't like it any more than she did
before, if she thinks I want to make up to you.'

'Don't, Raymond--don't!' the girl exclaimed, gently, but with a look of
sudden pain.

'Don't what, Dora?--don't make up to you?'

'Don't begin to talk of those things. There is no need. We can go on
being friends.'

'I will do exactly as you prescribe, and heaven forbid I should annoy
you. But would you mind answering me a question? It is very particular,
very intimate.' He stopped, and she only looked at him, saying nothing.
So he went on: 'Is it an idea of your mother's that you should
marry--some person here?' He gave her a chance to reply, but still she
was silent, and he continued: 'Do you mind telling me this? Could it
ever be an idea of your own?'

'Do you mean some Frenchman?'

Raymond smiled. 'Some protégé of Madame de Brives.'

Then the girl simply gave a slow, sad head-shake which struck him as the
sweetest, proudest, most suggestive thing in the world. 'Well, well,
that's all right,' he remarked, cheerfully, and looked again a while at
the bust, which he thought extraordinarily clever. 'And haven't _you_
been done by one of these great fellows?'

'Oh dear no; only mamma and Effie. But Tishy is going to be, in a month
or two. The next time you come you must see her. She remembers you
vividly.'

'And I remember her that last night, with her reticule. Is she always
pretty?'

Dora hesitated a moment. 'She is a very sweet little creature, but she
is not so pretty as Effie.'

'And have none of them wished to do you--none of the painters?'

'Oh, it's not a question of me. I only wish them to let me alone.'

'For me it would be a question of you, if you would sit for me. But I
daresay your mother wouldn't allow that.'

'No, I think not,' said Dora, smiling.

She smiled, but her companion looked grave. However, not to pursue the
subject, he asked, abruptly, 'Who is this Madame de Brives?'

'If you lived in Paris you would know. She is very celebrated.'

'Celebrated for what?'

'For everything.'

'And is she good--is she genuine?' Raymond asked. Then, seeing something
in the girl's face, he added: 'I told you I should be brutal again. Has
she undertaken to make a great marriage for Effie?'

'I don't know what she has undertaken,' said Dora, impatiently.

'And then for Tishy, when Effie has been disposed of?'

'Poor little Tishy!' the girl continued, rather inscrutably.

'And can she do nothing for you?' the young man inquired.

Her answer surprised him--after a moment. 'She has kindly offered to
exert herself, but it's no use.'

'Well, that's good. And who is it the young man comes for--the secretary
of embassy?'

'Oh, he comes for all of us,' said Dora, laughing.

'I suppose your mother would prefer a preference,' Raymond suggested.

To this she replied, irrelevantly, that she thought they had better go
back; but as Raymond took no notice of the recommendation she mentioned
that the secretary was no one in particular. At this moment Effie,
looking very rosy and happy, pushed through the _portière_ with the news
that her sister must come and bid good-bye to the Marquise. She was
taking her to the Duchess's--didn't Dora remember? To the _bal
blanc_--the _sauterie de jeunes filles_.

'I thought we should be called,' said Raymond, as he followed Effie;
and he remarked that perhaps Madame de Brives would find something
suitable at the Duchess's.

'I don't know. Mamma would be very particular,' the girl rejoined; and
this was said simply, sympathetically, without the least appearance of
deflection from that loyalty which Raymond deplored.




IV


'You must come to us on the 17th; we expect to have a few people and
some good music,' Cousin Maria said to him before he quitted the house;
and he wondered whether, the 17th being still ten days off, this might
not be an intimation that they could abstain from his society until
then. He chose, at any rate, not to take it as such, and called several
times in the interval, late in the afternoon, when the ladies would be
sure to have come in.

They were always there, and Cousin Maria's welcome was, for each
occasion, maternal, though when he took leave she made no allusion to
future meetings--to his coming again; but there were always other
visitors as well, collected at tea round the great fire of logs, in the
friendly, brilliant drawing-room where the luxurious was no enemy to the
casual and Mrs. Temperly's manner of dispensing hospitality recalled to
our young man somehow certain memories of his youthful time: visits in
New England, at old homesteads flanked with elms, where a talkative,
democratic, delightful farmer's wife pressed upon her company rustic
viands in which she herself had had a hand. Cousin Maria enjoyed the
services of a distinguished _chef_, and delicious _petits fours_ were
served with her tea; but Raymond had a sense that to complete the
impression hot home-made gingerbread should have been produced.

The atmosphere was suffused with the presence of Madame de Brives. She
was either there or she was just coming or she was just gone; her name,
her voice, her example and encouragement were in the air. Other ladies
came and went--sometimes accompanied by gentlemen who looked worn out,
had waxed moustaches and knew how to talk--and they were sometimes
designated in the same manner as Madame de Brives; but she remained the
Marquise _par excellence_, the incarnation of brilliancy and renown. The
conversation moved among simple but civilised topics, was not dull and,
considering that it consisted largely of personalities, was not
ill-natured. Least of all was it scandalous, for the girls were always
there, Cousin Maria not having thought it in the least necessary, in
order to put herself in accord with French traditions, to relegate her
daughters to the middle distance. They occupied a considerable part of
the foreground, in the prettiest, most modest, most becoming attitudes.

It was Cousin Maria's theory of her own behaviour that she did in Paris
simply as she had always done; and though this would not have been a
complete account of the matter Raymond could not fail to notice the good
sense and good taste with which she laid down her lines and the quiet
_bonhomie_ of the authority with which she caused the tone of the
American home to be respected. Scandal stayed outside, not simply
because Effie and Tishy were there, but because, even if Cousin Maria
had received alone, she never would have received evil-speakers.
Indeed, for Raymond, who had been accustomed to think that in a general
way he knew pretty well what the French capital was, this was a strange,
fresh Paris altogether, destitute of the salt that seasoned it for most
palates, and yet not insipid nor innutritive. He marvelled at Cousin
Maria's air, in such a city, of knowing, of recognising nothing bad: all
the more that it represented an actual state of mind. He used to wonder
sometimes what she would do and how she would feel if some day, in
consequence of researches made by the Marquise in the _grand monde_, she
should find herself in possession of a son-in-law formed according to
one of the types of which _he_ had impressions. However, it was not
credible that Madame de Brives would play her a trick. There were
moments when Raymond almost wished she might--to see how Cousin Maria
would handle the gentleman.

Dora was almost always taken up by visitors, and he had scarcely any
direct conversation with her. She was there, and he was glad she was
there, and she knew he was glad (he knew that), but this was almost all
the communion he had with her. She was mild, exquisitely mild--this was
the term he mentally applied to her now--and it amply sufficed him, with
the conviction he had that she was not stupid. She attended to the tea
(for Mademoiselle Bourde was not always free), she handed the _petits
fours_, she rang the bell when people went out; and it was in connection
with these offices that the idea came to him once--he was rather ashamed
of it afterward--that she was the Cinderella of the house, the domestic
drudge, the one for whom there was no career, as it was useless for the
Marquise to take up her case. He was ashamed of this fancy, I say, and
yet it came back to him; he was even surprised that it had not occurred
to him before. Her sisters were neither ugly nor proud (Tishy, indeed,
was almost touchingly delicate and timid, with exceedingly pretty
points, yet with a little appealing, old-womanish look, as if,
small--very small--as she was, she was afraid she shouldn't grow any
more); but her mother, like the mother in the fairy-tale, was a _femme
forte_. Madame de Brives could do nothing for Dora, not absolutely
because she was too plain, but because she would never lend herself, and
that came to the same thing. Her mother accepted her as recalcitrant,
but Cousin Maria's attitude, at the best, could only be resignation. She
would respect her child's preferences, she would never put on the screw;
but this would not make her love the child any more. So Raymond
interpreted certain signs, which at the same time he felt to be very
slight, while the conversation in Mrs. Temperly's _salon_ (this was its
preponderant tendency) rambled among questions of bric-à-brac, of where
Tishy's portrait should be placed when it was finished, and the current
prices of old Gobelins. _Ces dames_ were not in the least above the
discussion of prices.

On the 17th it was easy to see that more lamps than usual had been
lighted. They streamed through all the windows of the charming hotel and
mingled with the radiance of the carriage-lanterns, which followed each
other slowly, in couples, in a close, long rank, into the fine sonorous
court, where the high stepping of valuable horses was sharp on the
stones, and up to the ruddy portico. The night was wet, not with a
downpour, but with showers interspaced by starry patches, which only
added to the glitter of the handsome, clean Parisian surfaces. The
_sergents de ville_ were about the place, and seemed to make the
occasion important and official. These night aspects of Paris in the
_beaux quartiers_ had always for Raymond a particularly festive
association, and as he passed from his cab under the wide permanent tin
canopy, painted in stripes like an awning, which protected the low
steps, it seemed to him odder than ever that all this established
prosperity should be Cousin Maria's.

If the thought of how well she did it bore him company from the
threshold, it deepened to admiration by the time he had been half an
hour in the place. She stood near the entrance with her two elder
daughters, distributing the most familiar, most encouraging smiles,
together with hand-shakes which were in themselves a whole system of
hospitality. If her party was grand Cousin Maria was not; she indulged
in no assumption of stateliness and no attempt at graduated welcomes. It
seemed to Raymond that it was only because it would have taken too much
time that she didn't kiss every one. Effie looked lovely and just a
little frightened, which was exactly what she ought to have done; and he
noticed that among the arriving guests those who were not intimate
(which he could not tell from Mrs. Temperly's manner, but could from
their own) recognised her as a daughter much more quickly than they
recognised Dora, who hung back disinterestedly, as if not to challenge
their discernment, while the current passed her, keeping her little
sister in position on its brink meanwhile by the tenderest small
gesture.

'May I talk with you a little, later?' he asked of Dora, with only a
few seconds for the question, as people were pressing behind him. She
answered evasively that there would be very little talk--they would all
have to listen--it was very serious; and the next moment he had received
a programme from the hand of a monumental yet gracious personage who
stood beyond and who had a silver chain round his neck.

The place was arranged for music, and how well arranged he saw later,
when every one was seated, spaciously, luxuriously, without pushing or
over-peeping, and the finest talents in Paris performed selections at
which the best taste had presided. The singers and players were all
stars of the first magnitude. Raymond was fond of music and he wondered
whose taste it had been. He made up his mind it was Dora's--it was only
she who could have conceived a combination so exquisite; and he said to
himself: 'How they all pull together! She is not in it, she is not of
it, and yet she too works for the common end.' And by 'all' he meant
also Mademoiselle Bourde and the Marquise. This impression made him feel
rather hopeless, as if, _en fin de compte_, Cousin Maria were too large
an adversary. Great as was the pleasure of being present on an occasion
so admirably organised, of sitting there in a beautiful room, in a
still, attentive, brilliant company, with all the questions of
temperature, space, light and decoration solved to the gratification of
every sense, and listening to the best artists doing their best--happily
constituted as our young man was to enjoy such a privilege as this, the
total effect was depressing: it made him feel as if the gods were not
on his side.

'And does she do it so well without a man? There must be so many details
a woman can't tackle,' he said to himself; for even counting in the
Marquise and Mademoiselle Bourde this only made a multiplication of
petticoats. Then it came over him that she _was_ a man as well as a
woman--the masculine element was included in her nature. He was sure
that she bought her horses without being cheated, and very few men could
do that. She had the American national quality--she had 'faculty' in a
supreme degree. 'Faculty--faculty,' the voices of the quartette of
singers seemed to repeat, in the quick movement of a composition they
rendered beautifully, while they swelled and went faster, till the thing
became a joyous chant of praise, a glorification of Cousin Maria's
practical genius.

During the intermission, in the middle of the concert, people changed
places more or less and circulated, so that, walking about at this time,
he came upon the Marquise, who, in her sympathetic, demonstrative way,
appeared to be on the point of clasping her hostess in her arms.
'Décidément, ma bonne, il n'y a que vous! C'est une perfection----' he
heard her say. To which, gratified but unelated, Cousin Maria replied,
according to her simple, sociable wont: 'Well, it _does_ seem quite a
successful occasion. If it will only keep on to the end!'

Raymond, wandering far, found himself in a world that was mainly quite
new to him, and explained his ignorance of it by reflecting that the
people were probably celebrated: so many of them had decorations and
stars and a quiet of manner that could only be accounted for by renown.
There were plenty of Americans with no badge but a certain fine
negativeness, and _they_ were quiet for a reason which by this time had
become very familiar to Raymond: he had heard it so often mentioned that
his country-people were supremely 'adaptable.' He tried to get hold of
Dora, but he saw that her mother had arranged things beautifully to keep
her occupied with other people; so at least he interpreted the
fact--after all very natural--that she had half a dozen fluttered young
girls on her mind, whom she was providing with programmes, seats, ices,
occasional murmured remarks and general support and protection. When the
concert was over she supplied them with further entertainment in the
form of several young men who had pliable backs and flashing breastpins
and whom she inarticulately introduced to them, which gave her still
more to do, as after this serious step she had to stay and watch all
parties. It was strange to Raymond to see her transformed by her mother
into a precocious duenna. Him she introduced to no young girl, and he
knew not whether to regard this as cold neglect or as high
consideration. If he had liked he might have taken it as a sweet
intimation that she knew he couldn't care for any girl but her.

On the whole he was glad, because it left him free--free to get hold of
her mother, which by this time he had boldly determined to do. The
conception was high, inasmuch as Cousin Maria's attention was obviously
required by the ambassadors and other grandees who had flocked to do her
homage. Nevertheless, while supper was going on (he wanted none, and
neither apparently did she), he collared her, as he phrased it to
himself, in just the right place--on the threshold of the conservatory.
She was flanked on either side with a foreigner of distinction, but he
didn't care for her foreigners now. Besides, a conservatory was meant
only for couples; it was a sign of her comprehensive sociability that
she should have been rambling among the palms and orchids with a double
escort. Her friends would wish to quit her but would not wish to appear
to give way to each other; and Raymond felt that he was relieving them
both (though he didn't care) when he asked her to be so good as to give
him a few minutes' conversation. He made her go back with him into the
conservatory: it was the only thing he had ever made her do, or probably
ever would. She began to talk about the great Gregorini--how it had been
too sweet of her to repeat one of her songs, when it had really been
understood in advance that repetitions were not expected. Raymond had no
interest at present in the great Gregorini. He asked Cousin Maria
vehemently if she remembered telling him in New York--that night at the
hotel, five years before--that when he should have followed them to
Paris he would be free to address her on the subject of Dora. She had
given him a promise that she would listen to him in this case, and now
he must keep her up to the mark. It was impossible to see her alone,
but, at whatever inconvenience to herself, he must insist on her giving
him his opportunity.

'About Dora, Cousin Raymond?' she asked, blandly and kindly--almost as
if she didn't exactly know who Dora was.

'Surely you haven't forgotten what passed between us the evening before
you left America. I was in love with her then and I have been in love
with her ever since. I told you so then, and you stopped me off, but you
gave me leave to make another appeal to you in the future. I make it
now--this is the only way I have--and I think you ought to listen to it.
Five years have passed, and I love her more than ever. I have behaved
like a saint in the interval: I haven't attempted to practise upon her
without your knowledge.'

'I am so glad; but she would have let me know,' said Cousin Maria,
looking round the conservatory as if to see if the plants were all
there.

'No doubt. I don't know what you do to her. But I trust that to-day your
opposition falls--in face of the proof that we have given you of mutual
fidelity.'

'Fidelity?' Cousin Maria repeated, smiling.

'Surely--unless you mean to imply that Dora has given me up. I have
reason to believe that she hasn't.'

'I think she will like better to remain just as she is.'

'Just as she is?'

'I mean, not to make a choice,' Cousin Maria went on, smiling.

Raymond hesitated a moment. 'Do you mean that you have tried to make her
make one?'

At this the good lady broke into a laugh. 'My dear Raymond, how little
you must think I know my child!'

'Perhaps, if you haven't tried to make her, you have tried to prevent
her. Haven't you told her I am unsuccessful, I am poor?'

She stopped him, laying her hand with unaffected solicitude on his arm.
'_Are_ you poor, my dear? I should be so sorry!'

'Never mind; I can support a wife,' said the young man.

'It wouldn't matter, because I am happy to say that Dora has something
of her own,' Cousin Maria went on, with her imperturbable candour. 'Her
father thought that was the best way to arrange it. I had quite
forgotten my opposition, as you call it; that was so long ago. Why, she
was only a little girl. Wasn't that the ground I took? Well, dear, she's
older now, and you can say anything to her you like. But I do think she
wants to stay----' And she looked up at him, cheerily.

'Wants to stay?'

'With Effie and Tishy.'

'Ah, Cousin Maria,' the young man exclaimed, 'you are modest about
yourself!'

'Well, we are all together. Now is that all? I _must_ see if there is
enough champagne. Certainly--you can say to her what you like. But
twenty years hence she will be just as she is to-day; that's how I see
her.'

'Lord, what is it you do to her?' Raymond groaned, as he accompanied his
hostess back to the crowded rooms.

He knew exactly what she would have replied if she had been a
Frenchwoman; she would have said to him, triumphantly, overwhelmingly:
'Que voulez-vous? Elle adore sa mère!' She was, however, only a
Californian, unacquainted with the language of epigram, and her answer
consisted simply of the words: 'I am sorry you have ideas that make you
unhappy. I guess you are the only person here who hasn't enjoyed
himself to-night.'

Raymond repeated to himself, gloomily, for the rest of the evening,
'Elle adore sa mère--elle adore sa mère!' He remained very late, and
when but twenty people were left and he had observed that the Marquise,
passing her hand into Mrs. Temperly's arm, led her aside as if for some
important confabulation (some new light doubtless on what might be hoped
for Effie), he persuaded Dora to let the rest of the guests depart in
peace (apparently her mother had told her to look out for them to the
very last), and come with him into some quiet corner. They found an
empty sofa in the outlasting lamp-light, and there the girl sat down
with him. Evidently she knew what he was going to say, or rather she
thought she did; for in fact, after a little, after he had told her that
he had spoken to her mother and she had told him he might speak to
_her_, he said things that she could not very well have expected.

'Is it true that you wish to remain with Effie and Tishy? That's what
your mother calls it when she means that you will give me up.'

'How can I give you up?' the girl demanded. 'Why can't we go on being
friends, as I asked you the evening you dined here?'

'What do you mean by friends?'

'Well, not making everything impossible.'

'You didn't think anything impossible of old,' Raymond rejoined,
bitterly. 'I thought you liked me then, and I have even thought so
since.'

'I like you more than I like any one. I like you so much that it's my
principal happiness.'

'Then why are there impossibilities?'

'Oh, some day I'll tell you!' said Dora, with a quick sigh. 'Perhaps
after Tishy is married. And meanwhile, are you not going to remain in
Paris, at any rate? Isn't your work here? You are not here for me only.
You can come to the house often. That's what I mean by our being
friends.'

Her companion sat looking at her with a gloomy stare, as if he were
trying to make up the deficiencies in her logic.

'After Tishy is married? I don't see what that has to do with it. Tishy
is little more than a baby; she may not be married for ten years.'

'That is very true.'

'And you dispose of the interval by a simple "meanwhile"? My dear Dora,
your talk is strange,' Raymond continued, with his voice passionately
lowered. 'And I may come to the house--often? How often do you mean--in
ten years? Five times--or even twenty?' He saw that her eyes were
filling with tears, but he went on: 'It has been coming over me little
by little (I notice things very much if I have a reason), and now I
think I understand your mother's system.'

'Don't say anything against my mother,' the girl broke in, beseechingly.

'I shall not say anything unjust. That is if I am unjust you must tell
me. This is my idea, and your speaking of Tishy's marriage confirms it.
To begin with she has had immense plans for you all; she wanted each of
you to be a princess or a duchess--I mean a good one. But she has had to
give _you_ up.'

'No one has asked for me,' said Dora, with unexpected honesty.

'I don't believe it. Dozens of fellows have asked for you, and you have
shaken your head in that divine way (divine for me, I mean) in which you
shook it the other night.'

'My mother has never said an unkind word to me in her life,' the girl
declared, in answer to this.

'I never said she had, and I don't know why you take the precaution of
telling me so. But whatever you tell me or don't tell me,' Raymond
pursued, 'there is one thing I see very well--that so long as you won't
marry a duke Cousin Maria has found means to prevent you from marrying
till your sisters have made rare alliances.'

'Has found means?' Dora repeated, as if she really wondered what was in
his thought.

'Of course I mean only through your affection for her. How she works
that, you know best yourself.'

'It's delightful to have a mother of whom every one is so fond,' said
Dora, smiling.

'She is a most remarkable woman. Don't think for a moment that I don't
appreciate her. You don't want to quarrel with her, and I daresay you
are right.'

'Why, Raymond, of course I'm right!'

'It proves you are not madly in love with me. It seems to me that for
you _I_ would have quarrelled----'

'Raymond, Raymond!' she interrupted, with the tears again rising.

He sat looking at her, and then he said, 'Well, when they _are_
married?'

'I don't know the future--I don't know what may happen.'

'You mean that Tishy is so small--she doesn't grow--and will therefore
be difficult? Yes, she _is_ small.' There was bitterness in his heart,
but he laughed at his own words. 'However, Effie ought to go off
easily,' he went on, as Dora said nothing. 'I really wonder that, with
the Marquise and all, she hasn't gone off yet. This thing, to-night,
ought to do a great deal for her.'

Dora listened to him with a fascinated gaze; it was as if he expressed
things for her and relieved her spirit by making them clear and
coherent. Her eyes managed, each time, to be dry again, and now a
somewhat wan, ironical smile moved her lips. 'Mamma knows what she
wants--she knows what she will take. And she will take only that.'

'Precisely--something tremendous. And she is willing to wait, eh? Well,
Effie is very young, and she's charming. But she won't be charming if
she has an ugly appendage in the shape of a poor unsuccessful American
artist (not even a good one), whose father went bankrupt, for a
brother-in-law. That won't smooth the way, of course; and if a prince is
to come into the family, the family must be kept tidy to receive him.'
Dora got up quickly, as if she could bear his lucidity no longer, but he
kept close to her as she walked away. 'And she can sacrifice you like
that, without a scruple, without a pang?'

'I might have escaped--if I would marry,' the girl replied.

'Do you call that escaping? She has succeeded with you, but is it a part
of what the Marquise calls her _succès de bonté_?'

'Nothing that you can say (and it's far worse than the reality) can
prevent her being delightful.'

'Yes, that's your loyalty, and I could shoot you for it!' he exclaimed,
making her pause on the threshold of the adjoining room. 'So you think
it will take about ten years, considering Tishy's size--or want of
size?' He himself again was the only one to laugh at this. 'Your mother
is closeted, as much as she can be closeted now, with Madame de Brives,
and perhaps this time they are really settling something.'

'I have thought that before and nothing has come. Mamma wants something
so good; not only every advantage and every grandeur, but every virtue
under heaven, and every guarantee. Oh, she wouldn't expose them!'

'I see; that's where her goodness comes in and where the Marquise is
impressed' He took Dora's hand; he felt that he must go, for she
exasperated him with her irony that stopped short and her patience that
wouldn't stop. 'You simply propose that I should wait?' he said, as he
held her hand.

'It seems to me that you might, if _I_ can.' Then the girl remarked,
'Now that you are here, it's far better.'

There was a sweetness in this which made him, after glancing about a
moment, raise her hand to his lips. He went away without taking leave of
Cousin Maria, who was still out of sight, her conference with the
Marquise apparently not having terminated. This looked (he reflected as
he passed out) as if something might come of it. However, before he went
home he fell again into a gloomy forecast. The weather had changed, the
stars were all out, and he walked the empty streets for an hour.
Tishy's perverse refusal to grow and Cousin Maria's conscientious
exactions promised him a terrible probation. And in those intolerable
years what further interference, what meddlesome, effective pressure,
might not make itself felt? It may be added that Tishy is decidedly a
dwarf and his probation is not yet over.


THE END






PART I


Four years ago--in 1874--two young Englishmen had occasion to go to the
United States. They crossed the ocean at midsummer, and, arriving in
New York on the first day of August, were much struck with the fervid
temperature of that city. Disembarking upon the wharf, they climbed
into one of those huge high-hung coaches which convey passengers to the
hotels, and with a great deal of bouncing and bumping, took their course
through Broadway. The midsummer aspect of New York is not, perhaps, the
most favorable one; still, it is not without its picturesque and even
brilliant side. Nothing could well resemble less a typical English
street than the interminable avenue, rich in incongruities, through
which our two travelers advanced--looking out on each side of them
at the comfortable animation of the sidewalks, the high-colored,
heterogeneous architecture, the huge white marble facades glittering
in the strong, crude light, and bedizened with gilded lettering, the
multifarious awnings, banners, and streamers, the extraordinary number
of omnibuses, horsecars, and other democratic vehicles, the vendors of
cooling fluids, the white trousers and big straw hats of the policemen,
the tripping gait of the modish young persons on the pavement, the
general brightness, newness, juvenility, both of people and things. The
young men had exchanged few observations; but in crossing Union Square,
in front of the monument to Washington--in the very shadow, indeed,
projected by the image of the PATER PATRIAE--one of them remarked to
the other, "It seems a rum-looking place."

"Ah, very odd, very odd," said the other, who was the clever man of the
two.

"Pity it's so beastly hot," resumed the first speaker after a pause.

"You know we are in a low latitude," said his friend.

"I daresay," remarked the other.

"I wonder," said the second speaker presently, "if they can give one a
bath?"

"I daresay not," rejoined the other.

"Oh, I say!" cried his comrade.

This animated discussion was checked by their arrival at the hotel,
which had been recommended to them by an American gentleman whose
acquaintance they made--with whom, indeed, they became very intimate--on
the steamer, and who had proposed to accompany them to the inn and
introduce them, in a friendly way, to the proprietor. This plan,
however, had been defeated by their friend's finding that his "partner"
was awaiting him on the wharf and that his commercial associate desired
him instantly to come and give his attention to certain telegrams
received from St. Louis. But the two Englishmen, with nothing but their
national prestige and personal graces to recommend them, were very well
received at the hotel, which had an air of capacious hospitality. They
found that a bath was not unattainable, and were indeed struck with
the facilities for prolonged and reiterated immersion with which their
apartment was supplied. After bathing a good deal--more, indeed, than
they had ever done before on a single occasion--they made their way into
the dining room of the hotel, which was a spacious restaurant, with a
fountain in the middle, a great many tall plants in ornamental tubs,
and an array of French waiters. The first dinner on land, after a sea
voyage, is, under any circumstances, a delightful occasion, and there
was something particularly agreeable in the circumstances in which our
young Englishmen found themselves. They were extremely good natured
young men; they were more observant than they appeared; in a sort of
inarticulate, accidentally dissimulative fashion, they were highly
appreciative. This was, perhaps, especially the case with the elder, who
was also, as I have said, the man of talent. They sat down at a little
table, which was a very different affair from the great clattering
seesaw in the saloon of the steamer. The wide doors and windows of the
restaurant stood open, beneath large awnings, to a wide pavement, where
there were other plants in tubs, and rows of spreading trees, and beyond
which there was a large shady square, without any palings, and with
marble-paved walks. And above the vivid verdure rose other facades of
white marble and of pale chocolate-colored stone, squaring themselves
against the deep blue sky. Here, outside, in the light and the shade
and the heat, there was a great tinkling of the bells of innumerable
streetcars, and a constant strolling and shuffling and rustling of
many pedestrians, a large proportion of whom were young women in
Pompadour-looking dresses. Within, the place was cool and vaguely
lighted, with the plash of water, the odor of flowers, and the flitting
of French waiters, as I have said, upon soundless carpets.

"It's rather like Paris, you know," said the younger of our two
travelers.

"It's like Paris--only more so," his companion rejoined.

"I suppose it's the French waiters," said the first speaker. "Why don't
they have French waiters in London?"

"Fancy a French waiter at a club," said his friend.

The young Englishman started a little, as if he could not fancy it. "In
Paris I'm very apt to dine at a place where there's an English waiter.
Don't you know what's-his-name's, close to the thingumbob? They always
set an English waiter at me. I suppose they think I can't speak French."

"Well, you can't." And the elder of the young Englishmen unfolded his
napkin.

His companion took no notice whatever of this declaration. "I say,"
he resumed in a moment, "I suppose we must learn to speak American. I
suppose we must take lessons."

"I can't understand them," said the clever man.

"What the deuce is HE saying?" asked his comrade, appealing from the
French waiter.

"He is recommending some soft-shell crabs," said the clever man.

And so, in desultory observation of the idiosyncrasies of the new
society in which they found themselves, the young Englishmen proceeded
to dine--going in largely, as the phrase is, for cooling draughts and
dishes, of which their attendant offered them a very long list. After
dinner they went out and slowly walked about the neighboring streets.
The early dusk of waning summer was coming on, but the heat was still
very great. The pavements were hot even to the stout boot soles of the
British travelers, and the trees along the curbstone emitted strange
exotic odors. The young men wandered through the adjoining square--that
queer place without palings, and with marble walks arranged in black
and white lozenges. There were a great many benches, crowded with
shabby-looking people, and the travelers remarked, very justly, that it
was not much like Belgrave Square. On one side was an enormous hotel,
lifting up into the hot darkness an immense array of open, brightly
lighted windows. At the base of this populous structure was an eternal
jangle of horsecars, and all round it, in the upper dusk, was a sinister
hum of mosquitoes. The ground floor of the hotel seemed to be a huge
transparent cage, flinging a wide glare of gaslight into the street,
of which it formed a sort of public adjunct, absorbing and emitting
the passersby promiscuously. The young Englishmen went in with everyone
else, from curiosity, and saw a couple of hundred men sitting on divans
along a great marble-paved corridor, with their legs stretched out,
together with several dozen more standing in a queue, as at the ticket
office of a railway station, before a brilliantly illuminated counter
of vast extent. These latter persons, who carried portmanteaus in their
hands, had a dejected, exhausted look; their garments were not very
fresh, and they seemed to be rendering some mysterious tribute to a
magnificent young man with a waxed mustache, and a shirtfront adorned
with diamond buttons, who every now and then dropped an absent glance
over their multitudinous patience. They were American citizens doing
homage to a hotel clerk.

"I'm glad he didn't tell us to go there," said one of our Englishmen,
alluding to their friend on the steamer, who had told them so many
things. They walked up the Fifth Avenue, where, for instance, he had
told them that all the first families lived. But the first families were
out of town, and our young travelers had only the satisfaction of seeing
some of the second--or perhaps even the third--taking the evening air
upon balconies and high flights of doorsteps, in the streets which
radiate from the more ornamental thoroughfare. They went a little way
down one of these side streets, and they saw young ladies in white
dresses--charming-looking persons--seated in graceful attitudes on the
chocolate-colored steps. In one or two places these young ladies were
conversing across the street with other young ladies seated in similar
postures and costumes in front of the opposite houses, and in the warm
night air their colloquial tones sounded strange in the ears of
the young Englishmen. One of our friends, nevertheless--the younger
one--intimated that he felt a disposition to interrupt a few of these
soft familiarities; but his companion observed, pertinently enough, that
he had better be careful. "We must not begin with making mistakes," said
his companion.

"But he told us, you know--he told us," urged the young man, alluding
again to the friend on the steamer.

"Never mind what he told us!" answered his comrade, who, if he had
greater talents, was also apparently more of a moralist.

By bedtime--in their impatience to taste of a terrestrial couch again
our seafarers went to bed early--it was still insufferably hot, and
the buzz of the mosquitoes at the open windows might have passed for an
audible crepitation of the temperature. "We can't stand this, you know,"
the young Englishmen said to each other; and they tossed about all night
more boisterously than they had tossed upon the Atlantic billows. On the
morrow, their first thought was that they would re-embark that day for
England; and then it occured to them that they might find an asylum
nearer at hand. The cave of Aeolus became their ideal of comfort, and
they wondered where the Americans went when they wished to cool
off. They had not the least idea, and they determined to apply for
information to Mr. J. L. Westgate. This was the name inscribed in a bold
hand on the back of a letter carefully preserved in the pocketbook of
our junior traveler. Beneath the address, in the left-hand corner of the
envelope, were the words, "Introducing Lord Lambeth and Percy Beaumont,
Esq." The letter had been given to the two Englishmen by a good friend
of theirs in London, who had been in America two years previously, and
had singled out Mr. J. L. Westgate from the many friends he had left
there as the consignee, as it were, of his compatriots. "He is a capital
fellow," the Englishman in London had said, "and he has got an awfully
pretty wife. He's tremendously hospitable--he will do everything in the
world for you; and as he knows everyone over there, it is quite needless
I should give you any other introduction. He will make you see everyone;
trust to him for putting you into circulation. He has got a tremendously
pretty wife." It was natural that in the hour of tribulation Lord
Lambeth and Mr. Percy Beaumont should have bethought themselves of a
gentleman whose attractions had been thus vividly depicted; all the more
so that he lived in the Fifth Avenue, and that the Fifth Avenue, as they
had ascertained the night before, was contiguous to their hotel. "Ten
to one he'll be out of town," said Percy Beaumont; "but we can at least
find out where he has gone, and we can immediately start in pursuit. He
can't possibly have gone to a hotter place, you know."

"Oh, there's only one hotter place," said Lord Lambeth, "and I hope he
hasn't gone there."

They strolled along the shady side of the street to the number
indicated upon the precious letter. The house presented an imposing
chocolate-colored expanse, relieved by facings and window cornices of
florid sculpture, and by a couple of dusty rose trees which clambered
over the balconies and the portico. This last-mentioned feature was
approached by a monumental flight of steps.

"Rather better than a London house," said Lord Lambeth, looking down
from this altitude, after they had rung the bell.

"It depends upon what London house you mean," replied his companion.
"You have a tremendous chance to get wet between the house door and your
carriage."

"Well," said Lord Lambeth, glancing at the burning heavens, "I 'guess'
it doesn't rain so much here!"

The door was opened by a long Negro in a white jacket, who grinned
familiarly when Lord Lambeth asked for Mr. Westgate.

"He ain't at home, sah; he's downtown at his o'fice."

"Oh, at his office?" said the visitors. "And when will he be at home?"

"Well, sah, when he goes out dis way in de mo'ning, he ain't liable to
come home all day."

This was discouraging; but the address of Mr. Westgate's office was
freely imparted by the intelligent black and was taken down by Percy
Beaumont in his pocketbook. The two gentlemen then returned, languidly,
to their hotel, and sent for a hackney coach, and in this commodious
vehicle they rolled comfortably downtown. They measured the whole length
of Broadway again and found it a path of fire; and then, deflecting to
the left, they were deposited by their conductor before a fresh,
light, ornamental structure, ten stories high, in a street crowded with
keen-faced, light-limbed young men, who were running about very quickly
and stopping each other eagerly at corners and in doorways. Passing into
this brilliant building, they were introduced by one of the keen-faced
young men--he was a charming fellow, in wonderful cream-colored garments
and a hat with a blue ribbon, who had evidently perceived them to be
aliens and helpless--to a very snug hydraulic elevator, in which they
took their place with many other persons, and which, shooting upward
in its vertical socket, presently projected them into the seventh
horizontal compartment of the edifice. Here, after brief delay, they
found themselves face to face with the friend of their friend in London.
His office was composed of several different rooms, and they waited very
silently in one of them after they had sent in their letter and their
cards. The letter was not one which it would take Mr. Westgate very long
to read, but he came out to speak to them more instantly than they could
have expected; he had evidently jumped up from his work. He was a tall,
lean personage and was dressed all in fresh white linen; he had a thin,
sharp, familiar face, with an expression that was at one and the same
time sociable and businesslike, a quick, intelligent eye, and a large
brown mustache, which concealed his mouth and made his chin, beneath it,
look small. Lord Lambeth thought he looked tremendously clever.

"How do you do, Lord Lambeth--how do you do, sir?" he said, holding the
open letter in his hand. "I'm very glad to see you; I hope you're very
well. You had better come in here; I think it's cooler," and he led
the way into another room, where there were law books and papers, and
windows wide open beneath striped awning. Just opposite one of the
windows, on a line with his eyes, Lord Lambeth observed the weathervane
of a church steeple. The uproar of the street sounded infinitely far
below, and Lord Lambeth felt very high in the air. "I say it's cooler,"
pursued their host, "but everything is relative. How do you stand the
heat?"

"I can't say we like it," said Lord Lambeth; "but Beaumont likes it
better than I."

"Well, it won't last," Mr. Westgate very cheerfully declared; "nothing
unpleasant lasts over here. It was very hot when Captain Littledale was
here; he did nothing but drink sherry cobblers. He expressed some doubt
in his letter whether I will remember him--as if I didn't remember
making six sherry cobblers for him one day in about twenty minutes. I
hope you left him well, two years having elapsed since then."

"Oh, yes, he's all right," said Lord Lambeth.

"I am always very glad to see your countrymen," Mr. Westgate pursued. "I
thought it would be time some of you should be coming along. A friend
of mine was saying to me only a day or two ago, 'It's time for the
watermelons and the Englishmen."

"The Englishmen and the watermelons just now are about the same thing,"
Percy Beaumont observed, wiping his dripping forehead.

"Ah, well, we'll put you on ice, as we do the melons. You must go down
to Newport."

"We'll go anywhere," said Lord Lambeth.

"Yes, you want to go to Newport; that's what you want to do," Mr.
Westgate affirmed. "But let's see--when did you get here?"

"Only yesterday," said Percy Beaumont.

"Ah, yes, by the Russia. Where are you staying?"

"At the Hanover, I think they call it."

"Pretty comfortable?" inquired Mr. Westgate.

"It seems a capital place, but I can't say we like the gnats," said Lord
Lambeth.

Mr. Westgate stared and laughed. "Oh, no, of course you don't like the
gnats. We shall expect you to like a good many things over here, but we
shan't insist upon your liking the gnats; though certainly you'll admit
that, as gnats, they are fine, eh? But you oughtn't to remain in the
city."

"So we think," said Lord Lambeth. "If you would kindly suggest
something--"

"Suggest something, my dear sir?" and Mr. Westgate looked at him,
narrowing his eyelids. "Open your mouth and shut your eyes! Leave it to
me, and I'll put you through. It's a matter of national pride with
me that all Englishmen should have a good time; and as I have had
considerable practice, I have learned to minister to their wants. I
find they generally want the right thing. So just please to consider
yourselves my property; and if anyone should try to appropriate you,
please to say, 'Hands off; too late for the market.' But let's see,"
continued the American, in his slow, humorous voice, with a distinctness
of utterance which appeared to his visitors to be part of a humorous
intention--a strangely leisurely, speculative voice for a man evidently
so busy and, as they felt, so professional--"let's see; are you going to
make something of a stay, Lord Lambeth?"

"Oh, dear, no," said the young Englishman; "my cousin was coming over
on some business, so I just came across, at an hour's notice, for the
lark."

"Is it your first visit to the United States?"

"Oh, dear, yes."

"I was obliged to come on some business," said Percy Beaumont, "and I
brought Lambeth along."

"And YOU have been here before, sir?"

"Never--never."

"I thought, from your referring to business--" said Mr. Westgate.

"Oh, you see I'm by way of being a barrister," Percy Beaumont answered.
"I know some people that think of bringing a suit against one of your
railways, and they asked me to come over and take measures accordingly."

"What's your railroad?" he asked.

"The Tennessee Central."

The American tilted back his chair a little and poised it an instant.
"Well, I'm sorry you want to attack one of our institutions," he said,
smiling. "But I guess you had better enjoy yourself FIRST!"

"I'm certainly rather afraid I can't work in this weather," the young
barrister confessed.

"Leave that to the natives," said Mr. Westgate. "Leave the Tennessee
Central to me, Mr. Beaumont. Some day we'll talk it over, and I guess I
can make it square. But I didn't know you Englishmen ever did any work,
in the upper classes."

"Oh, we do a lot of work; don't we, Lambeth?" asked Percy Beaumont.

"I must certainly be at home by the 19th of September," said the younger
Englishman, irrelevantly but gently.

"For the shooting, eh? or is it the hunting, or the fishing?" inquired
his entertainer.

"Oh, I must be in Scotland," said Lord Lambeth, blushing a little.

"Well, then," rejoined Mr. Westgate, "you had better amuse yourself
first, also. You must go down and see Mrs. Westgate."

"We should be so happy, if you would kindly tell us the train," said
Percy Beaumont.

"It isn't a train--it's a boat."

"Oh, I see. And what is the name of--a--the--a--town?"

"It isn't a town," said Mr. Westgate, laughing. "It's a--well, what
shall I call it? It's a watering place. In short, it's Newport. You'll
see what it is. It's cool; that's the principal thing. You will greatly
oblige me by going down there and putting yourself into the hands of
Mrs. Westgate. It isn't perhaps for me to say it, but you couldn't be in
better hands. Also in those of her sister, who is staying with her. She
is very fond of Englishmen. She thinks there is nothing like them."

"Mrs. Westgate or--a--her sister?" asked Percy Beaumont modestly, yet in
the tone of an inquiring traveler.

"Oh, I mean my wife," said Mr. Westgate. "I don't suppose my
sister-in-law knows much about them. She has always led a very quiet
life; she has lived in Boston."

Percy Beaumont listened with interest. "That, I believe," he said, "is
the most--a--intellectual town?"

"I believe it is very intellectual. I don't go there much," responded
his host.

"I say, we ought to go there," said Lord Lambeth to his companion.

"Oh, Lord Lambeth, wait till the great heat is over," Mr. Westgate
interposed. "Boston in this weather would be very trying; it's not the
temperature for intellectual exertion. At Boston, you know, you have to
pass an examination at the city limits; and when you come away they give
you a kind of degree."

Lord Lambeth stared, blushing a little; and Percy Beaumont stared a
little also--but only with his fine natural complexion--glancing aside
after a moment to see that his companion was not looking too credulous,
for he had heard a great deal of American humor. "I daresay it is very
jolly," said the younger gentleman.

"I daresay it is," said Mr. Westgate. "Only I must impress upon you that
at present--tomorrow morning, at an early hour--you will be expected at
Newport. We have a house there; half the people in New York go there for
the summer. I am not sure that at this very moment my wife can take you
in; she has got a lot of people staying with her; I don't know who they
all are; only she may have no room. But you can begin with the hotel,
and meanwhile you can live at my house. In that way--simply sleeping
at the hotel--you will find it tolerable. For the rest, you must make
yourself at home at my place. You mustn't be shy, you know; if you are
only here for a month that will be a great waste of time. Mrs. Westgate
won't neglect you, and you had better not try to resist her. I know
something about that. I expect you'll find some pretty girls on the
premises. I shall write to my wife by this afternoon's mail, and
tomorrow morning she and Miss Alden will look out for you. Just walk
right in and make yourself comfortable. Your steamer leaves from this
part of the city, and I will immediately send out and get you a cabin.
Then, at half past four o'clock, just call for me here, and I will go
with you and put you on board. It's a big boat; you might get lost. A
few days hence, at the end of the week, I will come down to Newport and
see how you are getting on."

The two young Englishmen inaugurated the policy of not resisting Mrs.
Westgate by submitting, with great docility and thankfulness, to her
husband. He was evidently a very good fellow, and he made an impression
upon his visitors; his hospitality seemed to recommend itself
consciously--with a friendly wink, as it were--as if it hinted,
judicially, that you could not possibly make a better bargain. Lord
Lambeth and his cousin left their entertainer to his labors and returned
to their hotel, where they spent three or four hours in their respective
shower baths. Percy Beaumont had suggested that they ought to see
something of the town; but "Oh, damn the town!" his noble kinsman had
rejoined. They returned to Mr. Westgate's office in a carriage, with
their luggage, very punctually; but it must be reluctantly recorded
that, this time, he kept them waiting so long that they felt themselves
missing the steamer, and were deterred only by an amiable modesty from
dispensing with his attendance and starting on a hasty scramble to the
wharf. But when at last he appeared, and the carriage plunged into the
purlieus of Broadway, they jolted and jostled to such good purpose that
they reached the huge white vessel while the bell for departure was
still ringing and the absorption of passengers still active. It was
indeed, as Mr. Westgate had said, a big boat, and his leadership in the
innumerable and interminable corridors and cabins, with which he seemed
perfectly acquainted, and of which anyone and everyone appeared to have
the entree, was very grateful to the slightly bewildered voyagers. He
showed them their stateroom--a spacious apartment, embellished with gas
lamps, mirrors en pied, and sculptured furniture--and then, long after
they had been intimately convinced that the steamer was in motion and
launched upon the unknown stream that they were about to navigate, he
bade them a sociable farewell.

"Well, goodbye, Lord Lambeth," he said; "goodbye, Mr. Percy Beaumont. I
hope you'll have a good time. Just let them do what they want with you.
I'll come down by-and-by and look after you."

The young Englishmen emerged from their cabin and amused themselves with
wandering about the immense labyrinthine steamer, which struck them as
an extraordinary mixture of a ship and a hotel. It was densely crowded
with passengers, the larger number of whom appeared to be ladies and
very young children; and in the big saloons, ornamented in white and
gold, which followed each other in surprising succession, beneath the
swinging gaslight, and among the small side passages where the Negro
domestics of both sexes assembled with an air of philosophic leisure,
everyone was moving to and fro and exchanging loud and familiar
observations. Eventually, at the instance of a discriminating black, our
young men went and had some "supper" in a wonderful place arranged like
a theater, where, in a gilded gallery, upon which little boxes appeared
to open, a large orchestra was playing operatic selections, and, below,
people were handing about bills of fare, as if they had been programs.
All this was sufficiently curious; but the agreeable thing, later, was
to sit out on one of the great white decks of the steamer, in the warm
breezy darkness, and, in the vague starlight, to make out the line of
low, mysterious coast. The young Englishmen tried American cigars--those
of Mr. Westgate--and talked together as they usually talked, with many
odd silences, lapses of logic, and incongruities of transition; like
people who have grown old together and learned to supply each other's
missing phrases; or, more especially, like people thoroughly conscious
of a common point of view, so that a style of conversation superficially
lacking in finish might suffice for reference to a fund of associations
in the light of which everything was all right.

"We really seem to be going out to sea," Percy Beaumont observed. "Upon
my word, we are going back to England. He has shipped us off again. I
call that 'real mean.'"

"I suppose it's all right," said Lord Lambeth. "I want to see those
pretty girls at Newport. You know, he told us the place was an island;
and aren't all islands in the sea?"

"Well," resumed the elder traveler after a while, "if his house is as
good as his cigars, we shall do very well."

"He seems a very good fellow," said Lord Lambeth, as if this idea had
just occurred to him.

"I say, we had better remain at the inn," rejoined his companion
presently. "I don't think I like the way he spoke of his house. I don't
like stopping in the house with such a tremendous lot of women."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Lord Lambeth. And then they smoked a while in
silence. "Fancy his thinking we do no work in England!" the young man
resumed.

"I daresay he didn't really think so," said Percy Beaumont.

"Well, I guess they don't know much about England over here!" declared
Lord Lambeth humorously. And then there was another long pause. "He was
devilish civil," observed the young nobleman.

"Nothing, certainly, could have been more civil," rejoined his
companion.

"Littledale said his wife was great fun," said Lord Lambeth.

"Whose wife--Littledale's?"

"This American's--Mrs. Westgate. What's his name? J.L."

Beaumont was silent a moment. "What was fun to Littledale," he said at
last, rather sententiously, "may be death to us."

"What do you mean by that?" asked his kinsman. "I am as good a man as
Littledale."

"My dear boy, I hope you won't begin to flirt," said Percy Beaumont.

"I don't care. I daresay I shan't begin."

"With a married woman, if she's bent upon it, it's all very well,"
Beaumont expounded. "But our friend mentioned a young lady--a sister, a
sister-in-law. For God's sake, don't get entangled with her!"

"How do you mean entangled?"

"Depend upon it she will try to hook you."

"Oh, bother!" said Lord Lambeth.

"American girls are very clever," urged his companion.

"So much the better," the young man declared.

"I fancy they are always up to some game of that sort," Beaumont
continued.

"They can't be worse than they are in England," said Lord Lambeth
judicially.

"Ah, but in England," replied Beaumont, "you have got your natural
protectors. You have got your mother and sisters."

"My mother and sisters--" began the young nobleman with a certain
energy. But he stopped in time, puffing at his cigar.

"Your mother spoke to me about it, with tears in her eyes," said Percy
Beaumont. "She said she felt very nervous. I promised to keep you out of
mischief."

"You had better take care of yourself," said the object of maternal and
ducal solicitude.

"Ah," rejoined the young barrister, "I haven't the expectation of a
hundred thousand a year, not to mention other attractions."

"Well," said Lord Lambeth, "don't cry out before you're hurt!"

It was certainly very much cooler at Newport, where our travelers found
themselves assigned to a couple of diminutive bedrooms in a faraway
angle of an immense hotel. They had gone ashore in the early summer
twilight and had very promptly put themselves to bed; thanks to which
circumstance and to their having, during the previous hours, in their
commodious cabin, slept the sleep of youth and health, they began to
feel, toward eleven o'clock, very alert and inquisitive. They looked out
of their windows across a row of small green fields, bordered with
low stone walls of rude construction, and saw a deep blue ocean lying
beneath a deep blue sky, and flecked now and then with scintillating
patches of foam. A strong, fresh breeze came in through the curtainless
casements and prompted our young men to observe, generally, that it
didn't seem half a bad climate. They made other observations after they
had emerged from their rooms in pursuit of breakfast--a meal of which
they partook in a huge bare hall, where a hundred Negroes, in white
jackets, were shuffling about upon an uncarpeted floor; where the
flies were superabundant, and the tables and dishes covered over with a
strange, voluminous integument of coarse blue gauze; and where several
little boys and girls, who had risen late, were seated in fastidious
solitude at the morning repast. These young persons had not the morning
paper before them, but they were engaged in languid perusal of the bill
of fare.

This latter document was a great puzzle to our friends, who, on
reflecting that its bewildering categories had relation to breakfast
alone, had an uneasy prevision of an encyclopedic dinner list. They
found a great deal of entertainment at the hotel, an enormous wooden
structure, for the erection of which it seemed to them that the
virgin forests of the West must have been terribly deflowered. It was
perforated from end to end with immense bare corridors, through which a
strong draught was blowing--bearing along wonderful figures of ladies
in white morning dresses and clouds of Valenciennes lace, who seemed
to float down the long vistas with expanded furbelows, like angels
spreading their wings. In front was a gigantic veranda, upon which an
army might have encamped--a vast wooden terrace, with a roof as lofty
as the nave of a cathedral. Here our young Englishmen enjoyed, as they
supposed, a glimpse of American society, which was distributed over the
measureless expanse in a variety of sedentary attitudes, and appeared
to consist largely of pretty young girls, dressed as if for a fete
champetre, swaying to and fro in rocking chairs, fanning themselves with
large straw fans, and enjoying an enviable exemption from social cares.
Lord Lambeth had a theory, which it might be interesting to trace to
its origin, that it would be not only agreeable, but easily possible, to
enter into relations with one of these young ladies; and his companion
(as he had done a couple of days before) found occasion to check the
young nobleman's colloquial impulses.

"You had better take care," said Percy Beaumont, "or you will have an
offended father or brother pulling out a bowie knife."

"I assure you it is all right," Lord Lambeth replied. "You know the
Americans come to these big hotels to make acquaintances."

"I know nothing about it, and neither do you," said his kinsman,
who, like a clever man, had begun to perceive that the observation of
American society demanded a readjustment of one's standard.

"Hang it, then let's find out!" cried Lord Lambeth with some impatience.
"You know I don't want to miss anything."

"We will find out," said Percy Beaumont very reasonably. "We will go and
see Mrs. Westgate and make all proper inquiries."

And so the two inquiring Englishmen, who had this lady's address
inscribed in her husband's hand upon a card, descended from the veranda
of the big hotel and took their way, according to direction, along a
large straight road, past a series of fresh-looking villas embosomed
in shrubs and flowers and enclosed in an ingenious variety of wooden
palings. The morning was brilliant and cool, the villas were smart
and snug, and the walk of the young travelers was very entertaining.
Everything looked as if it had received a coat of fresh paint the day
before--the red roofs, the green shutters, the clean, bright browns and
buffs of the housefronts. The flower beds on the little lawns seemed to
sparkle in the radiant air, and the gravel in the short carriage sweeps
to flash and twinkle. Along the road came a hundred little
basket phaetons, in which, almost always, a couple of ladies were
sitting--ladies in white dresses and long white gloves, holding the
reins and looking at the two Englishmen, whose nationality was not
elusive, through thick blue veils tied tightly about their faces as if
to guard their complexions. At last the young men came within sight of
the sea again, and then, having interrogated a gardener over the paling
of a villa, they turned into an open gate. Here they found themselves
face to face with the ocean and with a very picturesque structure,
resembling a magnified chalet, which was perched upon a green embankment
just above it. The house had a veranda of extraordinary width all around
it and a great many doors and windows standing open to the veranda.
These various apertures had, in common, such an accessible, hospitable
air, such a breezy flutter within of light curtains, such expansive
thresholds and reassuring interiors, that our friends hardly knew which
was the regular entrance, and, after hesitating a moment, presented
themselves at one of the windows. The room within was dark, but in
a moment a graceful figure vaguely shaped itself in the rich-looking
gloom, and a lady came to meet them. Then they saw that she had been
seated at a table writing, and that she had heard them and had got up.
She stepped out into the light; she wore a frank, charming smile, with
which she held out her hand to Percy Beaumont.

"Oh, you must be Lord Lambeth and Mr. Beaumont," she said. "I have heard
from my husband that you would come. I am extremely glad to see you."
And she shook hands with each of her visitors. Her visitors were a
little shy, but they had very good manners; they responded with smiles
and exclamations, and they apologized for not knowing the front door.
The lady rejoined, with vivacity, that when she wanted to see people
very much she did not insist upon those distinctions, and that Mr.
Westgate had written to her of his English friends in terms that made
her really anxious. "He said you were so terribly prostrated," said Mrs.
Westgate.

"Oh, you mean by the heat?" replied Percy Beaumont. "We were
rather knocked up, but we feel wonderfully better. We had such a
jolly--a--voyage down here. It's so very good of you to mind."

"Yes, it's so very kind of you," murmured Lord Lambeth.

Mrs. Westgate stood smiling; she was extremely pretty. "Well, I did
mind," she said; "and I thought of sending for you this morning to the
Ocean House. I am very glad you are better, and I am charmed you have
arrived. You must come round to the other side of the piazza." And she
led the way, with a light, smooth step, looking back at the young men
and smiling.

The other side of the piazza was, as Lord Lambeth presently remarked, a
very jolly place. It was of the most liberal proportions, and with its
awnings, its fanciful chairs, its cushions and rugs, its view of the
ocean, close at hand, tumbling along the base of the low cliffs whose
level tops intervened in lawnlike smoothness, it formed a charming
complement to the drawing room. As such it was in course of use at the
present moment; it was occupied by a social circle. There were several
ladies and two or three gentlemen, to whom Mrs. Westgate proceeded to
introduce the distinguished strangers. She mentioned a great many names
very freely and distinctly; the young Englishmen, shuffling about and
bowing, were rather bewildered. But at last they were provided
with chairs--low, wicker chairs, gilded, and tied with a great many
ribbons--and one of the ladies (a very young person, with a little snub
nose and several dimples) offered Percy Beaumont a fan. The fan was also
adorned with pink love knots; but Percy Beaumont declined it, although
he was very hot. Presently, however, it became cooler; the breeze from
the sea was delicious, the view was charming, and the people sitting
there looked exceedingly fresh and comfortable. Several of the ladies
seemed to be young girls, and the gentlemen were slim, fair youths,
such as our friends had seen the day before in New York. The ladies were
working upon bands of tapestry, and one of the young men had an open
book in his lap. Beaumont afterward learned from one of the ladies that
this young man had been reading aloud, that he was from Boston and was
very fond of reading aloud. Beaumont said it was a great pity that they
had interrupted him; he should like so much (from all he had heard) to
hear a Bostonian read. Couldn't the young man be induced to go on?

"Oh no," said his informant very freely; "he wouldn't be able to get the
young ladies to attend to him now."

There was something very friendly, Beaumont perceived, in the attitude
of the company; they looked at the young Englishmen with an air of
animated sympathy and interest; they smiled, brightly and unanimously,
at everything either of the visitors said. Lord Lambeth and his
companion felt that they were being made very welcome. Mrs. Westgate
seated herself between them, and, talking a great deal to each, they had
occasion to observe that she was as pretty as their friend Littledale
had promised. She was thirty years old, with the eyes and the smile of
a girl of seventeen, and she was extremely light and graceful, elegant,
exquisite. Mrs. Westgate was extremely spontaneous. She was very
frank and demonstrative and appeared always--while she looked at
you delightedly with her beautiful young eyes--to be making sudden
confessions and concessions, after momentary hesitations.

"We shall expect to see a great deal of you," she said to Lord Lambeth
with a kind of joyous earnestness. "We are very fond of Englishmen here;
that is, there are a great many we have been fond of. After a day or
two you must come and stay with us; we hope you will stay a long time.
Newport's a very nice place when you come really to know it, when you
know plenty of people. Of course you and Mr. Beaumont will have no
difficulty about that. Englishmen are very well received here; there are
almost always two or three of them about. I think they always like it,
and I must say I should think they would. They receive ever so much
attention. I must say I think they sometimes get spoiled; but I am sure
you and Mr. Beaumont are proof against that. My husband tells me you
are a friend of Captain Littledale; he was such a charming man. He made
himself most agreeable here, and I am sure I wonder he didn't stay.
It couldn't have been pleasanter for him in his own country, though,
I suppose, it is very pleasant in England, for English people. I don't
know myself; I have been there very little. I have been a great deal
abroad, but I am always on the Continent. I must say I'm extremely fond
of Paris; you know we Americans always are; we go there when we die. Did
you ever hear that before? That was said by a great wit, I mean the good
Americans; but we are all good; you'll see that for yourself. All I know
of England is London, and all I know of London is that place on that
little corner, you know, where you buy jackets--jackets with that coarse
braid and those big buttons. They make very good jackets in London, I
will do you the justice to say that. And some people like the hats; but
about the hats I was always a heretic; I always got my hats in Paris.
You can't wear an English hat--at least I never could--unless you dress
your hair a l'Anglaise; and I must say that is a talent I have never
possessed. In Paris they will make things to suit your peculiarities;
but in England I think you like much more to have--how shall I say
it?--one thing for everybody. I mean as regards dress. I don't know
about other things; but I have always supposed that in other things
everything was different. I mean according to the people--according to
the classes, and all that. I am afraid you will think that I don't take
a very favorable view; but you know you can't take a very favorable view
in Dover Street in the month of November. That has always been my fate.
Do you know Jones's Hotel in Dover Street? That's all I know of England.
Of course everyone admits that the English hotels are your weak point.
There was always the most frightful fog; I couldn't see to try my things
on. When I got over to America--into the light--I usually found they
were twice too big. The next time I mean to go in the season; I think
I shall go next year. I want very much to take my sister; she has never
been to England. I don't know whether you know what I mean by saying
that the Englishmen who come here sometimes get spoiled. I mean that
they take things as a matter of course--things that are done for them.
Now, naturally, they are only a matter of course when the Englishmen are
very nice. But, of course, they are almost always very nice. Of course
this isn't nearly such an interesting country as England; there are not
nearly so many things to see, and we haven't your country life. I have
never seen anything of your country life; when I am in Europe I am
always on the Continent. But I have heard a great deal about it; I know
that when you are among yourselves in the country you have the most
beautiful time. Of course we have nothing of that sort, we have nothing
on that scale. I don't apologize, Lord Lambeth; some Americans are
always apologizing; you must have noticed that. We have the reputation
of always boasting and bragging and waving the American flag; but I must
say that what strikes me is that we are perpetually making excuses and
trying to smooth things over. The American flag has quite gone out of
fashion; it's very carefully folded up, like an old tablecloth. Why
should we apologize? The English never apologize--do they? No; I
must say I never apologize. You must take us as we come--with all our
imperfections on our heads. Of course we haven't your country life, and
your old ruins, and your great estates, and your leisure class, and all
that. But if we haven't, I should think you might find it a pleasant
change--I think any country is pleasant where they have pleasant
manners. Captain Littledale told me he had never seen such pleasant
manners as at Newport, and he had been a great deal in European society.
Hadn't he been in the diplomatic service? He told me the dream of his
life was to get appointed to a diplomatic post in Washington. But he
doesn't seem to have succeeded. I suppose that in England promotion--and
all that sort of thing--is fearfully slow. With us, you know, it's a
great deal too fast. You see, I admit our drawbacks. But I must confess
I think Newport is an ideal place. I don't know anything like it
anywhere. Captain Littledale told me he didn't know anything like it
anywhere. It's entirely different from most watering places; it's a
most charming life. I must say I think that when one goes to a foreign
country one ought to enjoy the differences. Of course there are
differences, otherwise what did one come abroad for? Look for your
pleasure in the differences, Lord Lambeth; that's the way to do it;
and then I am sure you will find American society--at least Newport
society--most charming and most interesting. I wish very much my husband
were here; but he's dreadfully confined to New York. I suppose you
think that is very strange--for a gentleman. But you see we haven't any
leisure class."

Mrs. Westgate's discourse, delivered in a soft, sweet voice, flowed
on like a miniature torrent, and was interrupted by a hundred
little smiles, glances, and gestures, which might have figured the
irregularities and obstructions of such a stream. Lord Lambeth listened
to her with, it must be confessed, a rather ineffectual attention,
although he indulged in a good many little murmurs and ejaculations
of assent and deprecation. He had no great faculty for apprehending
generalizations. There were some three or four indeed which, in the
play of his own intelligence, he had originated, and which had seemed
convenient at the moment; but at the present time he could hardly have
been said to follow Mrs. Westgate as she darted gracefully about in the
sea of speculation. Fortunately she asked for no especial rejoinder, for
she looked about at the rest of the company as well, and smiled at Percy
Beaumont, on the other side of her, as if he too much understand her and
agree with her. He was rather more successful than his companion; for
besides being, as we know, cleverer, his attention was not vaguely
distracted by close vicinity to a remarkably interesting young girl,
with dark hair and blue eyes. This was the case with Lord Lambeth, to
whom it occurred after a while that the young girl with blue eyes and
dark hair was the pretty sister of whom Mrs. Westgate had spoken. She
presently turned to him with a remark which established her identity.

"It's a great pity you couldn't have brought my brother-in-law with you.
It's a great shame he should be in New York in these days."

"Oh, yes; it's so very hot," said Lord Lambeth.

"It must be dreadful," said the young girl.

"I daresay he is very busy," Lord Lambeth observed.

"The gentlemen in America work too much," the young girl went on.

"Oh, do they? I daresay they like it," said her interlocutor.

"I don't like it. One never sees them."

"Don't you, really?" asked Lord Lambeth. "I shouldn't have fancied
that."

"Have you come to study American manners?" asked the young girl.

"Oh, I don't know. I just came over for a lark. I haven't got long."
Here there was a pause, and Lord Lambeth began again. "But Mr. Westgate
will come down here, will not he?"

"I certainly hope he will. He must help to entertain you and Mr.
Beaumont."

Lord Lambeth looked at her a little with his handsome brown eyes. "Do
you suppose he would have come down with us if we had urged him?"

Mr. Westgate's sister-in-law was silent a moment, and then, "I daresay
he would," she answered.

"Really!" said the young Englishman. "He was immensely civil to Beaumont
and me," he added.

"He is a dear good fellow," the young lady rejoined, "and he is a
perfect husband. But all Americans are that," she continued, smiling.

"Really!" Lord Lambeth exclaimed again and wondered whether all American
ladies had such a passion for generalizing as these two.

He sat there a good while: there was a great deal of talk; it was all
very friendly and lively and jolly. Everyone present, sooner or
later, said something to him, and seemed to make a particular point of
addressing him by name. Two or three other persons came in, and there
was a shifting of seats and changing of places; the gentlemen all
entered into intimate conversation with the two Englishmen, made them
urgent offers of hospitality, and hoped they might frequently be of
service to them. They were afraid Lord Lambeth and Mr. Beaumont were not
very comfortable at their hotel; that it was not, as one of them said,
"so private as those dear little English inns of yours." This last
gentleman went on to say that unfortunately, as yet, perhaps, privacy
was not quite so easily obtained in America as might be desired; still,
he continued, you could generally get it by paying for it; in fact, you
could get everything in America nowadays by paying for it. American life
was certainly growing a great deal more private; it was growing very
much like England. Everything at Newport, for instance, was thoroughly
private; Lord Lambeth would probably be struck with that. It was also
represented to the strangers that it mattered very little whether their
hotel was agreeable, as everyone would want them to make visits; they
would stay with other people, and, in any case, they would be a great
deal at Mrs. Westgate's. They would find that very charming; it was
the pleasantest house in Newport. It was a pity Mr. Westgate was always
away; he was a man of the highest ability--very acute, very acute. He
worked like a horse, and he left his wife--well, to do about as she
liked. He liked her to enjoy herself, and she seemed to know how. She
was extremely brilliant and a splendid talker. Some people preferred her
sister; but Miss Alden was very different; she was in a different style
altogether. Some people even thought her prettier, and, certainly, she
was not so sharp. She was more in the Boston style; she had lived a
great deal in Boston, and she was very highly educated. Boston girls, it
was propounded, were more like English young ladies.

Lord Lambeth had presently a chance to test the truth of this
proposition, for on the company rising in compliance with a suggestion
from their hostess that they should walk down to the rocks and look
at the sea, the young Englishman again found himself, as they strolled
across the grass, in proximity to Mrs. Westgate's sister. Though she was
but a girl of twenty, she appeared to feel the obligation to exert an
active hospitality; and this was, perhaps, the more to be noticed as she
seemed by nature a reserved and retiring person, and had little of her
sister's fraternizing quality. She was perhaps rather too thin, and she
was a little pale; but as she moved slowly over the grass, with her arms
hanging at her sides, looking gravely for a moment at the sea and then
brightly, for all her gravity, at him, Lord Lambeth thought her at least
as pretty as Mrs. Westgate, and reflected that if this was the Boston
style the Boston style was very charming. He thought she looked very
clever; he could imagine that she was highly educated; but at the same
time she seemed gentle and graceful. For all her cleverness, however,
he felt that she had to think a little what to say; she didn't say the
first thing that came into her head; he had come from a different part
of the world and from a different society, and she was trying to adapt
her conversation. The others were scattering themselves near the rocks;
Mrs. Westgate had charge of Percy Beaumont.

"Very jolly place, isn't it?" said Lord Lambeth. "It's a very jolly
place to sit."

"Very charming," said the young girl. "I often sit here; there are all
kinds of cozy corners--as if they had been made on purpose."

"Ah! I suppose you have had some of them made," said the young man.

Miss Alden looked at him a moment. "Oh no, we have had nothing made.
It's pure nature."

"I should think you would have a few little benches--rustic seats and
that sort of thing. It might be so jolly to sit here, you know," Lord
Lambeth went on.

"I am afraid we haven't so many of those things as you," said the young
girl thoughtfully.

"I daresay you go in for pure nature, as you were saying. Nature over
here must be so grand, you know." And Lord Lambeth looked about him.

The little coast line hereabouts was very pretty, but it was not at all
grand, and Miss Alden appeared to rise to a perception of this fact.
"I am afraid it seems to you very rough," she said. "It's not like the
coast scenery in Kingsley's novels."

"Ah, the novels always overdo it, you know," Lord Lambeth rejoined. "You
must not go by the novels."

They were wandering about a little on the rocks, and they stopped and
looked down into a narrow chasm where the rising tide made a curious
bellowing sound. It was loud enough to prevent their hearing each other,
and they stood there for some moments in silence. The young girl looked
at her companion, observing him attentively, but covertly, as women,
even when very young, know how to do. Lord Lambeth repaid observation;
tall, straight, and strong, he was handsome as certain young Englishmen,
and certain young Englishmen almost alone, are handsome; with a perfect
finish of feature and a look of intellectual repose and gentle good
temper which seemed somehow to be consequent upon his well-cut nose and
chin. And to speak of Lord Lambeth's expression of intellectual repose
is not simply a civil way of saying that he looked stupid. He was
evidently not a young man of an irritable imagination; he was not, as
he would himself have said, tremendously clever; but though there was a
kind of appealing dullness in his eye, he looked thoroughly reasonable
and competent, and his appearance proclaimed that to be a nobleman,
an athlete, and an excellent fellow was a sufficiently brilliant
combination of qualities. The young girl beside him, it may be attested
without further delay, thought him the handsomest young man she had ever
seen; and Bessie Alden's imagination, unlike that of her companion,
was irritable. He, however, was also making up his mind that she was
uncommonly pretty.

"I daresay it's very gay here, that you have lots of balls and parties,"
he said; for, if he was not tremendously clever, he rather prided
himself on having, with women, a sufficiency of conversation.

"Oh, yes, there is a great deal going on," Bessie Alden replied. "There
are not so many balls, but there are a good many other things. You will
see for yourself; we live rather in the midst of it."

"It's very kind of you to say that. But I thought you Americans were
always dancing."

"I suppose we dance a good deal; but I have never seen much of it. We
don't do it much, at any rate, in summer. And I am sure," said Bessie
Alden, "that we don't have so many balls as you have in England."

"Really!" exclaimed Lord Lambeth. "Ah, in England it all depends, you
know."

"You will not think much of our gaieties," said the young girl, looking
at him with a little mixture of interrogation and decision which was
peculiar to her. The interrogation seemed earnest and the decision
seemed arch; but the mixture, at any rate, was charming. "Those things,
with us, are much less splendid than in England."

"I fancy you don't mean that," said Lord Lambeth, laughing.

"I assure you I mean everything I say," the young girl declared.
"Certainly, from what I have read about English society, it is very
different."

"Ah well, you know," said her companion, "those things are often
described by fellows who know nothing about them. You mustn't mind what
you read."

"Oh, I SHALL mind what I read!" Bessie Alden rejoined. "When I read
Thackeray and George Eliot, how can I help minding them?"

"Ah well, Thackeray, and George Eliot," said the young nobleman; "I
haven't read much of them."

"Don't you suppose they know about society?" asked Bessie Alden.

"Oh, I daresay they know; they were so very clever. But these
fashionable novels," said Lord Lambeth, "they are awful rot, you know."

His companion looked at him a moment with her dark blue eyes, and then
she looked down in the chasm where the water was tumbling about. "Do you
mean Mrs. Gore, for instance?" she said presently, raising her eyes.

"I am afraid I haven't read that, either," was the young man's
rejoinder, laughing a little and blushing. "I am afraid you'll think I
am not very intellectual."

"Reading Mrs. Gore is no proof of intellect. But I like reading
everything about English life--even poor books. I am so curious about
it."

"Aren't ladies always curious?" asked the young man jestingly.

But Bessie Alden appeared to desire to answer his question seriously. "I
don't think so--I don't think we are enough so--that we care about many
things. So it's all the more of a compliment," she added, "that I should
want to know so much about England."

The logic here seemed a little close; but Lord Lambeth, made conscious
of a compliment, found his natural modesty just at hand. "I am sure you
know a great deal more than I do."

"I really think I know a great deal--for a person who has never been
there."

"Have you really never been there?" cried Lord Lambeth. "Fancy!"

"Never--except in imagination," said the young girl.

"Fancy!" repeated her companion. "But I daresay you'll go soon, won't
you?"

"It's the dream of my life!" declared Bessie Alden, smiling.

"But your sister seems to know a tremendous lot about London," Lord
Lambeth went on.

The young girl was silent a moment. "My sister and I are two very
different persons," she presently said. "She has been a great deal in
Europe. She has been in England several times. She has known a great
many English people."

"But you must have known some, too," said Lord Lambeth.

"I don't think that I have ever spoken to one before. You are the first
Englishman that--to my knowledge--I have ever talked with."

Bessie Alden made this statement with a certain gravity--almost, as it
seemed to Lord Lambeth, an impressiveness. Attempts at impressiveness
always made him feel awkward, and he now began to laugh and swing his
stick. "Ah, you would have been sure to know!" he said. And then he
added, after an instant, "I'm sorry I am not a better specimen."

The young girl looked away; but she smiled, laying aside her
impressiveness. "You must remember that you are only a beginning," she
said. Then she retraced her steps, leading the way back to the lawn,
where they saw Mrs. Westgate come toward them with Percy Beaumont still
at her side. "Perhaps I shall go to England next year," Miss Alden
continued; "I want to, immensely. My sister is going to Europe, and she
has asked me to go with her. If we go, I shall make her stay as long as
possible in London."

"Ah, you must come in July," said Lord Lambeth. "That's the time when
there is most going on."

"I don't think I can wait till July," the young girl rejoined. "By the
first of May I shall be very impatient." They had gone further, and Mrs.
Westgate and her companion were near them. "Kitty," said Miss Alden,
"I have given out that we are going to London next May. So please to
conduct yourself accordingly."

Percy Beaumont wore a somewhat animated--even a slightly irritated--air.
He was by no means so handsome a man as his cousin, although in his
cousin's absence he might have passed for a striking specimen of the
tall, muscular, fair-bearded, clear-eyed Englishman. Just now Beaumont's
clear eyes, which were small and of a pale gray color, had a rather
troubled light, and, after glancing at Bessie Alden while she spoke,
he rested them upon his kinsman. Mrs. Westgate meanwhile, with her
superfluously pretty gaze, looked at everyone alike.

"You had better wait till the time comes," she said to her sister.
"Perhaps next May you won't care so much about London. Mr. Beaumont
and I," she went on, smiling at her companion, "have had a tremendous
discussion. We don't agree about anything. It's perfectly delightful."

"Oh, I say, Percy!" exclaimed Lord Lambeth.

"I disagree," said Beaumont, stroking down his back hair, "even to the
point of not thinking it delightful."

"Oh, I say!" cried Lord Lambeth again.

"I don't see anything delightful in my disagreeing with Mrs. Westgate,"
said Percy Beaumont.

"Well, I do!" Mrs. Westgate declared; and she turned to her sister. "You
know you have to go to town. The phaeton is there. You had better take
Lord Lambeth."

At this point Percy Beaumont certainly looked straight at his kinsman;
he tried to catch his eye. But Lord Lambeth would not look at him; his
own eyes were better occupied. "I shall be very happy," cried Bessie
Alden. "I am only going to some shops. But I will drive you about and
show you the place."

"An American woman who respects herself," said Mrs. Westgate, turning to
Beaumont with her bright expository air, "must buy something every day
of her life. If she can not do it herself, she must send out some
member of her family for the purpose. So Bessie goes forth to fulfill my
mission."

The young girl had walked away, with Lord Lambeth by her side, to whom
she was talking still; and Percy Beaumont watched them as they passed
toward the house. "She fulfills her own mission," he presently said;
"that of being a very attractive young lady."

"I don't know that I should say very attractive," Mrs. Westgate
rejoined. "She is not so much that as she is charming when you really
know her. She is very shy."

"Oh, indeed!" said Percy Beaumont.

"Extremely shy," Mrs. Westgate repeated. "But she is a dear good girl;
she is a charming species of girl. She is not in the least a flirt; that
isn't at all her line; she doesn't know the alphabet of that sort of
thing. She is very simple, very serious. She has lived a great deal in
Boston, with another sister of mine--the eldest of us--who married a
Bostonian. She is very cultivated, not at all like me; I am not in the
least cultivated. She has studied immensely and read everything; she is
what they call in Boston 'thoughtful.'"

"A rum sort of girl for Lambeth to get hold of!" his lordship's kinsman
privately reflected.

"I really believe," Mrs. Westgate continued, "that the most charming
girl in the world is a Boston superstructure upon a New York fonds; or
perhaps a New York superstructure upon a Boston fonds. At any rate, it's
the mixture," said Mrs. Westgate, who continued to give Percy Beaumont a
great deal of information.

Lord Lambeth got into a little basket phaeton with Bessie Alden, and she
drove him down the long avenue, whose extent he had measured on foot a
couple of hours before, into the ancient town, as it was called in that
part of the world, of Newport. The ancient town was a curious affair--a
collection of fresh-looking little wooden houses, painted white,
scattered over a hillside and clustered about a long straight street
paved with enormous cobblestones. There were plenty of shops--a large
proportion of which appeared to be those of fruit vendors, with piles
of huge watermelons and pumpkins stacked in front of them; and, drawn up
before the shops, or bumping about on the cobblestones, were innumerable
other basket phaetons freighted with ladies of high fashion, who greeted
each other from vehicle to vehicle and conversed on the edge of the
pavement in a manner that struck Lord Lambeth as demonstrative, with a
great many "Oh, my dears," and little quick exclamations and caresses.
His companion went into seventeen shops--he amused himself with counting
them--and accumulated at the bottom of the phaeton a pile of bundles
that hardly left the young Englishman a place for his feet. As she had
no groom nor footman, he sat in the phaeton to hold the ponies, where,
although he was not a particularly acute observer, he saw much to
entertain him--especially the ladies just mentioned, who wandered up
and down with the appearance of a kind of aimless intentness, as if they
were looking for something to buy, and who, tripping in and out of
their vehicles, displayed remarkably pretty feet. It all seemed to Lord
Lambeth very odd, and bright, and gay. Of course, before they got back
to the villa, he had had a great deal of desultory conversation with
Bessie Alden.

The young Englishmen spent the whole of that day and the whole of
many successive days in what the French call the intimite of their new
friends. They agreed that it was extremely jolly, that they had never
known anything more agreeable. It is not proposed to narrate minutely
the incidents of their sojourn on this charming shore; though if it
were convenient I might present a record of impressions nonetheless
delectable that they were not exhaustively analyzed. Many of them still
linger in the minds of our travelers, attended by a train of harmonious
images--images of brilliant mornings on lawns and piazzas that
overlooked the sea; of innumerable pretty girls; of infinite lounging
and talking and laughing and flirting and lunching and dining; of
universal friendliness and frankness; of occasions on which they knew
everyone and everything and had an extraordinary sense of ease; of
drives and rides in the late afternoon over gleaming beaches, on long
sea roads, beneath a sky lighted up by marvelous sunsets; of suppers, on
the return, informal, irregular, agreeable; of evenings at open windows
or on the perpetual verandas, in the summer starlight, above the warm
Atlantic. The young Englishmen were introduced to everybody, entertained
by everybody, intimate with everybody. At the end of three days they
had removed their luggage from the hotel and had gone to stay with
Mrs. Westgate--a step to which Percy Beaumont at first offered some
conscientious opposition. I call his opposition conscientious, because
it was founded upon some talk that he had had, on the second day, with
Bessie Alden. He had indeed had a good deal of talk with her, for she
was not literally always in conversation with Lord Lambeth. He had
meditated upon Mrs. Westgate's account of her sister, and he discovered
for himself that the young lady was clever, and appeared to have read a
great deal. She seemed very nice, though he could not make out, as Mrs.
Westgate had said, she was shy. If she was shy, she carried it off very
well.

"Mr. Beaumont," she had said, "please tell me something about Lord
Lambeth's family. How would you say it in England--his position?"

"His position?" Percy Beaumont repeated.

"His rank, or whatever you call it. Unfortunately we haven't got a
PEERAGE, like the people in Thackeray."

"That's a great pity," said Beaumont. "You would find it all set forth
there so much better than I can do it."

"He is a peer, then?"

"Oh, yes, he is a peer."

"And has he any other title than Lord Lambeth?"

"His title is the Marquis of Lambeth," said Beaumont; and then he was
silent. Bessie Alden appeared to be looking at him with interest. "He is
the son of the Duke of Bayswater," he added presently.

"The eldest son?"

"The only son."

"And are his parents living?"

"Oh yes; if his father were not living he would be a duke."

"So that when his father dies," pursued Bessie Alden with more
simplicity than might have been expected in a clever girl, "he will
become Duke of Bayswater?"

"Of course," said Percy Beaumont. "But his father is in excellent
health."

"And his mother?"

Beaumont smiled a little. "The duchess is uncommonly robust."

"And has he any sisters?"

"Yes, there are two."

"And what are they called?"

"One of them is married. She is the Countess of Pimlico."

"And the other?"

"The other is unmarried; she is plain Lady Julia."

Bessie Alden looked at him a moment. "Is she very plain?"

Beaumont began to laugh again. "You would not find her so handsome
as her brother," he said; and it was after this that he attempted
to dissuade the heir of the Duke of Bayswater from accepting Mrs.
Westgate's invitation. "Depend upon it," he said, "that girl means to
try for you."

"It seems to me you are doing your best to make a fool of me," the
modest young nobleman answered.

"She has been asking me," said Beaumont, "all about your people and your
possessions."

"I am sure it is very good of her!" Lord Lambeth rejoined.

"Well, then," observed his companion, "if you go, you go with your eyes
open."

"Damn my eyes!" exclaimed Lord Lambeth. "If one is to be a dozen times
a day at the house, it is a great deal more convenient to sleep there. I
am sick of traveling up and down this beastly avenue."

Since he had determined to go, Percy Beaumont would, of course, have
been very sorry to allow him to go alone; he was a man of conscience,
and he remembered his promise to the duchess. It was obviously the
memory of this promise that made him say to his companion a couple of
days later that he rather wondered he should be so fond of that girl.

"In the first place, how do you know how fond I am of her?" asked Lord
Lambeth. "And, in the second place, why shouldn't I be fond of her?"

"I shouldn't think she would be in your line."

"What do you call my 'line'? You don't set her down as 'fast'?"

"Exactly so. Mrs. Westgate tells me that there is no such thing as the
'fast girl' in America; that it's an English invention, and that the
term has no meaning here."

"All the better. It's an animal I detest."

"You prefer a bluestocking."

"Is that what you call Miss Alden?"

"Her sister tells me," said Percy Beaumont, "that she is tremendously
literary."

"I don't know anything about that. She is certainly very clever."

"Well," said Beaumont, "I should have supposed you would have found that
sort of thing awfully slow."

"In point of fact," Lord Lambeth rejoined, "I find it uncommonly
lively."

After this, Percy Beaumont held his tongue; but on the 10th of August
he wrote to the Duchess of Bayswater. He was, as I have said, a man of
conscience, and he had a strong, incorruptible sense of the proprieties
of life. His kinsman, meanwhile, was having a great deal of talk with
Bessie Alden--on the red sea rocks beyond the lawn; in the course of
long island rides, with a slow return in the glowing twilight; on the
deep veranda late in the evening. Lord Lambeth, who had stayed at many
houses, had never stayed at a house in which it was possible for a young
man to converse so frequently with a young lady. This young lady
no longer applied to Percy Beaumont for information concerning his
lordship. She addressed herself directly to the young nobleman. She
asked him a great many questions, some of which bored him a little; for
he took no pleasure in talking about himself.

"Lord Lambeth," said Bessie Alden, "are you a hereditary legislator?"

"Oh, I say!" cried Lord Lambeth, "don't make me call myself such names
as that."

"But you are a member of Parliament," said the young girl.

"I don't like the sound of that, either."

"Don't you sit in the House of Lords?" Bessie Alden went on.

"Very seldom," said Lord Lambeth.

"Is it an important position?" she asked.

"Oh, dear, no," said Lord Lambeth.

"I should think it would be very grand," said Bessie Alden, "to possess,
simply by an accident of birth, the right to make laws for a great
nation."

"Ah, but one doesn't make laws. It's a great humbug."

"I don't believe that," the young girl declared. "It must be a great
privilege, and I should think that if one thought of it in the right
way--from a high point of view--it would be very inspiring."

"The less one thinks of it, the better," Lord Lambeth affirmed.

"I think it's tremendous," said Bessie Alden; and on another occasion
she asked him if he had any tenantry. Hereupon it was that, as I have
said, he was a little bored.

"Do you want to buy up their leases?" he asked.

"Well, have you got any livings?" she demanded.

"Oh, I say!" he cried. "Have you got a clergyman that is looking out?"
But she made him tell her that he had a castle; he confessed to but one.
It was the place in which he had been born and brought up, and, as he
had an old-time liking for it, he was beguiled into describing it a
little and saying it was really very jolly. Bessie Alden listened with
great interest and declared that she would give the world to see such
a place. Whereupon--"It would be awfully kind of you to come and
stay there," said Lord Lambeth. He took a vague satisfaction in the
circumstance that Percy Beaumont had not heard him make the remark I
have just recorded.

Mr. Westgate all this time had not, as they said at Newport, "come on."
His wife more than once announced that she expected him on the morrow;
but on the morrow she wandered about a little, with a telegram in
her jeweled fingers, declaring it was very tiresome that his business
detained him in New York; that he could only hope the Englishmen were
having a good time. "I must say," said Mrs. Westgate, "that it is
no thanks to him if you are." And she went on to explain, while she
continued that slow-paced promenade which enabled her well-adjusted
skirts to display themselves so advantageously, that unfortunately in
America there was no leisure class. It was Lord Lambeth's theory, freely
propounded when the young men were together, that Percy Beaumont was
having a very good time with Mrs. Westgate, and that, under the pretext
of meeting for the purpose of animated discussion, they were indulging
in practices that imparted a shade of hypocrisy to the lady's regret for
her husband's absence.

"I assure you we are always discussing and differing," said Percy
Beaumont. "She is awfully argumentative. American ladies certainly don't
mind contradicting you. Upon my word I don't think I was ever treated so
by a woman before. She's so devilish positive."

Mrs. Westgate's positive quality, however, evidently had its
attractions, for Beaumont was constantly at his hostess's side. He
detached himself one day to the extent of going to New York to talk
over the Tennessee Central with Mr. Westgate; but he was absent only
forty-eight hours, during which, with Mr. Westgate's assistance, he
completely settled this piece of business. "They certainly do things
quickly in New York," he observed to his cousin; and he added that
Mr. Westgate had seemed very uneasy lest his wife should miss her
visitor--he had been in such an awful hurry to send him back to her.
"I'm afraid you'll never come up to an American husband, if that's what
the wives expect," he said to Lord Lambeth.

Mrs. Westgate, however, was not to enjoy much longer the entertainment
with which an indulgent husband had desired to keep her provided. On
the 21st of August Lord Lambeth received a telegram from his mother,
requesting him to return immediately to England; his father had been
taken ill, and it was his filial duty to come to him.

The young Englishman was visibly annoyed. "What the deuce does it mean?"
he asked of his kinsman. "What am I to do?"

Percy Beaumont was annoyed as well; he had deemed it his duty, as I have
narrated, to write to the duchess, but he had not expected that this
distinguished woman would act so promptly upon his hint. "It means,"
he said, "that your father is laid up. I don't suppose it's anything
serious; but you have no option. Take the first steamer; but don't be
alarmed."

Lord Lambeth made his farewells; but the few last words that he
exchanged with Bessie Alden are the only ones that have a place in our
record. "Of course I needn't assure you," he said, "that if you should
come to England next year, I expect to be the first person that you
inform of it."

Bessie Alden looked at him a little, and she smiled. "Oh, if we come to
London," she answered, "I should think you would hear of it."

Percy Beaumont returned with his cousin, and his sense of duty compelled
him, one windless afternoon, in mid-Atlantic, to say to Lord Lambeth
that he suspected that the duchess's telegram was in part the result
of something he himself had written to her. "I wrote to her--as I
explicitly notified you I had promised to do--that you were extremely
interested in a little American girl."

Lord Lambeth was extremely angry, and he indulged for some moments
in the simple language of indignation. But I have said that he was a
reasonable young man, and I can give no better proof of it than the fact
that he remarked to his companion at the end of half an hour, "You were
quite right, after all. I am very much interested in her. Only, to
be fair," he added, "you should have told my mother also that she is
not--seriously--interested in me."

Percy Beaumont gave a little laugh. "There is nothing so charming as
modesty in a young man in your position. That speech is a capital proof
that you are sweet on her."

"She is not interested--she is not!" Lord Lambeth repeated.

"My dear fellow," said his companion, "you are very far gone."





PART II


In point of fact, as Percy Beaumont would have said, Mrs. Westgate
disembarked on the 18th of May on the British coast. She was accompanied
by her sister, but she was not attended by any other member of her
family. To the deprivation of her husband's society Mrs. Westgate
was, however, habituated; she had made half a dozen journeys to Europe
without him, and she now accounted for his absence, to interrogative
friends on this side of the Atlantic, by allusion to the regrettable
but conspicuous fact that in America there was no leisure class. The
two ladies came up to London and alighted at Jones's Hotel, where Mrs.
Westgate, who had made on former occasions the most agreeable impression
at this establishment, received an obsequious greeting. Bessie Alden
had felt much excited about coming to England; she had expected the
"associations" would be very charming, that it would be an infinite
pleasure to rest her eyes upon the things she had read about in the
poets and historians. She was very fond of the poets and historians,
of the picturesque, of the past, of retrospect, of mementos and
reverberations of greatness; so that on coming into the English world,
where strangeness and familiarity would go hand in hand, she
was prepared for a multitude of fresh emotions. They began very
promptly--these tender, fluttering sensations; they began with the sight
of the beautiful English landscape, whose dark richness was quickened
and brightened by the season; with the carpeted fields and flowering
hedgerows, as she looked at them from the window of the train; with the
spires of the rural churches peeping above the rook-haunted treetops;
with the oak-studded parks, the ancient homes, the cloudy light,
the speech, the manners, the thousand differences. Mrs. Westgate's
impressions had, of course, much less novelty and keenness, and she gave
but a wandering attention to her sister's ejaculations and rhapsodies.

"You know my enjoyment of England is not so intellectual as Bessie's,"
she said to several of her friends in the course of her visit to this
country. "And yet if it is not intellectual, I can't say it is physical.
I don't think I can quite say what it is, my enjoyment of England." When
once it was settled that the two ladies should come abroad and should
spend a few weeks in England on their way to the Continent, they of
course exchanged a good many allusions to their London acquaintance.

"It will certainly be much nicer having friends there," Bessie Alden had
said one day as she sat on the sunny deck of the steamer at her sister's
feet on a large blue rug.

"Whom do you mean by friends?" Mrs. Westgate asked.

"All those English gentlemen whom you have known and entertained.
Captain Littledale, for instance. And Lord Lambeth and Mr. Beaumont,"
added Bessie Alden.

"Do you expect them to give us a very grand reception?"

Bessie reflected a moment; she was addicted, as we know, to reflection.
"Well, yes."

"My poor, sweet child," murmured her sister.

"What have I said that is so silly?" asked Bessie.

"You are a little too simple; just a little. It is very becoming, but it
pleases people at your expense."

"I am certainly too simple to understand you," said Bessie.

"Shall I tell you a story?" asked her sister.

"If you would be so good. That is what they do to amuse simple people."

Mrs. Westgate consulted her memory, while her companion sat gazing at
the shining sea. "Did you ever hear of the Duke of Green-Erin?"

"I think not," said Bessie.

"Well, it's no matter," her sister went on.

"It's a proof of my simplicity."

"My story is meant to illustrate that of some other people," said Mrs.
Westgate. "The Duke of Green-Erin is what they call in England a great
swell, and some five years ago he came to America. He spent most of his
time in New York, and in New York he spent his days and his nights at
the Butterworths'. You have heard, at least, of the Butterworths. BIEN.
They did everything in the world for him--they turned themselves inside
out. They gave him a dozen dinner parties and balls and were the means
of his being invited to fifty more. At first he used to come into Mrs.
Butterworth's box at the opera in a tweed traveling suit; but someone
stopped that. At any rate, he had a beautiful time, and they parted the
best friends in the world. Two years elapse, and the Butterworths come
abroad and go to London. The first thing they see in all the papers--in
England those things are in the most prominent place--is that the Duke
of Green-Erin has arrived in town for the Season. They wait a little,
and then Mr. Butterworth--as polite as ever--goes and leaves a card.
They wait a little more; the visit is not returned; they wait three
weeks--silence de mort--the Duke gives no sign. The Butterworths see
a lot of other people, put down the Duke of Green-Erin as a rude,
ungrateful man, and forget all about him. One fine day they go to Ascot
Races, and there they meet him face to face. He stares a moment and
then comes up to Mr. Butterworth, taking something from his
pocketbook--something which proves to be a banknote. 'I'm glad to see
you, Mr. Butterworth,' he says, 'so that I can pay you that ten pounds
I lost to you in New York. I saw the other day you remembered our bet;
here are the ten pounds, Mr. Butterworth. Goodbye, Mr. Butterworth.' And
off he goes, and that's the last they see of the Duke of Green-Erin."

"Is that your story?" asked Bessie Alden.

"Don't you think it's interesting?" her sister replied.

"I don't believe it," said the young girl.

"Ah," cried Mrs. Westgate, "you are not so simple after all! Believe it
or not, as you please; there is no smoke without fire."

"Is that the way," asked Bessie after a moment, "that you expect your
friends to treat you?"

"I defy them to treat me very ill, because I shall not give them the
opportunity. With the best will in the world, in that case they can't be
very offensive."

Bessie Alden was silent a moment. "I don't see what makes you talk that
way," she said. "The English are a great people."

"Exactly; and that is just the way they have grown great--by dropping
you when you have ceased to be useful. People say they are not clever;
but I think they are very clever."

"You know you have liked them--all the Englishmen you have seen," said
Bessie.

"They have liked me," her sister rejoined; "it would be more correct to
say that. And, of course, one likes that."

Bessie Alden resumed for some moments her studies in sea green. "Well,"
she said, "whether they like me or not, I mean to like them. And
happily," she added, "Lord Lambeth does not owe me ten pounds."

During the first few days after their arrival at Jones's Hotel our
charming Americans were much occupied with what they would have called
looking about them. They found occasion to make a large number of
purchases, and their opportunities for conversation were such only as
were offered by the deferential London shopmen. Bessie Alden, even
in driving from the station, took an immense fancy to the British
metropolis, and at the risk of exhibiting her as a young woman of vulgar
tastes it must be recorded that for a considerable period she desired no
higher pleasure than to drive about the crowded streets in a hansom cab.
To her attentive eyes they were full of a strange picturesque life, and
it is at least beneath the dignity of our historic muse to enumerate the
trivial objects and incidents which this simple young lady from Boston
found so entertaining. It may be freely mentioned, however, that
whenever, after a round of visits in Bond Street and Regent Street,
she was about to return with her sister to Jones's Hotel, she made an
earnest request that they should be driven home by way of Westminster
Abbey. She had begun by asking whether it would not be possible to take
the Tower on the way to their lodgings; but it happened that at a more
primitive stage of her culture Mrs. Westgate had paid a visit to this
venerable monument, which she spoke of ever afterward vaguely as a
dreadful disappointment; so that she expressed the liveliest disapproval
of any attempt to combine historical researches with the purchase of
hairbrushes and notepaper. The most she would consent to do in this line
was to spend half an hour at Madame Tussaud's, where she saw several
dusty wax effigies of members of the royal family. She told Bessie that
if she wished to go to the Tower she must get someone else to take her.
Bessie expressed hereupon an earnest disposition to go alone; but upon
this proposal as well Mrs. Westgate sprinkled cold water.

"Remember," she said, "that you are not in your innocent little Boston.
It is not a question of walking up and down Beacon Street." Then she
went on to explain that there were two classes of American girls in
Europe--those that walked about alone and those that did not. "You
happen to belong, my dear," she said to her sister, "to the class that
does not."

"It is only," answered Bessie, laughing, "because you happen to prevent
me." And she devoted much private meditation to this question of
effecting a visit to the Tower of London.

Suddenly it seemed as if the problem might be solved; the two ladies at
Jones's Hotel received a visit from Willie Woodley. Such was the social
appellation of a young American who had sailed from New York a few days
after their own departure, and who, having the privilege of intimacy
with them in that city, had lost no time, on his arrival in London,
in coming to pay them his respects. He had, in fact, gone to see them
directly after going to see his tailor, than which there can be no
greater exhibition of promptitude on the part of a young American who
has just alighted at the Charing Cross Hotel. He was a slim, pale youth,
of the most amiable disposition, famous for the skill with which he led
the "German" in New York. Indeed, by the young ladies who habitually
figured in this Terpsichorean revel he was believed to be "the best
dancer in the world"; it was in these terms that he was always spoken
of, and that his identity was indicated. He was the gentlest, softest
young man it was possible to meet; he was beautifully dressed--"in the
English style"--and he knew an immense deal about London. He had been
at Newport during the previous summer, at the time of our young
Englishmen's visit, and he took extreme pleasure in the society of
Bessie Alden, whom he always addressed as "Miss Bessie." She immediately
arranged with him, in the presence of her sister, that he should conduct
her to the scene of Anne Boleyn's execution.

"You may do as you please," said Mrs. Westgate. "Only--if you desire the
information--it is not the custom here for young ladies to knock about
London with young men."

"Miss Bessie has waltzed with me so often," observed Willie Woodley;
"she can surely go out with me in a hansom."

"I consider waltzing," said Mrs. Westgate, "the most innocent pleasure
of our time."

"It's a compliment to our time!" exclaimed the young man with a little
laugh, in spite of himself.

"I don't see why I should regard what is done here," said Bessie Alden.
"Why should I suffer the restrictions of a society of which I enjoy none
of the privileges?"

"That's very good--very good," murmured Willie Woodley.

"Oh, go to the Tower, and feel the ax, if you like," said Mrs. Westgate.
"I consent to your going with Mr. Woodley; but I should not let you go
with an Englishman."

"Miss Bessie wouldn't care to go with an Englishman!" Mr. Woodley
declared with a faint asperity that was, perhaps, not unnatural in a
young man, who, dressing in the manner that I have indicated and knowing
a great deal, as I have said, about London, saw no reason for drawing
these sharp distinctions. He agreed upon a day with Miss Bessie--a day
of that same week.

An ingenious mind might, perhaps, trace a connection between the young
girl's allusion to her destitution of social privileges and a question
she asked on the morrow as she sat with her sister at lunch.

"Don't you mean to write to--to anyone?" said Bessie.

"I wrote this morning to Captain Littledale," Mrs. Westgate replied.

"But Mr. Woodley said that Captain Littledale had gone to India."

"He said he thought he had heard so; he knew nothing about it."

For a moment Bessie Alden said nothing more; then, at last, "And don't
you intend to write to--to Mr. Beaumont?" she inquired.

"You mean to Lord Lambeth," said her sister.

"I said Mr. Beaumont because he was so good a friend of yours."

Mrs. Westgate looked at the young girl with sisterly candor. "I don't
care two straws for Mr. Beaumont."

"You were certainly very nice to him."

"I am nice to everyone," said Mrs. Westgate simply.

"To everyone but me," rejoined Bessie, smiling.

Her sister continued to look at her; then, at last, "Are you in love
with Lord Lambeth?" she asked.

The young girl stared a moment, and the question was apparently too
humorous even to make her blush. "Not that I know of," she answered.

"Because if you are," Mrs. Westgate went on, "I shall certainly not send
for him."

"That proves what I said," declared Bessie, smiling--"that you are not
nice to me."

"It would be a poor service, my dear child," said her sister.

"In what sense? There is nothing against Lord Lambeth that I know of."

Mrs. Westgate was silent a moment. "You ARE in love with him then?"

Bessie stared again; but this time she blushed a little. "Ah! if you
won't be serious," she answered, "we will not mention him again."

For some moments Lord Lambeth was not mentioned again, and it was Mrs.
Westgate who, at the end of this period, reverted to him. "Of course I
will let him know we are here, because I think he would be hurt--justly
enough--if we should go away without seeing him. It is fair to give
him a chance to come and thank me for the kindness we showed him. But I
don't want to seem eager."

"Neither do I," said Bessie with a little laugh.

"Though I confess," added her sister, "that I am curious to see how he
will behave."

"He behaved very well at Newport."

"Newport is not London. At Newport he could do as he liked; but here it
is another affair. He has to have an eye to consequences."

"If he had more freedom, then, at Newport," argued Bessie, "it is the
more to his credit that he behaved well; and if he has to be so careful
here, it is possible he will behave even better."

"Better--better," repeated her sister. "My dear child, what is your
point of view?"

"How do you mean--my point of view?"

"Don't you care for Lord Lambeth--a little?"

This time Bessie Alden was displeased; she slowly got up from the
table, turning her face away from her sister. "You will oblige me by not
talking so," she said.

Mrs. Westgate sat watching her for some moments as she moved slowly
about the room and went and stood at the window. "I will write to him
this afternoon," she said at last.

"Do as you please!" Bessie answered; and presently she turned round. "I
am not afraid to say that I like Lord Lambeth. I like him very much."

"He is not clever," Mrs. Westgate declared.

"Well, there have been clever people whom I have disliked," said Bessie
Alden; "so that I suppose I may like a stupid one. Besides, Lord Lambeth
is not stupid."

"Not so stupid as he looks!" exclaimed her sister, smiling.

"If I were in love with Lord Lambeth, as you said just now, it would be
bad policy on your part to abuse him."

"My dear child, don't give me lessons in policy!" cried Mrs. Westgate.
"The policy I mean to follow is very deep."

The young girl began to walk about the room again; then she stopped
before her sister. "I have never heard in the course of five minutes,"
she said, "so many hints and innuendoes. I wish you would tell me in
plain English what you mean."

"I mean that you may be much annoyed."

"That is still only a hint," said Bessie.

Her sister looked at her, hesitating an instant. "It will be said of you
that you have come after Lord Lambeth--that you followed him."

Bessie Alden threw back her pretty head like a startled hind, and a look
flashed into her face that made Mrs. Westgate rise from her chair. "Who
says such things as that?" she demanded.

"People here."

"I don't believe it," said Bessie.

"You have a very convenient faculty of doubt. But my policy will be, as
I say, very deep. I shall leave you to find out this kind of thing for
yourself."

Bessie fixed her eyes upon her sister, and Mrs. Westgate thought for
a moment there were tears in them. "Do they talk that way here?" she
asked.

"You will see. I shall leave you alone."

"Don't leave me alone," said Bessie Alden. "Take me away."

"No; I want to see what you make of it," her sister continued.

"I don't understand."

"You will understand after Lord Lambeth has come," said Mrs. Westgate
with a little laugh.

The two ladies had arranged that on this afternoon Willie Woodley should
go with them to Hyde Park, where Bessie Alden expected to derive much
entertainment from sitting on a little green chair, under the great
trees, beside Rotten Row. The want of a suitable escort had hitherto
rendered this pleasure inaccessible; but no escort now, for such an
expedition, could have been more suitable than their devoted young
countryman, whose mission in life, it might almost be said, was to find
chairs for ladies, and who appeared on the stroke of half-past five with
a white camellia in his buttonhole.

"I have written to Lord Lambeth, my dear," said Mrs. Westgate to her
sister, on coming into the room where Bessie Alden, drawing on her long
gray gloves, was entertaining their visitor.

Bessie said nothing, but Willie Woodley exclaimed that his lordship was
in town; he had seen his name in the Morning Post.

"Do you read the Morning Post?" asked Mrs. Westgate.

"Oh, yes; it's great fun," Willie Woodley affirmed.

"I want so to see it," said Bessie; "there is so much about it in
Thackeray."

"I will send it to you every morning," said Willie Woodley.

He found them what Bessie Alden thought excellent places, under the
great trees, beside the famous avenue whose humors had been made
familiar to the young girl's childhood by the pictures in Punch. The
day was bright and warm, and the crowd of riders and spectators, and the
great procession of carriages, were proportionately dense and brilliant.
The scene bore the stamp of the London Season at its height, and Bessie
Alden found more entertainment in it than she was able to express to
her companions. She sat silent, under her parasol, and her imagination,
according to its wont, let itself loose into the great changing
assemblage of striking and suggestive figures. They stirred up a host
of old impressions and preconceptions, and she found herself fitting a
history to this person and a theory to that, and making a place for them
all in her little private museum of types. But if she said little, her
sister on one side and Willie Woodley on the other expressed themselves
in lively alternation.

"Look at that green dress with blue flounces," said Mrs. Westgate.
"Quelle toilette!"

"That's the Marquis of Blackborough," said the young man--"the one in
the white coat. I heard him speak the other night in the House of Lords;
it was something about ramrods; he called them 'wamwods.' He's an awful
swell."

"Did you ever see anything like the way they are pinned back?" Mrs.
Westgate resumed. "They never know where to stop."

"They do nothing but stop," said Willie Woodley. "It prevents them from
walking. Here comes a great celebrity--Lady Beatrice Bellevue. She's
awfully fast; see what little steps she takes."

"Well, my dear," Mrs. Westgate pursued, "I hope you are getting some
ideas for your couturiere?"

"I am getting plenty of ideas," said Bessie, "but I don't know that my
couturiere would appreciate them."

Willie Woodley presently perceived a friend on horseback, who drove up
beside the barrier of the Row and beckoned to him. He went forward, and
the crowd of pedestrians closed about him, so that for some ten minutes
he was hidden from sight. At last he reappeared, bringing a gentleman
with him--a gentleman whom Bessie at first supposed to be his friend
dismounted. But at a second glance she found herself looking at Lord
Lambeth, who was shaking hands with her sister.

"I found him over there," said Willie Woodley, "and I told him you were
here."

And then Lord Lambeth, touching his hat a little, shook hands with
Bessie. "Fancy your being here!" he said. He was blushing and smiling;
he looked very handsome, and he had a kind of splendor that he had not
had in America. Bessie Alden's imagination, as we know, was just then in
exercise; so that the tall young Englishman, as he stood there looking
down at her, had the benefit of it. "He is handsomer and more splendid
than anything I have ever seen," she said to herself. And then she
remembered that he was a marquis, and she thought he looked like a
marquis.

"I say, you know," he cried, "you ought to have let a man know you were
here!"

"I wrote to you an hour ago," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Doesn't all the world know it?" asked Bessie, smiling.

"I assure you I didn't know it!" cried Lord Lambeth. "Upon my honor I
hadn't heard of it. Ask Woodley now; had I, Woodley?"

"Well, I think you are rather a humbug," said Willie Woodley.

"You don't believe that--do you, Miss Alden?" asked his lordship. "You
don't believe I'm a humbug, eh?"

"No," said Bessie, "I don't."

"You are too tall to stand up, Lord Lambeth," Mrs. Westgate observed.
"You are only tolerable when you sit down. Be so good as to get a
chair."

He found a chair and placed it sidewise, close to the two ladies. "If I
hadn't met Woodley I should never have found you," he went on. "Should
I, Woodley?"

"Well, I guess not," said the young American.

"Not even with my letter?" asked Mrs. Westgate.

"Ah, well, I haven't got your letter yet; I suppose I shall get it this
evening. It was awfully kind of you to write."

"So I said to Bessie," observed Mrs. Westgate.

"Did she say so, Miss Alden?" Lord Lambeth inquired. "I daresay you have
been here a month."

"We have been here three," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Have you been here three months?" the young man asked again of Bessie.

"It seems a long time," Bessie answered.

"I say, after that you had better not call me a humbug!" cried Lord
Lambeth. "I have only been in town three weeks; but you must have been
hiding away; I haven't seen you anywhere."

"Where should you have seen us--where should we have gone?" asked Mrs.
Westgate.

"You should have gone to Hurlingham," said Willie Woodley.

"No; let Lord Lambeth tell us," Mrs. Westgate insisted.

"There are plenty of places to go to," said Lord Lambeth; "each one
stupider than the other. I mean people's houses; they send you cards."

"No one has sent us cards," said Bessie.

"We are very quiet," her sister declared. "We are here as travelers."

"We have been to Madame Tussaud's," Bessie pursued.

"Oh, I say!" cried Lord Lambeth.

"We thought we should find your image there," said Mrs. Westgate--"yours
and Mr. Beaumont's."

"In the Chamber of Horrors?" laughed the young man.

"It did duty very well for a party," said Mrs. Westgate. "All the women
were decolletes, and many of the figures looked as if they could speak
if they tried."

"Upon my word," Lord Lambeth rejoined, "you see people at London parties
that look as if they couldn't speak if they tried."

"Do you think Mr. Woodley could find us Mr. Beaumont?" asked Mrs.
Westgate.

Lord Lambeth stared and looked round him. "I daresay he could. Beaumont
often comes here. Don't you think you could find him, Woodley? Make a
dive into the crowd."

"Thank you; I have had enough diving," said Willie Woodley. "I will wait
till Mr. Beaumont comes to the surface."

"I will bring him to see you," said Lord Lambeth; "where are you
staying?"

"You will find the address in my letter--Jones's Hotel."

"Oh, one of those places just out of Piccadilly? Beastly hole, isn't
it?" Lord Lambeth inquired.

"I believe it's the best hotel in London," said Mrs. Westgate.

"But they give you awful rubbish to eat, don't they?" his lordship went
on.

"Yes," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I always feel so sorry for the people that come up to town and go to
live in those places," continued the young man. "They eat nothing but
filth."

"Oh, I say!" cried Willie Woodley.

"Well, how do you like London, Miss Alden?" Lord Lambeth asked,
unperturbed by this ejaculation.

"I think it's grand," said Bessie Alden.

"My sister likes it, in spite of the 'filth'!" Mrs. Westgate exclaimed.

"I hope you are going to stay a long time."

"As long as I can," said Bessie.

"And where is Mr. Westgate?" asked Lord Lambeth of this gentleman's
wife.

"He's where he always is--in that tiresome New York."

"He must be tremendously clever," said the young man.

"I suppose he is," said Mrs. Westgate.

Lord Lambeth sat for nearly an hour with his American friends; but it
is not our purpose to relate their conversation in full. He addressed
a great many remarks to Bessie Alden, and finally turned toward her
altogether, while Willie Woodley entertained Mrs. Westgate. Bessie
herself said very little; she was on her guard, thinking of what
her sister had said to her at lunch. Little by little, however, she
interested herself in Lord Lambeth again, as she had done at Newport;
only it seemed to her that here he might become more interesting. He
would be an unconscious part of the antiquity, the impressiveness, the
picturesqueness, of England; and poor Bessie Alden, like many a Yankee
maiden, was terribly at the mercy of picturesqueness.

"I have often wished I were at Newport again," said the young man.
"Those days I spent at your sister's were awfully jolly."

"We enjoyed them very much; I hope your father is better."

"Oh, dear, yes. When I got to England, he was out grouse shooting.
It was what you call in America a gigantic fraud. My mother had got
nervous. My three weeks at Newport seemed like a happy dream."

"America certainly is very different from England," said Bessie.

"I hope you like England better, eh?" Lord Lambeth rejoined almost
persuasively.

"No Englishman can ask that seriously of a person of another country."

Her companion looked at her for a moment. "You mean it's a matter of
course?"

"If I were English," said Bessie, "it would certainly seem to me a
matter of course that everyone should be a good patriot."

"Oh, dear, yes, patriotism is everything," said Lord Lambeth, not quite
following, but very contented. "Now, what are you going to do here?"

"On Thursday I am going to the Tower."

"The Tower?"

"The Tower of London. Did you never hear of it?"

"Oh, yes, I have been there," said Lord Lambeth. "I was taken there
by my governess when I was six years old. It's a rum idea, your going
there."

"Do give me a few more rum ideas," said Bessie. "I want to see
everything of that sort. I am going to Hampton Court, and to Windsor,
and to the Dulwich Gallery."

Lord Lambeth seemed greatly amused. "I wonder you don't go to the
Rosherville Gardens."

"Are they interesting?" asked Bessie.

"Oh, wonderful."

"Are they very old? That's all I care for," said Bessie.

"They are tremendously old; they are all falling to ruins."

"I think there is nothing so charming as an old ruinous garden," said
the young girl. "We must certainly go there."

Lord Lambeth broke out into merriment. "I say, Woodley," he cried,
"here's Miss Alden wants to go to the Rosherville Gardens!"

Willie Woodley looked a little blank; he was caught in the fact of
ignorance of an apparently conspicuous feature of London life. But in
a moment he turned it off. "Very well," he said, "I'll write for a
permit."

Lord Lambeth's exhilaration increased. "Gad, I believe you Americans
would go anywhere!" he cried.

"We wish to go to Parliament," said Bessie. "That's one of the first
things."

"Oh, it would bore you to death!" cried the young man.

"We wish to hear you speak."

"I never speak--except to young ladies," said Lord Lambeth, smiling.

Bessie Alden looked at him a while, smiling, too, in the shadow of her
parasol. "You are very strange," she murmured. "I don't think I approve
of you."

"Ah, now, don't be severe, Miss Alden," said Lord Lambeth, smiling still
more. "Please don't be severe. I want you to like me--awfully."

"To like you awfully? You must not laugh at me, then, when I make
mistakes. I consider it my right--as a freeborn American--to make as
many mistakes as I choose."

"Upon my word, I didn't laugh at you," said Lord Lambeth.

"And not only that," Bessie went on; "but I hold that all my mistakes
shall be set down to my credit. You must think the better of me for
them."

"I can't think better of you than I do," the young man declared.

Bessie Alden looked at him a moment again. "You certainly speak very
well to young ladies. But why don't you address the House?--isn't that
what they call it?"

"Because I have nothing to say," said Lord Lambeth.

"Haven't you a great position?" asked Bessie Alden.

He looked a moment at the back of his glove. "I'll set that down," he
said, "as one of your mistakes--to your credit." And as if he disliked
talking about his position, he changed the subject. "I wish you would
let me go with you to the Tower, and to Hampton Court, and to all those
other places."

"We shall be most happy," said Bessie.

"And of course I shall be delighted to show you the House of Lords--some
day that suits you. There are a lot of things I want to do for you.
I want to make you have a good time. And I should like very much to
present some of my friends to you, if it wouldn't bore you. Then it
would be awfully kind of you to come down to Branches."

"We are much obliged to you, Lord Lambeth," said Bessie. "What is
Branches?"

"It's a house in the country. I think you might like it."

Willie Woodley and Mrs. Westgate at this moment were sitting in silence,
and the young man's ear caught these last words of Lord Lambeth's.
"He's inviting Miss Bessie to one of his castles," he murmured to his
companion.

Mrs. Westgate, foreseeing what she mentally called "complications,"
immediately got up; and the two ladies, taking leave of Lord Lambeth,
returned, under Mr. Woodley's conduct, to Jones's Hotel.

Lord Lambeth came to see them on the morrow, bringing Percy Beaumont
with him--the latter having instantly declared his intention of
neglecting none of the usual offices of civility. This declaration,
however, when his kinsman informed him of the advent of their American
friends, had been preceded by another remark.

"Here they are, then, and you are in for it."

"What am I in for?" demanded Lord Lambeth.

"I will let your mother give it a name. With all respect to whom," added
Percy Beaumont, "I must decline on this occasion to do any more police
duty. Her Grace must look after you herself."

"I will give her a chance," said her Grace's son, a trifle grimly. "I
shall make her go and see them."

"She won't do it, my boy."

"We'll see if she doesn't," said Lord Lambeth.

But if Percy Beaumont took a somber view of the arrival of the two
ladies at Jones's Hotel, he was sufficiently a man of the world to
offer them a smiling countenance. He fell into animated
conversation--conversation, at least, that was animated on her
side--with Mrs. Westgate, while his companion made himself agreeable
to the younger lady. Mrs. Westgate began confessing and protesting,
declaring and expounding.

"I must say London is a great deal brighter and prettier just now
than it was when I was here last--in the month of November. There
is evidently a great deal going on, and you seem to have a good many
flowers. I have no doubt it is very charming for all you people, and
that you amuse yourselves immensely. It is very good of you to let
Bessie and me come and sit and look at you. I suppose you will think I
am very satirical, but I must confess that that's the feeling I have in
London."

"I am afraid I don't quite understand to what feeling you allude," said
Percy Beaumont.

"The feeling that it's all very well for you English people. Everything
is beautifully arranged for you."

"It seems to me it is very well for some Americans, sometimes," rejoined
Beaumont.

"For some of them, yes--if they like to be patronized. But I must say I
don't like to be patronized. I may be very eccentric, and undisciplined,
and outrageous, but I confess I never was fond of patronage. I like
to associate with people on the same terms as I do in my own country;
that's a peculiar taste that I have. But here people seem to expect
something else--Heaven knows what! I am afraid you will think I am very
ungrateful, for I certainly have received a great deal of attention. The
last time I was here, a lady sent me a message that I was at liberty to
come and see her."

"Dear me! I hope you didn't go," observed Percy Beaumont.

"You are deliciously naive, I must say that for you!" Mrs. Westgate
exclaimed. "It must be a great advantage to you here in London. I
suppose that if I myself had a little more naivete, I should enjoy it
more. I should be content to sit on a chair in the park, and see the
people pass, and be told that this is the Duchess of Suffolk, and that
is the Lord Chamberlain, and that I must be thankful for the privilege
of beholding them. I daresay it is very wicked and critical of me to ask
for anything else. But I was always critical, and I freely confess to
the sin of being fastidious. I am told there is some remarkably superior
second-rate society provided here for strangers. MERCI! I don't want
any superior second-rate society. I want the society that I have been
accustomed to."

"I hope you don't call Lambeth and me second rate," Beaumont interposed.

"Oh, I am accustomed to you," said Mrs. Westgate. "Do you know that you
English sometimes make the most wonderful speeches? The first time I
came to London I went out to dine--as I told you, I have received a
great deal of attention. After dinner, in the drawing room, I had some
conversation with an old lady; I assure you I had. I forget what we
talked about, but she presently said, in allusion to something we were
discussing, 'Oh, you know, the aristocracy do so-and-so; but in one's
own class of life it is very different.' In one's own class of life!
What is a poor unprotected American woman to do in a country where she
is liable to have that sort of thing said to her?"

"You seem to get hold of some very queer old ladies; I compliment you
on your acquaintance!" Percy Beaumont exclaimed. "If you are trying to
bring me to admit that London is an odious place, you'll not succeed.
I'm extremely fond of it, and I think it the jolliest place in the
world."

"POUR VOUS AUTRES. I never said the contrary," Mrs. Westgate retorted.
I make use of this expression, because both interlocutors had begun to
raise their voices. Percy Beaumont naturally did not like to hear his
country abused, and Mrs. Westgate, no less naturally, did not like a
stubborn debater.

"Hallo!" said Lord Lambeth; "what are they up to now?" And he came away
from the window, where he had been standing with Bessie Alden.

"I quite agree with a very clever countrywoman of mine," Mrs. Westgate
continued with charming ardor, though with imperfect relevancy. She
smiled at the two gentlemen for a moment with terrible brightness, as
if to toss at their feet--upon their native heath--the gauntlet of
defiance. "For me, there are only two social positions worth speaking
of--that of an American lady and that of the Emperor of Russia."

"And what do you do with the American gentlemen?" asked Lord Lambeth.

"She leaves them in America!" said Percy Beaumont.

On the departure of their visitors, Bessie Alden told her sister that
Lord Lambeth would come the next day, to go with them to the Tower, and
that he had kindly offered to bring his "trap" and drive them thither.
Mrs. Westgate listened in silence to this communication, and for some
time afterward she said nothing. But at last, "If you had not requested
me the other day not to mention it," she began, "there is something I
should venture to ask you." Bessie frowned a little; her dark blue eyes
were more dark than blue. But her sister went on. "As it is, I will
take the risk. You are not in love with Lord Lambeth: I believe it,
perfectly. Very good. But is there, by chance, any danger of your
becoming so? It's a very simple question; don't take offense. I have a
particular reason," said Mrs. Westgate, "for wanting to know."

Bessie Alden for some moments said nothing; she only looked displeased.
"No; there is no danger," she answered at last, curtly.

"Then I should like to frighten them," declared Mrs. Westgate, clasping
her jeweled hands.

"To frighten whom?"

"All these people; Lord Lambeth's family and friends."

"How should you frighten them?" asked the young girl.

"It wouldn't be I--it would be you. It would frighten them to think that
you should absorb his lordship's young affections."

Bessie Alden, with her clear eyes still overshadowed by her dark brows,
continued to interrogate. "Why should that frighten them?"

Mrs. Westgate poised her answer with a smile before delivering it.
"Because they think you are not good enough. You are a charming girl,
beautiful and amiable, intelligent and clever, and as bien-elevee as it
is possible to be; but you are not a fit match for Lord Lambeth."

Bessie Alden was decidedly disgusted. "Where do you get such
extraordinary ideas?" she asked. "You have said some such strange things
lately. My dear Kitty, where do you collect them?"

Kitty was evidently enamored of her idea. "Yes, it would put them on
pins and needles, and it wouldn't hurt you. Mr. Beaumont is already most
uneasy; I could soon see that."

The young girl meditated a moment. "Do you mean that they spy upon
him--that they interfere with him?"

"I don't know what power they have to interfere, but I know that a
British mama may worry her son's life out."

It has been intimated that, as regards certain disagreeable things,
Bessie Alden had a fund of skepticism. She abstained on the present
occasion from expressing disbelief, for she wished not to irritate her
sister. But she said to herself that Kitty had been misinformed--that
this was a traveler's tale. Though she was a girl of a lively
imagination, there could in the nature of things be, to her sense, no
reality in the idea of her belonging to a vulgar category. What she
said aloud was, "I must say that in that case I am very sorry for Lord
Lambeth."

Mrs. Westgate, more and more exhilarated by her scheme, was smiling at
her again. "If I could only believe it was safe!" she exclaimed. "When
you begin to pity him, I, on my side, am afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"Of your pitying him too much."

Bessie Alden turned away impatiently; but at the end of a minute she
turned back. "What if I should pity him too much?" she asked.

Mrs. Westgate hereupon turned away, but after a moment's reflection
she also faced her sister again. "It would come, after all, to the same
thing," she said.

Lord Lambeth came the next day with his trap, and the two ladies,
attended by Willie Woodley, placed themselves under his guidance, and
were conveyed eastward, through some of the duskier portions of the
metropolis, to the great turreted donjon which overlooks the London
shipping. They all descended from their vehicle and entered the famous
inclosure; and they secured the services of a venerable beefeater, who,
though there were many other claimants for legendary information, made
a fine exclusive party of them and marched them through courts and
corridors, through armories and prisons. He delivered his usual
peripatetic discourse, and they stopped and stared, and peeped and
stooped, according to the official admonitions. Bessie Alden asked the
old man in the crimson doublet a great many questions; she thought it
a most fascinating place. Lord Lambeth was in high good humor; he was
constantly laughing; he enjoyed what he would have called the lark.
Willie Woodley kept looking at the ceilings and tapping the walls with
the knuckle of a pearl-gray glove; and Mrs. Westgate, asking at frequent
intervals to be allowed to sit down and wait till they came back, was as
frequently informed that they would never come back. To a great many of
Bessie's questions--chiefly on collateral points of English history--the
ancient warder was naturally unable to reply; whereupon she always
appealed to Lord Lambeth. But his lordship was very ignorant. He
declared that he knew nothing about that sort of thing, and he seemed
greatly diverted at being treated as an authority.

"You can't expect everyone to know as much as you," he said.

"I should expect you to know a great deal more," declared Bessie Alden.

"Women always know more than men about names and dates and that sort of
thing," Lord Lambeth rejoined. "There was Lady Jane Grey we have just
been hearing about, who went in for Latin and Greek and all the learning
of her age."

"YOU have no right to be ignorant, at all events," said Bessie.

"Why haven't I as good a right as anyone else?"

"Because you have lived in the midst of all these things."

"What things do you mean? Axes, and blocks, and thumbscrews?"

"All these historical things. You belong to a historical family."

"Bessie is really too historical," said Mrs. Westgate, catching a word
of this dialogue.

"Yes, you are too historical," said Lord Lambeth, laughing, but thankful
for a formula. "Upon my honor, you are too historical!"

He went with the ladies a couple of days later to Hampton Court, Willie
Woodley being also of the party. The afternoon was charming, the famous
horse chestnuts were in blossom, and Lord Lambeth, who quite entered
into the spirit of the cockney excursionist, declared that it was a
jolly old place. Bessie Alden was in ecstasies; she went about murmuring
and exclaiming.

"It's too lovely," said the young girl; "it's too enchanting; it's too
exactly what it ought to be!"

At Hampton Court the little flocks of visitors are not provided with an
official bellwether, but are left to browse at discretion upon the local
antiquities. It happened in this manner that, in default of another
informant, Bessie Alden, who on doubtful questions was able to suggest
a great many alternatives, found herself again applying for intellectual
assistance to Lord Lambeth. But he again assured her that he was utterly
helpless in such matters--that his education had been sadly neglected.

"And I am sorry it makes you unhappy," he added in a moment.

"You are very disappointing, Lord Lambeth," she said.

"Ah, now don't say that," he cried. "That's the worst thing you could
possibly say."

"No," she rejoined, "it is not so bad as to say that I had expected
nothing of you."

"I don't know. Give me a notion of the sort of thing you expected."

"Well," said Bessie Alden, "that you would be more what I should like to
be--what I should try to be--in your place."

"Ah, my place!" exclaimed Lord Lambeth. "You are always talking about my
place!"

The young girl looked at him; he thought she colored a little; and for a
moment she made no rejoinder.

"Does it strike you that I am always talking about your place?" she
asked.

"I am sure you do it a great honor," he said, fearing he had been
uncivil.

"I have often thought about it," she went on after a moment. "I have
often thought about your being a hereditary legislator. A hereditary
legislator ought to know a great many things."

"Not if he doesn't legislate."

"But you do legislate; it's absurd your saying you don't. You are very
much looked up to here--I am assured of that."

"I don't know that I ever noticed it."

"It is because you are used to it, then. You ought to fill the place."

"How do you mean to fill it?" asked Lord Lambeth.

"You ought to be very clever and brilliant, and to know almost
everything."

Lord Lambeth looked at her a moment. "Shall I tell you something?" he
asked. "A young man in my position, as you call it--"

"I didn't invent the term," interposed Bessie Alden. "I have seen it in
a great many books."

"Hang it! you are always at your books. A fellow in my position, then,
does very well whatever he does. That's about what I mean to say."

"Well, if your own people are content with you," said Bessie Alden,
laughing, "it is not for me to complain. But I shall always think that,
properly, you should have been a great mind--a great character."

"Ah, that's very theoretic," Lord Lambeth declared. "Depend upon it,
that's a Yankee prejudice."

"Happy the country," said Bessie Alden, "where even people's prejudices
are so elevated!"

"Well, after all," observed Lord Lambeth, "I don't know that I am such a
fool as you are trying to make me out."

"I said nothing so rude as that; but I must repeat that you are
disappointing."

"My dear Miss Alden," exclaimed the young man, "I am the best fellow in
the world!"

"Ah, if it were not for that!" said Bessie Alden with a smile.

Mrs. Westgate had a good many more friends in London than she pretended,
and before long she had renewed acquaintance with most of them. Their
hospitality was extreme, so that, one thing leading to another, she
began, as the phrase is, to go out. Bessie Alden, in this way, saw
something of what she found it a great satisfaction to call to herself
English society. She went to balls and danced, she went to dinners and
talked, she went to concerts and listened (at concerts Bessie always
listened), she went to exhibitions and wondered. Her enjoyment was
keen and her curiosity insatiable, and, grateful in general for all her
opportunities, she especially prized the privilege of meeting certain
celebrated persons--authors and artists, philosophers and statesmen--of
whose renown she had been a humble and distant beholder, and who now, as
a part of the habitual furniture of London drawing rooms, struck her
as stars fallen from the firmament and become palpable--revealing also
sometimes, on contact, qualities not to have been predicted of sidereal
bodies. Bessie, who knew so many of her contemporaries by reputation,
had a good many personal disappointments; but, on the other hand, she
had innumerable satisfactions and enthusiasms, and she communicated the
emotions of either class to a dear friend, of her own sex, in Boston,
with whom she was in voluminous correspondence. Some of her reflections,
indeed, she attempted to impart to Lord Lambeth, who came almost every
day to Jones's Hotel, and whom Mrs. Westgate admitted to be really
devoted. Captain Littledale, it appeared, had gone to India; and of
several others of Mrs. Westgate's ex-pensioners--gentlemen who, as she
said, had made, in New York, a clubhouse of her drawing room--no tidings
were to be obtained; but Lord Lambeth was certainly attentive enough to
make up for the accidental absences, the short memories, all the other
irregularities of everyone else. He drove them in the park, he took them
to visit private collections of pictures, and, having a house of his
own, invited them to dinner. Mrs. Westgate, following the fashion of
many of her compatriots, caused herself and her sister to be presented
at the English court by her diplomatic representative--for it was
in this manner that she alluded to the American minister to England,
inquiring what on earth he was put there for, if not to make the proper
arrangements for one's going to a Drawing Room.

Lord Lambeth declared that he hated Drawing Rooms, but he participated
in the ceremony on the day on which the two ladies at Jones's Hotel
repaired to Buckingham Palace in a remarkable coach which his lordship
had sent to fetch them. He had on a gorgeous uniform, and Bessie Alden
was particularly struck with his appearance--especially when on her
asking him, rather foolishly as she felt, if he were a loyal subject,
he replied that he was a loyal subject to HER. This declaration was
emphasized by his dancing with her at a royal ball to which the two
ladies afterward went, and was not impaired by the fact that she
thought he danced very ill. He seemed to her wonderfully kind; she asked
herself, with growing vivacity, why he should be so kind. It was his
disposition--that seemed the natural answer. She had told her sister
that she liked him very much, and now that she liked him more she
wondered why. She liked him for his disposition; to this question as
well that seemed the natural answer. When once the impressions of London
life began to crowd thickly upon her, she completely forgot her sister's
warning about the cynicism of public opinion. It had given her great
pain at the moment, but there was no particular reason why she should
remember it; it corresponded too little with any sensible reality; and
it was disagreeable to Bessie to remember disagreeable things. So she
was not haunted with the sense of a vulgar imputation. She was not in
love with Lord Lambeth--she assured herself of that. It will immediately
be observed that when such assurances become necessary the state of a
young lady's affections is already ambiguous; and, indeed, Bessie
Alden made no attempt to dissimulate--to herself, of course--a certain
tenderness that she felt for the young nobleman. She said to herself
that she liked the type to which he belonged--the simple, candid, manly,
healthy English temperament. She spoke to herself of him as women speak
of young men they like--alluded to his bravery (which she had never in
the least seen tested), to his honesty and gentlemanliness, and was not
silent upon the subject of his good looks. She was perfectly conscious,
moreover, that she liked to think of his more adventitious merits; that
her imagination was excited and gratified by the sight of a handsome
young man endowed with such large opportunities--opportunities she
hardly knew for what, but, as she supposed, for doing great things--for
setting an example, for exerting an influence, for conferring happiness,
for encouraging the arts. She had a kind of ideal of conduct for a young
man who should find himself in this magnificent position, and she tried
to adapt it to Lord Lambeth's deportment as you might attempt to fit a
silhouette in cut paper upon a shadow projected upon a wall. But Bessie
Alden's silhouette refused to coincide with his lordship's image,
and this want of harmony sometimes vexed her more than she thought
reasonable. When he was absent it was, of course, less striking; then
he seemed to her a sufficiently graceful combination of high
responsibilities and amiable qualities. But when he sat there
within sight, laughing and talking with his customary good humor and
simplicity, she measured it more accurately, and she felt acutely that
if Lord Lambeth's position was heroic, there was but little of the
hero in the young man himself. Then her imagination wandered away
from him--very far away; for it was an incontestable fact that at such
moments he seemed distinctly dull. I am afraid that while Bessie's
imagination was thus invidiously roaming, she cannot have been herself
a very lively companion; but it may well have been that these occasional
fits of indifference seemed to Lord Lambeth a part of the young girl's
personal charm. It had been a part of this charm from the first that
he felt that she judged him and measured him more freely and
irresponsibly--more at her ease and her leisure, as it were--than
several young ladies with whom he had been on the whole about as
intimate. To feel this, and yet to feel that she also liked him,
was very agreeable to Lord Lambeth. He fancied he had compassed that
gratification so desirable to young men of title and fortune--being
liked for himself. It is true that a cynical counselor might have
whispered to him, "Liked for yourself? Yes; but not so very much!" He
had, at any rate, the constant hope of being liked more.

It may seem, perhaps, a trifle singular--but it is nevertheless
true--that Bessie Alden, when he struck her as dull, devoted some time,
on grounds of conscience, to trying to like him more. I say on grounds
of conscience because she felt that he had been extremely "nice" to her
sister, and because she reflected that it was no more than fair that
she should think as well of him as he thought of her. This effort was
possibly sometimes not so successful as it might have been, for the
result of it was occasionally a vague irritation, which expressed itself
in hostile criticism of several British institutions. Bessie Alden went
to some entertainments at which she met Lord Lambeth; but she went
to others at which his lordship was neither actually nor potentially
present; and it was chiefly on these latter occasions that she
encountered those literary and artistic celebrities of whom mention has
been made. After a while she reduced the matter to a principle. If Lord
Lambeth should appear anywhere, it was a symbol that there would be no
poets and philosophers; and in consequence--for it was almost a strict
consequence--she used to enumerate to the young man these objects of her
admiration.

"You seem to be awfully fond of those sort of people," said Lord Lambeth
one day, as if the idea had just occurred to him.

"They are the people in England I am most curious to see," Bessie Alden
replied.

"I suppose that's because you have read so much," said Lord Lambeth
gallantly.

"I have not read so much. It is because we think so much of them at
home."

"Oh, I see," observed the young nobleman. "In Boston."

"Not only in Boston; everywhere," said Bessie. "We hold them in great
honor; they go to the best dinner parties."

"I daresay you are right. I can't say I know many of them."

"It's a pity you don't," Bessie Alden declared. "It would do you good."

"I daresay it would," said Lord Lambeth very humbly. "But I must say I
don't like the looks of some of them."

"Neither do I--of some of them. But there are all kinds, and many of
them are charming."

"I have talked with two or three of them," the young man went on, "and I
thought they had a kind of fawning manner."

"Why should they fawn?" Bessie Alden demanded.

"I'm sure I don't know. Why, indeed?"

"Perhaps you only thought so," said Bessie.

"Well, of course," rejoined her companion, "that's a kind of thing that
can't be proved."

"In America they don't fawn," said Bessie.

"Ah, well, then, they must be better company."

Bessie was silent a moment. "That is one of the things I don't like
about England," she said; "your keeping the distinguished people apart."

"How do you mean apart?"

"Why, letting them come only to certain places. You never see them."

Lord Lambeth looked at her a moment. "What people do you mean?"

"The eminent people--the authors and artists--the clever people."

"Oh, there are other eminent people besides those," said Lord Lambeth.

"Well, you certainly keep them apart," repeated the young girl.

"And there are other clever people," added Lord Lambeth simply.

Bessie Alden looked at him, and she gave a light laugh. "Not many," she
said.

On another occasion--just after a dinner party--she told him that there
was something else in England she did not like.

"Oh, I say!" he cried, "haven't you abused us enough?"

"I have never abused you at all," said Bessie; "but I don't like your
PRECEDENCE."

"It isn't my precedence!" Lord Lambeth declared, laughing.

"Yes, it is yours--just exactly yours; and I think it's odious," said
Bessie.

"I never saw such a young lady for discussing things! Has someone had
the impudence to go before you?" asked his lordship.

"It is not the going before me that I object to," said Bessie; "it
is their thinking that they have a right to do it--A RIGHT THAT I
RECOGNIZE."

"I never saw such a young lady as you are for not 'recognizing.' I have
no doubt the thing is BEASTLY, but it saves a lot of trouble."

"It makes a lot of trouble. It's horrid," said Bessie.

"But how would you have the first people go?" asked Lord Lambeth. "They
can't go last."

"Whom do you mean by the first people?"

"Ah, if you mean to question first principles!" said Lord Lambeth.

"If those are your first principles, no wonder some of your arrangements
are horrid," observed Bessie Alden with a very pretty ferocity. "I am a
young girl, so of course I go last; but imagine what Kitty must feel on
being informed that she is not at liberty to budge until certain other
ladies have passed out."

"Oh, I say, she is not 'informed!'" cried Lord Lambeth. "No one would do
such a thing as that."

"She is made to feel it," the young girl insisted--"as if they were
afraid she would make a rush for the door. No; you have a lovely
country," said Bessie Alden, "but your precedence is horrid."

"I certainly shouldn't think your sister would like it," rejoined Lord
Lambeth with even exaggerated gravity. But Bessie Alden could induce
him to enter no formal protest against this repulsive custom, which he
seemed to think an extreme convenience.

Percy Beaumont all this time had been a very much less frequent visitor
at Jones's Hotel than his noble kinsman; he had, in fact, called but
twice upon the two American ladies. Lord Lambeth, who often saw him,
reproached him with his neglect and declared that, although Mrs.
Westgate had said nothing about it, he was sure that she was secretly
wounded by it. "She suffers too much to speak," said Lord Lambeth.

"That's all gammon," said Percy Beaumont; "there's a limit to what
people can suffer!" And, though sending no apologies to Jones's Hotel,
he undertook in a manner to explain his absence. "You are always there,"
he said, "and that's reason enough for my not going."

"I don't see why. There is enough for both of us."

"I don't care to be a witness of your--your reckless passion," said
Percy Beaumont.

Lord Lambeth looked at him with a cold eye and for a moment said
nothing. "It's not so obvious as you might suppose," he rejoined dryly,
"considering what a demonstrative beggar I am."

"I don't want to know anything about it--nothing whatever," said
Beaumont. "Your mother asks me everytime she sees me whether I believe
you are really lost--and Lady Pimlico does the same. I prefer to be able
to answer that I know nothing about it--that I never go there. I stay
away for consistency's sake. As I said the other day, they must look
after you themselves."

"You are devilish considerate," said Lord Lambeth. "They never question
me."

"They are afraid of you. They are afraid of irritating you and making
you worse. So they go to work very cautiously, and, somewhere or other,
they get their information. They know a great deal about you. They
know that you have been with those ladies to the dome of St. Paul's
and--where was the other place?--to the Thames Tunnel."

"If all their knowledge is as accurate as that, it must be very
valuable," said Lord Lambeth.

"Well, at any rate, they know that you have been visiting the 'sights
of the metropolis.' They think--very naturally, as it seems to me--that
when you take to visiting the sights of the metropolis with a little
American girl, there is serious cause for alarm." Lord Lambeth responded
to this intimation by scornful laughter, and his companion continued,
after a pause: "I said just now I didn't want to know anything about
the affair; but I will confess that I am curious to learn whether you
propose to marry Miss Bessie Alden."

On this point Lord Lambeth gave his interlocutor no immediate
satisfaction; he was musing, with a frown. "By Jove," he said, "they go
rather too far. They SHALL find me dangerous--I promise them."

Percy Beaumont began to laugh. "You don't redeem your promises. You said
the other day you would make your mother call."

Lord Lambeth continued to meditate. "I asked her to call," he said
simply.

"And she declined?"

"Yes; but she shall do it yet."

"Upon my word," said Percy Beaumont, "if she gets much more frightened I
believe she will." Lord Lambeth looked at him, and he went on. "She will
go to the girl herself."

"How do you mean she will go to her?"

"She will beg her off, or she will bribe her. She will take strong
measures."

Lord Lambeth turned away in silence, and his companion watched him take
twenty steps and then slowly return. "I have invited Mrs. Westgate and
Miss Alden to Branches," he said, "and this evening I shall name a day."

"And shall you invite your mother and your sisters to meet them?"

"Explicitly!"

"That will set the duchess off," said Percy Beaumont. "I suspect she
will come."

"She may do as she pleases."

Beaumont looked at Lord Lambeth. "You do really propose to marry the
little sister, then?"

"I like the way you talk about it!" cried the young man. "She won't
gobble me down; don't be afraid."

"She won't leave you on your knees," said Percy Beaumont. "What IS the
inducement?"

"You talk about proposing: wait till I HAVE proposed," Lord Lambeth went
on.

"That's right, my dear fellow; think about it," said Percy Beaumont.

"She's a charming girl," pursued his lordship.

"Of course she's a charming girl. I don't know a girl more charming,
intrinsically. But there are other charming girls nearer home."

"I like her spirit," observed Lord Lambeth, almost as if he were trying
to torment his cousin.

"What's the peculiarity of her spirit?"

"She's not afraid, and she says things out, and she thinks herself as
good as anyone. She is the only girl I have ever seen that was not dying
to marry me."

"How do you know that, if you haven't asked her?"

"I don't know how; but I know it."

"I am sure she asked me questions enough about your property and your
titles," said Beaumont.

"She has asked me questions, too; no end of them," Lord Lambeth
admitted. "But she asked for information, don't you know."

"Information? Aye, I'll warrant she wanted it. Depend upon it that she
is dying to marry you just as much and just as little as all the rest of
them."

"I shouldn't like her to refuse me--I shouldn't like that."

"If the thing would be so disagreeable, then, both to you and to her, in
Heaven's name leave it alone," said Percy Beaumont.

Mrs. Westgate, on her side, had plenty to say to her sister about the
rarity of Mr. Beaumont's visits and the nonappearance of the Duchess of
Bayswater. She professed, however, to derive more satisfaction from
this latter circumstance than she could have done from the most lavish
attentions on the part of this great lady. "It is most marked," she
said--"most marked. It is a delicious proof that we have made them
miserable. The day we dined with Lord Lambeth I was really sorry for the
poor fellow." It will have been gathered that the entertainment offered
by Lord Lambeth to his American friends had not been graced by the
presence of his anxious mother. He had invited several choice spirits
to meet them; but the ladies of his immediate family were to Mrs.
Westgate's sense--a sense possibly morbidly acute--conspicuous by their
absence.

"I don't want to express myself in a manner that you dislike," said
Bessie Alden; "but I don't know why you should have so many theories
about Lord Lambeth's poor mother. You know a great many young men in New
York without knowing their mothers."

Mrs. Westgate looked at her sister and then turned away. "My dear
Bessie, you are superb!" she said.

"One thing is certain," the young girl continued. "If I believed I were
a cause of annoyance--however unwitting--to Lord Lambeth's family, I
should insist--"

"Insist upon my leaving England," said Mrs. Westgate.

"No, not that. I want to go to the National Gallery again; I want to see
Stratford-on-Avon and Canterbury Cathedral. But I should insist upon his
coming to see us no more."

"That would be very modest and very pretty of you; but you wouldn't do
it now."

"Why do you say 'now'?" asked Bessie Alden. "Have I ceased to be
modest?"

"You care for him too much. A month ago, when you said you didn't, I
believe it was quite true. But at present, my dear child," said Mrs.
Westgate, "you wouldn't find it quite so simple a matter never to see
Lord Lambeth again. I have seen it coming on."

"You are mistaken," said Bessie. "You don't understand."

"My dear child, don't be perverse," rejoined her sister.

"I know him better, certainly, if you mean that," said Bessie. "And I
like him very much. But I don't like him enough to make trouble for him
with his family. However, I don't believe in that."

"I like the way you say 'however,'" Mrs. Westgate exclaimed. "Come; you
would not marry him?"

"Oh, no," said the young girl.

Mrs. Westgate for a moment seemed vexed. "Why not, pray?" she demanded.

"Because I don't care to," said Bessie Alden.

The morning after Lord Lambeth had had, with Percy Beaumont, that
exchange of ideas which has just been narrated, the ladies at Jones's
Hotel received from his lordship a written invitation to pay their
projected visit to Branches Castle on the following Tuesday. "I think I
have made up a very pleasant party," the young nobleman said. "Several
people whom you know, and my mother and sisters, who have so long been
regrettably prevented from making your acquaintance." Bessie Alden lost
no time in calling her sister's attention to the injustice she had done
the Duchess of Bayswater, whose hostility was now proved to be a vain
illusion.

"Wait till you see if she comes," said Mrs. Westgate. "And if she is to
meet us at her son's house the obligation was all the greater for her to
call upon us."

Bessie had not to wait long, and it appeared that Lord Lambeth's mother
now accepted Mrs. Westgate's view of her duties. On the morrow, early in
the afternoon, two cards were brought to the apartment of the American
ladies--one of them bearing the name of the Duchess of Bayswater and
the other that of the Countess of Pimlico. Mrs. Westgate glanced at the
clock. "It is not yet four," she said; "they have come early; they wish
to see us. We will receive them." And she gave orders that her visitors
should be admitted. A few moments later they were introduced, and there
was a solemn exchange of amenities. The duchess was a large lady, with a
fine fresh color; the Countess of Pimlico was very pretty and elegant.

The duchess looked about her as she sat down--looked not especially at
Mrs. Westgate. "I daresay my son has told you that I have been wanting
to come and see you," she observed.

"You are very kind," said Mrs. Westgate, vaguely--her conscience not
allowing her to assent to this proposition--and, indeed, not permitting
her to enunciate her own with any appreciable emphasis.

"He says you were so kind to him in America," said the duchess.

"We are very glad," Mrs. Westgate replied, "to have been able to make
him a little more--a little less--a little more comfortable."

"I think he stayed at your house," remarked the Duchess of Bayswater,
looking at Bessie Alden.

"A very short time," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Oh!" said the duchess; and she continued to look at Bessie, who was
engaged in conversation with her daughter.

"Do you like London?" Lady Pimlico had asked of Bessie, after looking at
her a good deal--at her face and her hands, her dress and her hair.

"Very much indeed," said Bessie.

"Do you like this hotel?"

"It is very comfortable," said Bessie.

"Do you like stopping at hotels?" inquired Lady Pimlico after a pause.

"I am very fond of traveling," Bessie answered, "and I suppose hotels
are a necessary part of it. But they are not the part I am fondest of."

"Oh, I hate traveling," said the Countess of Pimlico and transferred her
attention to Mrs. Westgate.

"My son tells me you are going to Branches," the duchess presently
resumed.

"Lord Lambeth has been so good as to ask us," said Mrs. Westgate, who
perceived that her visitor had now begun to look at her, and who had her
customary happy consciousness of a distinguished appearance. The only
mitigation of her felicity on this point was that, having inspected her
visitor's own costume, she said to herself, "She won't know how well I
am dressed!"

"He has asked me to go, but I am not sure I shall be able," murmured the
duchess.

"He had offered us the p--prospect of meeting you," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I hate the country at this season," responded the duchess.

Mrs. Westgate gave a little shrug. "I think it is pleasanter than
London."

But the duchess's eyes were absent again; she was looking very fixedly
at Bessie. In a moment she slowly rose, walked to a chair that stood
empty at the young girl's right hand, and silently seated herself.
As she was a majestic, voluminous woman, this little transaction had,
inevitably, an air of somewhat impressive intention. It diffused a
certain awkwardness, which Lady Pimlico, as a sympathetic daughter,
perhaps desired to rectify in turning to Mrs. Westgate.

"I daresay you go out a great deal," she observed.

"No, very little. We are strangers, and we didn't come here for
society."

"I see," said Lady Pimlico. "It's rather nice in town just now."

"It's charming," said Mrs. Westgate. "But we only go to see a few
people--whom we like."

"Of course one can't like everyone," said Lady Pimlico.

"It depends upon one's society," Mrs. Westgate rejoined.

The Duchess meanwhile had addressed herself to Bessie. "My son tells me
the young ladies in America are so clever."

"I am glad they made so good an impression on him," said Bessie,
smiling.

The Duchess was not smiling; her large fresh face was very tranquil.
"He is very susceptible," she said. "He thinks everyone clever, and
sometimes they are."

"Sometimes," Bessie assented, smiling still.

The duchess looked at her a little and then went on; "Lambeth is very
susceptible, but he is very volatile, too."

"Volatile?" asked Bessie.

"He is very inconstant. It won't do to depend on him."

"Ah," said Bessie, "I don't recognize that description. We have depended
on him greatly--my sister and I--and he has never disappointed us."

"He will disappoint you yet," said the duchess.

Bessie gave a little laugh, as if she were amused at the duchess's
persistency. "I suppose it will depend on what we expect of him."

"The less you expect, the better," Lord Lambeth's mother declared.

"Well," said Bessie, "we expect nothing unreasonable."

The duchess for a moment was silent, though she appeared to have more to
say. "Lambeth says he has seen so much of you," she presently began.

"He has been to see us very often; he has been very kind," said Bessie
Alden.

"I daresay you are used to that. I am told there is a great deal of that
in America."

"A great deal of kindness?" the young girl inquired, smiling.

"Is that what you call it? I know you have different expressions."

"We certainly don't always understand each other," said Mrs. Westgate,
the termination of whose interview with Lady Pimlico allowed her to give
her attention to their elder visitor.

"I am speaking of the young men calling so much upon the young ladies,"
the duchess explained.

"But surely in England," said Mrs. Westgate, "the young ladies don't
call upon the young men?"

"Some of them do--almost!" Lady Pimlico declared. "When the young men
are a great PARTI."

"Bessie, you must make a note of that," said Mrs. Westgate. "My sister,"
she added, "is a model traveler. She writes down all the curious facts
she hears in a little book she keeps for the purpose."

The duchess was a little flushed; she looked all about the room, while
her daughter turned to Bessie. "My brother told us you were wonderfully
clever," said Lady Pimlico.

"He should have said my sister," Bessie answered--"when she says such
things as that."

"Shall you be long at Branches?" the duchess asked, abruptly, of the
young girl.

"Lord Lambeth has asked us for three days," said Bessie.

"I shall go," the duchess declared, "and my daughter, too."

"That will be charming!" Bessie rejoined.

"Delightful!" murmured Mrs. Westgate.

"I shall expect to see a great deal of you," the duchess continued.
"When I go to Branches I monopolize my son's guests."

"They must be most happy," said Mrs. Westgate very graciously.

"I want immensely to see it--to see the castle," said Bessie to the
duchess. "I have never seen one--in England, at least; and you know we
have none in America."

"Ah, you are fond of castles?" inquired her Grace.

"Immensely!" replied the young girl. "It has been the dream of my life
to live in one."

The duchess looked at her a moment, as if she hardly knew how to take
this assurance, which, from her Grace's point of view, was either very
artless or very audacious. "Well," she said, rising, "I will show
you Branches myself." And upon this the two great ladies took their
departure.

"What did they mean by it?" asked Mrs. Westgate, when they were gone.

"They meant to be polite," said Bessie, "because we are going to meet
them."

"It is too late to be polite," Mrs. Westgate replied almost grimly.
"They meant to overawe us by their fine manners and their grandeur, and
to make you LACHER PRISE."

"LACHER PRISE? What strange things you say!" murmured Bessie Alden.

"They meant to snub us, so that we shouldn't dare to go to Branches,"
Mrs. Westgate continued.

"On the contrary," said Bessie, "the duchess offered to show me the
place herself."

"Yes, you may depend upon it she won't let you out of her sight. She
will show you the place from morning till night."

"You have a theory for everything," said Bessie.

"And you apparently have none for anything."

"I saw no attempt to 'overawe' us," said the young girl. "Their manners
were not fine."

"They were not even good!" Mrs. Westgate declared.

Bessie was silent a while, but in a few moments she observed that she
had a very good theory. "They came to look at me," she said, as if this
had been a very ingenious hypothesis. Mrs. Westgate did it justice;
she greeted it with a smile and pronounced it most brilliant, while, in
reality, she felt that the young girl's skepticism, or her charity, or,
as she had sometimes called it appropriately, her idealism, was proof
against irony. Bessie, however, remained meditative all the rest of that
day and well on into the morrow.

On the morrow, before lunch, Mrs. Westgate had occasion to go out for an
hour, and left her sister writing a letter. When she came back she
met Lord Lambeth at the door of the hotel, coming away. She thought he
looked slightly embarrassed; he was certainly very grave. "I am sorry to
have missed you. Won't you come back?" she asked.

"No," said the young man, "I can't. I have seen your sister. I can never
come back." Then he looked at her a moment and took her hand. "Goodbye,
Mrs. Westgate," he said. "You have been very kind to me." And with what
she thought a strange, sad look in his handsome young face, he turned
away.

She went in, and she found Bessie still writing her letter; that is,
Mrs. Westgate perceived she was sitting at the table with the pen in her
hand and not writing. "Lord Lambeth has been here," said the elder lady
at last.

Then Bessie got up and showed her a pale, serious face. She bent this
face upon her sister for some time, confessing silently and a little
pleading. "I told him," she said at last, "that we could not go to
Branches."

Mrs. Westgate displayed just a spark of irritation. "He might have
waited," she said with a smile, "till one had seen the castle." Later,
an hour afterward, she said, "Dear Bessie, I wish you might have
accepted him."

"I couldn't," said Bessie gently.

"He is an excellent fellow," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I couldn't," Bessie repeated.

"If it is only," her sister added, "because those women will think that
they succeeded--that they paralyzed us!"

Bessie Alden turned away; but presently she added, "They were
interesting; I should have liked to see them again."

"So should I!" cried Mrs. Westgate significantly.

"And I should have liked to see the castle," said Bessie. "But now we
must leave England," she added.

Her sister looked at her. "You will not wait to go to the National
Gallery?"

"Not now."

"Nor to Canterbury Cathedral?"

Bessie reflected a moment. "We can stop there on our way to Paris," she
said.

Lord Lambeth did not tell Percy Beaumont that the contingency he was
not prepared at all to like had occurred; but Percy Beaumont, on hearing
that the two ladies had left London, wondered with some intensity what
had happened; wondered, that is, until the Duchess of Bayswater came
a little to his assistance. The two ladies went to Paris, and Mrs.
Westgate beguiled the journey to that city by repeating several
times--"That's what I regret; they will think they petrified us." But
Bessie Alden seemed to regret nothing.








I

Intending to sail for America in the early part of June, I determined to
spend the interval of six weeks in England, to which country my mind's
eye only had as yet been introduced. I had formed in Italy and France a
resolute preference for old inns, considering that what they sometimes
cost the ungratified body they repay the delighted mind. On my arrival
in London, therefore, I lodged at a certain antique hostelry, much
to the east of Temple Bar, deep in the quarter that I had inevitably
figured as the Johnsonian. Here, on the first evening of my stay, I
descended to the little coffee-room and bespoke my dinner of the genius
of "attendance" in the person of the solitary waiter. No sooner had
I crossed the threshold of this retreat than I felt I had cut a
golden-ripe crop of English "impressions." The coffee-room of the Red
Lion, like so many other places and things I was destined to see in the
motherland, seemed to have been waiting for long years, with just that
sturdy sufferance of time written on its visage, for me to come and
extract the romantic essence of it.

The latent preparedness of the American mind even for the most
characteristic features of English life was a matter I meanwhile failed
to get to the bottom of. The roots of it are indeed so deeply buried
in the soil of our early culture that, without some great upheaval
of feeling, we are at a loss to say exactly when and where and how it
begins. It makes an American's enjoyment of England an emotion more
searching than anything Continental. I had seen the coffee-room of
the Red Lion years ago, at home--at Saragossa Illinois--in books, in
visions, in dreams, in Dickens, in Smollett, in Boswell. It was small
and subdivided into six narrow compartments by a series of perpendicular
screens of mahogany, something higher than a man's stature, furnished
on either side with a meagre uncushioned ledge, denominated in ancient
Britain a seat. In each of these rigid receptacles was a narrow table--a
table expected under stress to accommodate no less than four pairs of
active British elbows. High pressure indeed had passed away from the
Red Lion for ever. It now knew only that of memories and ghosts and
atmosphere. Round the room there marched, breast-high, a magnificent
panelling of mahogany, so dark with time and so polished with unremitted
friction that by gazing a while into its lucid blackness I made out
the dim reflexion of a party of wigged gentlemen in knee-breeches just
arrived from York by the coach. On the dark yellow walls, coated by
the fumes of English coal, of English mutton, of Scotch whiskey, were a
dozen melancholy prints, sallow-toned with age--the Derby favourite of
the year 1807, the Bank of England, her Majesty the Queen. On the floor
was a Turkey carpet--as old as the mahogany almost, as the Bank
of England, as the Queen--into which the waiter had in his lonely
revolutions trodden so many massive soot-flakes and drops of overflowing
beer that the glowing looms of Smyrna would certainly not have
recognised it. To say that I ordered my dinner of this archaic type
would be altogether to misrepresent the process owing to which, having
dreamed of lamb and spinach and a salade de saison, I sat down in
penitence to a mutton-chop and a rice pudding. Bracing my feet against
the cross-beam of my little oaken table, I opposed to the mahogany
partition behind me the vigorous dorsal resistance that must have
expressed the old-English idea of repose. The sturdy screen refused even
to creak, but my poor Yankee joints made up the deficiency.

While I was waiting there for my chop there came into the room a person
whom, after I had looked at him a moment, I supposed to be a fellow
lodger and probably the only one. He seemed, like myself, to have
submitted to proposals for dinner; the table on the other side of my
partition had been prepared to receive him. He walked up to the fire,
exposed his back to it and, after consulting his watch, looked directly
out of the window and indirectly at me. He was a man of something less
than middle age and more than middle stature, though indeed you would
have called him neither young nor tall. He was chiefly remarkable for
his emphasised leanness. His hair, very thin on the summit of his head,
was dark short and fine. His eye was of a pale turbid grey, unsuited,
perhaps, to his dark hair and well-drawn brows, but not altogether out
of harmony with his colourless bilious complexion. His nose was aquiline
and delicate; beneath it his moustache languished much rather than
bristled. His mouth and chin were negative, or at the most provisional;
not vulgar, doubtless, but ineffectually refined. A cold fatal
gentlemanly weakness was expressed indeed in his attenuated person. His
eye was restless and deprecating; his whole physiognomy, his manner of
shifting his weight from foot to foot, the spiritless droop of his head,
told of exhausted intentions, of a will relaxed. His dress was neat and
"toned down"--he might have been in mourning. I made up my mind on three
points: he was a bachelor, he was out of health, he was not indigenous
to the soil. The waiter approached him, and they conversed in accents
barely audible. I heard the words "claret," "sherry" with a tentative
inflexion, and finally "beer" with its last letter changed to "ah."
Perhaps he was a Russian in reduced circumstances; he reminded me
slightly of certain sceptical cosmopolite Russians whom I had met on the
Continent. While in my extravagant way I followed this train--for
you see I was interested--there appeared a short brisk man with
reddish-brown hair, with a vulgar nose, a sharp blue eye and a red
beard confined to his lower jaw and chin. My putative Russian, still in
possession of the rug, let his mild gaze stray over the dingy ornaments
of the room. The other drew near, and his umbrella dealt a playful
poke at the concave melancholy waistcoat. "A penny ha'penny for your
thoughts!"

My friend, as I call him, uttered an exclamation, stared, then laid
his two hands on the other's shoulders. The latter looked round at me
keenly, compassing me in a momentary glance. I read in its own vague
light that this was a transatlantic eyebeam; and with such confidence
that I hardly needed to see its owner, as he prepared, with his
companion, to seat himself at the table adjoining my own, take from his
overcoat-pocket three New York newspapers and lay them beside his
plate. As my neighbours proceeded to dine I felt the crumbs of their
conversation scattered pretty freely abroad. I could hear almost all
they said, without straining to catch it, over the top of the partition
that divided us. Occasionally their voices dropped to recovery of
discretion, but the mystery pieced itself together as if on purpose to
entertain me. Their speech was pitched in the key that may in English
air be called alien in spite of a few coincidences. The voices were
American, however, with a difference; and I had no hesitation in
assigning the softer and clearer sound to the pale thin gentleman, whom
I decidedly preferred to his comrade. The latter began to question him
about his voyage.

"Horrible, horrible! I was deadly sick from the hour we left New York."

"Well, you do look considerably reduced," said the second-comer.

"Reduced! I've been on the verge of the grave. I haven't slept six hours
for three weeks." This was said with great gravity.

"Well, I've made the voyage for the last time."

"The plague you have! You mean to locate here permanently?"

"Oh it won't be so very permanent!"

There was a pause; after which: "You're the same merry old boy, Searle.
Going to give up the ghost to-morrow, eh?"

"I almost wish I were."

"You're not so sweet on England then? I've heard people say at home that
you dress and talk and act like an Englishman. But I know these people
here and I know you. You're not one of this crowd, Clement Searle, not
you. You'll go under here, sir; you'll go under as sure as my name's
Simmons."

Following this I heard a sudden clatter as of the drop of a knife and
fork. "Well, you're a delicate sort of creature, if it IS your ugly
name! I've been wandering about all day in this accursed city, ready
to cry with homesickness and heartsickness and every possible sort of
sickness, and thinking, in the absence of anything better, of meeting
you here this evening and of your uttering some sound of cheer and
comfort and giving me some glimmer of hope. Go under? Ain't I under now?
I can't do more than get under the ground!"

Mr. Simmons's superior brightness appeared to flicker a moment in this
gust of despair, but the next it was burning steady again. "DON'T 'cry,'
Searle," I heard him say. "Remember the waiter. I've grown Englishman
enough for that. For heaven's sake don't let's have any nerves. Nerves
won't do anything for you here. It's best to come to the point. Tell me
in three words what you expect of me."

I heard another movement, as if poor Searle had collapsed in his
chair. "Upon my word, sir, you're quite inconceivable. You never got my
letter?"

"Yes, I got your letter. I was never sorrier to get anything in my
life."

At this declaration Mr. Searle rattled out an oath, which it was well
perhaps that I but partially heard. "Abijah Simmons," he then cried,
"what demon of perversity possesses you? Are you going to betray me here
in a foreign land, to turn out a false friend, a heartless rogue?"

"Go on, sir," said sturdy Simmons. "Pour it all out. I'll wait till
you've done. Your beer's lovely," he observed independently to the
waiter. "I'll have some more."

"For God's sake explain yourself!" his companion appealed.

There was a pause, at the end of which I heard Mr. Simmons set down his
empty tankard with emphasis. "You poor morbid mooning man," he resumed,
"I don't want to say anything to make you feel sore. I regularly pity
you. But you must allow that you've acted more like a confirmed crank
than a member of our best society--in which every one's so sensible."

Mr. Searle seemed to have made an effort to compose himself. "Be so good
as to tell me then what was the meaning of your letter."

"Well, you had got on MY nerves, if you want to know, when I wrote it.
It came of my always wishing so to please folks. I had much better have
let you alone. To tell you the plain truth I never was so horrified in
my life as when I found that on the strength of my few kind words you
had come out here to seek your fortune."

"What then did you expect me to do?"

"I expected you to wait patiently till I had made further enquiries and
had written you again."

"And you've made further enquiries now?"

"Enquiries! I've committed assaults."

"And you find I've no claim?"

"No claim that one of THESE big bugs will look at. It struck me at first
that you had rather a neat little case. I confess the look of it took
hold of me--"

"Thanks to your liking so to please folks!" Mr. Simmons appeared for
a moment at odds with something; it proved to be with his liquor. "I
rather think your beer's too good to be true," he said to the waiter. "I
guess I'll take water. Come, old man," he resumed, "don't challenge me
to the arts of debate, or you'll have me right down on you, and then you
WILL feel me. My native sweetness, as I say, was part of it. The idea
that if I put the thing through it would be a very pretty feather in
my cap and a very pretty penny in my purse was part of it. And the
satisfaction of seeing a horrid low American walk right into an old
English estate was a good deal of it. Upon my word, Searle, when I think
of it I wish with all my heart that, extravagant vain man as you are, I
COULD, for the charm of it, put you through! I should hardly care what
you did with the blamed place when you got it. I could leave you alone
to turn it into Yankee notions--into ducks and drakes as they call 'em
here. I should like to see you tearing round over it and kicking up its
sacred dust in their very faces!"

"You don't know me one little bit," said Mr. Searle, rather shirking,
I thought, the burden of this tribute and for all response to the
ambiguity of the compliment.

"I should be very glad to think I didn't, sir. I've been to no small
amount of personal inconvenience for you. I've pushed my way right up
to the headspring. I've got the best opinion that's to be had. The best
opinion that's to be had just gives you one leer over its spectacles. I
guess that look will fix you if you ever get it straight. I've been
able to tap, indirectly," Mr. Simmons went on, "the solicitor of your
usurping cousin, and he evidently knows something to be in the wind. It
seems your elder brother twenty years ago put out a feeler. So you're
not to have the glory of even making them sit up."

"I never made any one sit up," I heard Mr. Searle plead. "I shouldn't
begin at this time of day. I should approach the subject like a
gentleman."

"Well, if you want very much to do something like a gentleman you've got
a capital chance. Take your disappointment like a gentleman."

I had finished my dinner and had become keenly interested in poor Mr.
Searle's unencouraging--or unencouraged--claim; so interested that I
at last hated to hear his trouble reflected in his voice without being
able--all respectfully!--to follow it in his face. I left my place, went
over to the fire, took up the evening paper and established a post of
observation behind it.

His cold counsellor was in the act of choosing a soft chop from the
dish--an act accompanied by a great deal of prying and poking with that
gentleman's own fork. My disillusioned compatriot had pushed away his
plate; he sat with his elbows on the table, gloomily nursing his head
with his hands. His companion watched him and then seemed to wonder--to
do Mr. Simmons justice--how he could least ungracefully give him up.
"I say, Searle,"--and for my benefit, I think, taking me for a native
ingenuous enough to be dazzled by his wit, he lifted his voice a little
and gave it an ironical ring--"in this country it's the inestimable
privilege of a loyal citizen, under whatsoever stress of pleasure or of
pain, to make a point of eating his dinner."

Mr. Searle gave his plate another push. "Anything may happen now. I
don't care a straw."

"You ought to care. Have another chop and you WILL care. Have some
better tipple. Take my advice!" Mr. Simmons went on.

My friend--I adopt that name for him--gazed from between his two hands
coldly before him. "I've had enough of your advice."

"A little more," said Simmons mildly; "I shan't trouble you again. What
do you mean to do?"

"Nothing."

"Oh come!"

"Nothing, nothing, nothing!"

"Nothing but starve. How about meeting expenses?"

"Why do you ask?" said my friend. "You don't care."

"My dear fellow, if you want to make me offer you twenty pounds you set
most clumsily about it. You said just now I don't know you," Mr. Simmons
went on. "Possibly. Come back with me then," he said kindly enough, "and
let's improve our acquaintance."

"I won't go back. I shall never go back."

"Never?"

"Never."

Mr. Simmons thought it shrewdly over. "Well, you ARE sick!" he exclaimed
presently. "All I can say is that if you're working out a plan for cold
poison, or for any other act of desperation, you had better give it
right up. You can't get a dose of the commonest kind of cold poison
for nothing, you know. Look here, Searle"--and the worthy man made what
struck me as a very decent appeal. "If you'll consent to return home
with me by the steamer of the twenty-third I'll pay your passage down.
More than that, I'll pay for your beer."

My poor gentleman met it. "I believe I never made up my mind to anything
before, but I think it's made up now. I shall stay here till I take my
departure for a newer world than any patched-up newness of ours. It's an
odd feeling--I rather like it! What should I do at home?"

"You said just now you were homesick."

"I meant I was sick for a home. Don't I belong here? Haven't I longed to
get here all my life? Haven't I counted the months and the years till I
should be able to 'go' as we say? And now that I've 'gone,' that is that
I've come, must I just back out? No, no, I'll move on. I'm much obliged
to you for your offer. I've enough money for the present. I've about my
person some forty pounds' worth of British gold, and the same amount,
say, of the toughness of the heaven-sent idiot. They'll see me through
together! After they're gone I shall lay my head in some English
churchyard, beside some ivied tower, beneath an old gnarled black yew."

I had so far distinctly followed the dialogue; but at this point the
landlord entered and, begging my pardon, would suggest that number 12,
a most superior apartment, having now been vacated, it would give him
pleasure if I would look in. I declined to look in, but agreed for
number 12 at a venture and gave myself again, with dissimulation, to
my friends. They had got up; Simmons had put on his overcoat; he stood
polishing his rusty black hat with his napkin. "Do you mean to go down
to the place?" he asked.

"Possibly. I've thought of it so often that I should like to see it."

"Shall you call on Mr. Searle?"

"Heaven forbid!"

"Something has just occurred to me," Simmons pursued with a grin that
made his upper lip look more than ever denuded by the razor and jerked
the ugly ornament of his chin into the air. "There's a certain Miss
Searle, the old man's sister."

"Well?" my gentleman quavered.

"Well, sir!--you talk of moving on. You might move on the damsel."

Mr. Searle frowned in silence and his companion gave him a tap on the
stomach. "Line those ribs a bit first!" He blushed crimson; his eyes
filled with tears. "You ARE a coarse brute," he said. The scene
quite harrowed me, but I was prevented from seeing it through by the
reappearance of the landlord on behalf of number 12. He represented to
me that I ought in justice to him to come and see how tidy they HAD
made it. Half an hour afterwards I was rattling along in a hansom toward
Covent Garden, where I heard Madame Bosio in The Barber of Seville. On
my return from the opera I went into the coffee-room; it had occurred
to me I might catch there another glimpse of Mr. Searle. I was not
disappointed. I found him seated before the fire with his head sunk on
his breast: he slept, dreaming perhaps of Abijah Simmons. I watched him
for some moments. His closed eyes, in the dim lamplight, looked even
more helpless and resigned, and I seemed to see the fine grain of his
nature in his unconscious mask. They say fortune comes while we sleep,
and, standing there, I felt really tender enough--though otherwise most
unqualified--to be poor Mr. Searle's fortune. As I walked away I noted
in one of the little prandial pews I have described the melancholy
waiter, whose whiskered chin also reposed on the bulge of his
shirt-front. I lingered a moment beside the old inn-yard in which, upon
a time, the coaches and post-chaises found space to turn and disgorge.
Above the dusky shaft of the enclosing galleries, where lounging lodgers
and crumpled chambermaids and all the picturesque domesticity of a
rattling tavern must have leaned on their elbows for many a year, I made
out the far-off lurid twinkle of the London constellations. At the foot
of the stairs, enshrined in the glittering niche of her well-appointed
bar, the landlady sat napping like some solemn idol amid votive brass
and plate.

The next morning, not finding the subject of my benevolent curiosity in
the coffee-room, I learned from the waiter that he had ordered breakfast
in bed. Into this asylum I was not yet prepared to pursue him. I spent
the morning in the streets, partly under pressure of business, but
catching all kinds of romantic impressions by the way. To the searching
American eye there is no tint of association with which the great grimy
face of London doesn't flush. As the afternoon approached, however,
I began to yearn for some site more gracefully classic than what
surrounded me, and, thinking over the excursions recommended to the
ingenuous stranger, decided to take the train to Hampton Court. The day
was the more propitious that it yielded just that dim subaqueous light
which sleeps so fondly upon the English landscape.

At the end of an hour I found myself wandering through the apartments of
the great palace. They follow each other in infinite succession, with no
great variety of interest or aspect, but with persistent pomp and a fine
specific effect. They are exactly of their various times. You pass from
painted and panelled bedchambers and closets, anterooms, drawing-rooms,
council-rooms, through king's suite, queen's suite, prince's suite,
until you feel yourself move through the appointed hours and stages
of some rigid monarchical day. On one side are the old monumental
upholsteries, the big cold tarnished beds and canopies, with the
circumference of disapparelled royalty symbolised by a gilded
balustrade, and the great carved and yawning chimney-places where
dukes-in-waiting may have warmed their weary heels; on the other,
in deep recesses, rise the immense windows, the framed and draped
embrasures where the sovereign whispered and favourites smiled, looking
out on terraced gardens and misty park. The brown walls are dimly
illumined by innumerable portraits of courtiers and captains, more
especially with various members of the Batavian entourage of William
of Orange, the restorer of the palace; with good store too of the
lily-bosomed models of Lely and Kneller. The whole tone of this
processional interior is singularly stale and sad. The tints of all
things have both faded and darkened--you taste the chill of the place
as you walk from room to room. It was still early in the day and in
the season, and I flattered myself that I was the only visitor. This
complacency, however, dropped at sight of a person standing motionless
before a simpering countess of Sir Peter Lely's creation. On hearing
my footstep this victim of an evaporated spell turned his head and I
recognised my fellow lodger of the Red Lion. I was apparently recognised
as well; he looked as if he could scarce wait for me to be kind to him,
and in fact didn't wait. Seeing I had a catalogue he asked the name of
the portrait. On my satisfying him he appealed, rather timidly, as to my
opinion of the lady.

"Well," said I, not quite timidly enough perhaps, "I confess she strikes
me as no great matter."

He remained silent and was evidently a little abashed. As we strolled
away he stole a sidelong glance of farewell at his leering shepherdess.
To speak with him face to face was to feel keenly that he was no less
interesting than infirm. We talked of our inn, of London, of the palace;
he uttered his mind freely, but seemed to struggle with a weight of
depression. It was an honest mind enough, with no great cultivation but
with a certain natural love of excellent things. I foresaw that I
should find him quite to the manner born--to ours; full of glimpses and
responses, of deserts and desolations. His perceptions would be fine and
his opinions pathetic; I should moreover take refuge from his sense of
proportion in his sense of humour, and then refuge from THAT, ah me!--in
what? On my telling him that I was a fellow citizen he stopped short,
deeply touched, and, silently passing his arm into my own, suffered me
to lead him through the other apartments and down into the gardens. A
large gravelled platform stretches itself before the basement of the
palace, taking the afternoon sun. Parts of the great structure are
reserved for private use and habitation, occupied by state-pensioners,
reduced gentlewomen in receipt of the Queen's bounty and other deserving
persons. Many of the apartments have their dependent gardens, and here
and there, between the verdure-coated walls, you catch a glimpse of
these somewhat stuffy bowers. My companion and I measured more than once
this long expanse, looking down on the floral figures of the rest of the
affair and on the stoutly-woven tapestry of creeping plants that muffle
the foundations of the huge red pile. I thought of the various images of
old-world gentility which, early and late, must have strolled in front
of it and felt the protection and security of the place. We peeped
through an antique grating into one of the mossy cages and saw an old
lady with a black mantilla on her head, a decanter of water in one hand
and a crutch in the other, come forth, followed by three little dogs and
a cat, to sprinkle a plant. She would probably have had an opinion on
the virtue of Queen Caroline. Feeling these things together made us
quickly, made us extraordinarily, intimate. My companion seemed to ache
with his impression; he scowled, all gently, as if it gave him pain. I
proposed at last that we should dine somewhere on the spot and take
a late train to town. We made our way out of the gardens into the
adjoining village, where we entered an inn which I pronounced, very
sincerely, exactly what we wanted. Mr. Searle had approached our board
as shyly as if it had been a cold bath; but, gradually warming to his
work, he declared at the end of half an hour that for the first time in
a month he enjoyed his victuals.

"I'm afraid you're rather out of health," I risked.

"Yes, sir--I'm an incurable."

The little village of Hampton Court stands clustered about the entrance
of Bushey Park, and after we had dined we lounged along into the
celebrated avenue of horse-chestnuts. There is a rare emotion, familiar
to every intelligent traveller, in which the mind seems to swallow the
sum total of its impressions at a gulp. You take in the whole place,
whatever it be. You feel England, you feel Italy, and the sensation
involves for the moment a kind of thrill. I had known it from time to
time in Italy and had opened my soul to it as to the spirit of the
Lord. Since my landing in England I had been waiting for it to arrive. A
bottle of tolerable Burgundy, at dinner, had perhaps unlocked to it the
gates of sense; it arrived now with irresistible force. Just the scene
around me was the England of one's early reveries. Over against us, amid
the ripeness of its gardens, the dark red residence, with its formal
facings and its vacant windows, seemed to make the past definite and
massive; the little village, nestling between park and palace, around
a patch of turfy common, with its taverns of figurative names, its
ivy-towered church, its mossy roofs, looked like the property of a
feudal lord. It was in this dark composite light that I had read the
British classics; it was this mild moist air that had blown from the
pages of the poets; while I seemed to feel the buried generations in the
dense and elastic sod. And that I must have testified in some form or
other to what I have called my thrill I gather, remembering it, from a
remark of my companion's.

"You've the advantage over me in coming to all this with an educated
eye. You already know what old things can be. I've never known it but by
report. I've always fancied I should like it. In a small way at home, of
course, I did try to stand by my idea of it. I must be a conservative by
nature. People at home used to call me a cockney and a fribble. But it
wasn't true," he went on; "if it had been I should have made my way over
here long ago: before--before--" He paused, and his head dropped sadly
on his breast.

The bottle of Burgundy had loosened his tongue; I had but to choose my
time for learning his story. Something told me that I had gained his
confidence and that, so far as attention and attitude might go, I was
"in" for responsibilities. But somehow I didn't dread them. "Before you
lost your health," I suggested.

"Before I lost my health," he answered. "And my property--the little I
had. And my ambition. And any power to take myself seriously."

"Come!" I cried. "You shall recover everything. This tonic English
climate will wind you up in a month. And THEN see how you'll take
yourself--and how I shall take you!"

"Oh," he gratefully smiled, "I may turn to dust in your hands! I should
like," he presently pursued, "to be an old genteel pensioner, lodged
over there in the palace and spending my days in maundering about these
vistas. I should go every morning, at the hour when it gets the sun,
into that long gallery where all those pretty women of Lely's are
hung--I know you despise them!--and stroll up and down and say something
kind to them. Poor precious forsaken creatures! So flattered and courted
in their day, so neglected now! Offering up their shoulders and ringlets
and smiles to that musty deadly silence!"

I laid my hand on my friend's shoulder. "Oh sir, you're all right!"

Just at this moment there came cantering down the shallow glade of the
avenue a young girl on a fine black horse--one of those little budding
gentlewomen, perfectly mounted and equipped, who form to alien eyes one
of the prettiest incidents of English scenery. She had distanced her
servant and, as she came abreast of us, turned slightly in her saddle
and glanced back at him. In the movement she dropped the hunting-crop
with which she was armed; whereupon she reined up and looked shyly at
us and at the implement. "This is something better than a Lely," I
said. Searle hastened forward, picked up the crop and, with a particular
courtesy that became him, handed it back to the rider. Fluttered and
blushing she reached forward, took it with a quick sweet sound, and the
next moment was bounding over the quiet turf. Searle stood watching her;
the servant, as he passed us, touched his hat. When my friend turned
toward me again I saw that he too was blushing. "Oh sir, you're all
right," I repeated.

At a short distance from where we had stopped was an old stone bench. We
went and sat down on it and, as the sun began to sink, watched the light
mist powder itself with gold. "We ought to be thinking of the train back
to London, I suppose," I at last said.

"Oh hang the train!" sighed my companion.

"Willingly. There could be no better spot than this to feel the English
evening stand still." So we lingered, and the twilight hung about us,
strangely clear in spite of the thickness of the air. As we sat there
came into view an apparition unmistakeable from afar as an immemorial
vagrant--the disowned, in his own rich way, of all the English ages. As
he approached us he slackened pace and finally halted, touching his cap.
He was a man of middle age, clad in a greasy bonnet with false-looking
ear-locks depending from its sides. Round his neck was a grimy red
scarf, tucked into his waistcoat; his coat and trousers had a remote
affinity with those of a reduced hostler. In one hand he had a stick; on
his arm he bore a tattered basket, with a handful of withered
vegetables at the bottom. His face was pale haggard and degraded beyond
description--as base as a counterfeit coin, yet as modelled somehow as
a tragic mask. He too, like everything else, had a history. From what
height had he fallen, from what depth had he risen? He was the perfect
symbol of generated constituted baseness; and I felt before him in
presence of a great artist or actor.

"For God's sake, gentlemen," he said in the raucous tone of
weather-beaten poverty, the tone of chronic sore-throat exacerbated
by perpetual gin, "for God's sake, gentlemen, have pity on a poor
fern-collector!"--turning up his stale daisies. "Food hasn't passed my
lips, gentlemen, for the last three days." We gaped at him and at each
other, and to our imagination his appeal had almost the force of a
command. "I wonder if half-a-crown would help?" I privately wailed. And
our fasting botanist went limping away through the park with the grace
of controlled stupefaction still further enriching his outline.

"I feel as if I had seen my Doppelganger," said Searle. "He reminds me
of myself. What am I but a mere figure in the landscape, a wandering
minstrel or picker of daisies?"

"What are you 'anyway,' my friend?" I thereupon took occasion to ask.
"Who are you? kindly tell me."

The colour rose again to his pale face and I feared I had offended
him. He poked a moment at the sod with the point of his umbrella before
answering. "Who am I?" he said at last. "My name is Clement Searle. I
was born in New York, and that's the beginning and the end of me."

"Ah not the end!" I made bold to plead.

"Then it's because I HAVE no end--any more than an ill-written book. I
just stop anywhere; which means I'm a failure," the poor man all lucidly
and unreservedly pursued: "a failure, as hopeless and helpless, sir, as
any that ever swallowed up the slender investments of the widow and
the orphan. I don't pay five cents on the dollar. What I might have
been--once!--there's nothing left to show. I was rotten before I was
ripe. To begin with, certainly, I wasn't a fountain of wisdom. All the
more reason for a definite channel--for having a little character and
purpose. But I hadn't even a little. I had nothing but nice tastes, as
they call them, and fine sympathies and sentiments. Take a turn through
New York to-day and you'll find the tattered remnants of these things
dangling on every bush and fluttering in every breeze; the men to whom
I lent money, the women to whom I made love, the friends I trusted, the
follies I invented, the poisonous fumes of pleasure amid which nothing
was worth a thought but the manhood they stifled! It was my fault that I
believed in pleasure here below. I believe in it still, but as I believe
in the immortality of the soul. The soul is immortal, certainly--if
you've got one; but most people haven't. Pleasure would be right if it
were pleasure straight through; but it never is. My taste was to be the
best in the world; well, perhaps it was. I had a little money; it went
the way of my little wit. Here in my pocket I have the scant dregs
of it. I should tell you I was the biggest kind of ass. Just now that
description would flatter me; it would assume there's something left of
me. But the ghost of a donkey--what's that? I think," he went on with
a charming turn and as if striking off his real explanation, "I should
have been all right in a world arranged on different lines. Before
heaven, sir--whoever you are--I'm in practice so absurdly tender-hearted
that I can afford to say it: I entered upon life a perfect gentleman.
I had the love of old forms and pleasant rites, and I found them
nowhere--found a world all hard lines and harsh lights, without shade,
without composition, as they say of pictures, without the lovely mystery
of colour. To furnish colour I melted down the very substance of my own
soul. I went about with my brush, touching up and toning down; a very
pretty chiaroscuro you'll find in my track! Sitting here in this old
park, in this old country, I feel that I hover on the misty verge of
what might have been! I should have been born here and not there; here
my makeshift distinctions would have found things they'd have been true
of. How it was I never got free is more than I can say. It might have
cut the knot, but the knot was too tight. I was always out of health or
in debt or somehow desperately dangling. Besides, I had a horror of the
great black sickening sea. A year ago I was reminded of the existence of
an old claim to an English estate, which has danced before the eyes of
my family, at odd moments, any time these eighty years. I confess it's a
bit of a muddle and a tangle, and am by no means sure that to this hour
I've got the hang of it. You look as if you had a clear head: some other
time, if you consent, we'll have a go at it, such as it is, together.
Poverty was staring me in the face; I sat down and tried to commit the
'points' of our case to memory, as I used to get nine-times-nine by
heart as a boy. I dreamed of it for six months, half-expecting to wake
up some fine morning and hear through a latticed casement the cawing of
an English rookery. A couple of months ago there came out to England on
business of his own a man who once got me out of a dreadful mess (not
that I had hurt anyone but myself), a legal practitioner in our courts,
a very rough diamond, but with a great deal of FLAIR, as they say in New
York. It was with him yesterday you saw me dining. He undertook, as
he called it, to 'nose round' and see if anything could be made of our
questionable but possible show. The matter had never seriously been
taken up. A month later I got a letter from Simmons assuring me that it
seemed a very good show indeed and that he should be greatly surprised
if I were unable to do something. This was the greatest push I had ever
got in my life; I took a deliberate step, for the first time; I sailed
for England. I've been here three days: they've seemed three months.
After keeping me waiting for thirty-six hours my legal adviser makes his
appearance last night and states to me, with his mouth full of mutton,
that I haven't a leg to stand on, that my claim is moonshine, and that
I must do penance and take a ticket for six more days of purgatory
with his presence thrown in. My friend, my friend--shall I say I was
disappointed? I'm already resigned. I didn't really believe I had
any case. I felt in my deeper consciousness that it was the crowning
illusion of a life of illusions. Well, it was a pretty one. Poor legal
adviser!--I forgive him with all my heart. But for him I shouldn't be
sitting in this place, in this air, under these impressions. This is a
world I could have got on with beautifully. There's an immense charm in
its having been kept for the last. After it nothing else would have been
tolerable. I shall now have a month of it, I hope, which won't be long
enough for it to "go back on me. There's one thing!"--and here, pausing,
he laid his hand on mine; I rose and stood before him--"I wish it were
possible you should be with me to the end."

"I promise you to leave you only when you kick me downstairs." But I
suggested my terms. "It must be on condition of your omitting from your
conversation this intolerable flavour of mortality. I know nothing of
'ends.' I'm all for beginnings."

He kept on me his sad weak eyes. Then with a faint smile: "Don't cut
down a man you find hanging. He has had a reason for it. I'm bankrupt."

"Oh health's money!" I said. "Get well, and the rest will take care of
itself. I'm interested in your questionable claim--it's the question
that's the charm; and pretenders, to anything big enough, have always
been, for me, an attractive class. Only their first duty's to be
gallant."

"Their first duty's to understand their own points and to know their own
mind," he returned with hopeless lucidity. "Don't ask me to climb our
family tree now," he added; "I fear I haven't the head for it. I'll try
some day--if it will bear my weight; or yours added to mine. There's
no doubt, however, that we, as they say, go back. But I know nothing of
business. If I were to take the matter in hand I should break in two the
poor little silken thread from which everything hangs. In a better world
than this I think I should be listened to. But the wind doesn't set to
ideal justice. There's no doubt that a hundred years ago we suffered
a palpable wrong. Yet we made no appeal at the time, and the dust of a
century now lies heaped upon our silence. Let it rest!"

"What then," I asked, "is the estimated value of your interest?"

"We were instructed from the first to accept a compromise. Compared with
the whole property our ideas have been small. We were once advised in
the sense of a hundred and thirty thousand dollars. Why a hundred and
thirty I'm sure I don't know. Don't beguile me into figures."

"Allow me one more question," I said. "Who's actually in possession?"

"A certain Mr. Richard Searle. I know nothing about him."

"He's in some way related to you?"

"Our great-grandfathers were half-brothers. What does that make us?"

"Twentieth cousins, say. And where does your twentieth cousin live?"

"At a place called Lackley--in Middleshire."

I thought it over. "Well, suppose we look up Lackley in Middleshire!"

He got straight up. "Go and see it?"

"Go and see it."

"Well," he said, "with you I'll go anywhere."

On our return to town we determined to spend three days there together
and then proceed to our errand. We were as conscious one as the other of
that deeper mystic appeal made by London to those superstitious pilgrims
who feel it the mother-city of their race, the distributing heart of
their traditional life. Certain characteristics of the dusky Babylon,
certain aspects, phases, features, "say" more to the American spiritual
ear than anything else in Europe. The influence of these things on
Searle it charmed me to note. His observation I soon saw to be, as
I pronounced it to him, searching and caressing. His almost morbid
appetite for any over-scoring of time, well-nigh extinct from long
inanition, threw the flush of its revival into his face and his talk.




II

We looked out the topography of Middleshire in a county-guide, which
spoke highly, as the phrase is, of Lackley Park, and took up our abode,
our journey ended, at a wayside inn where, in the days of leisure, the
coach must have stopped for luncheon and burnished pewters of rustic
ale been handed up as straight as possible to outsiders athirst with
the sense of speed. We stopped here for mere gaping joy of its
steep-thatched roof, its latticed windows, its hospitable porch, and
allowed a couple of days to elapse in vague undirected strolls and sweet
sentimental observance of the land before approaching the particular
business that had drawn us on. The region I allude to is a compendium
of the general physiognomy of England. The noble friendliness of the
scenery, its latent old-friendliness, the way we scarcely knew whether
we were looking at it for the first or the last time, made it arrest us
at every step. The countryside, in the full warm rains of the last
of April, had burst into sudden perfect spring. The dark walls of the
hedgerows had turned into blooming screens, the sodden verdure of lawn
and meadow been washed over with a lighter brush. We went forth without
loss of time for a long walk on the great grassy hills, smooth arrested
central billows of some primitive upheaval, from the summits of which
you find half England unrolled at your feet. A dozen broad counties,
within the scope of your vision, commingle their green exhalations.
Closely beneath us lay the dark rich hedgy flats and the copse-chequered
slopes, white with the blossom of apples. At widely opposite points of
the expanse two great towers of cathedrals rose sharply out of a reddish
blur of habitation, taking the mild English light.

We gave an irrepressible attention to this same solar reserve, and found
in it only a refinement of art. The sky never was empty and never idle;
the clouds were continually at play for our benefit. Over against
us, from our station on the hills, we saw them piled and dissolved,
condensed and shifted, blotting the blue with sullen rain-spots,
stretching, breeze-fretted, into dappled fields of grey, bursting into
an explosion of light or melting into a drizzle of silver. We made our
way along the rounded ridge of the downs and reached, by a descent,
through slanting angular fields, green to cottage-doors, a russet
village that beckoned us from the heart of the maze in which the hedges
wrapped it up. Close beside it, I admit, the roaring train bounces out
of a hole in the hills; yet there broods upon this charming hamlet an
old-time quietude that makes a violation of confidence of naming it so
far away. We struck through a narrow lane, a green lane, dim with its
barriers of hawthorn; it led us to a superb old farmhouse, now rather
rudely jostled by the multiplied roads and by-ways that have reduced its
ancient appanage. It stands there in stubborn picturesqueness, doggedly
submitting to be pointed out and sketched. It is a wonderful image of
the domiciliary conditions of the past--cruelly complete; with bended
beams and joists, beneath the burden of gables, that seem to ache and
groan with memories and regrets. The short low windows, where lead and
glass combine equally to create an inward gloom, retain their opacity as
a part of the primitive idea of defence. Such an old house provokes on
the part of an American a luxury of respect. So propped and patched, so
tinkered with clumsy tenderness, clustered so richly about its central
English sturdiness, its oaken vertebrations, so humanised with ages
of use and touches of beneficent affection, it seemed to offer to our
grateful eyes a small rude symbol of the great English social order.
Passing out upon the highroad, we came to the common browsing-patch,
the "village-green" of the tales of our youth. Nothing was absent: the
shaggy mouse-coloured donkey, nosing the turf with his mild and huge
proboscis, the geese, the old woman--THE old woman, in person, with
her red cloak and her black bonnet, frilled about the face and
double-frilled beside her decent placid cheeks--the towering ploughman
with his white smock-frock puckered on chest and back, his short
corduroys, his mighty calves, his big red rural face. We greeted these
things as children greet the loved pictures in a storybook lost and
mourned and found again. We recognised them as one recognises the
handwriting on letter-backs. Beside the road we saw a ploughboy straddle
whistling on a stile, and he had the merit of being not only a ploughboy
but a Gainsborough. Beyond the stile, across the level velvet of a
meadow, a footpath wandered like a streak drawn by a finger over a
surface of fine plush. We followed it from field to field and from
stile to stile; it was all adorably the way to church. At the church we
finally arrived, lost in its rook-haunted churchyard, hidden from the
workday world by the broad stillness of pastures--a grey, grey tower, a
huge black yew, a cluster of village-graves with crooked headstones and
protrusions that had settled and sunk. The place seemed so to ache with
consecration that my sensitive companion gave way to the force of it.

"You must bury me here, you know"--he caught at my arm. "It's the first
place of worship I've seen in my life. How it makes a Sunday where it
stands!"

It took the Church, we agreed, to make churches, but we had the sense
the next day of seeing still better why. We walked over some seven
miles, to the nearer of the two neighbouring seats of that lesson; and
all through such a mist of local colour that we felt ourselves a pair
of Smollett's pedestrian heroes faring tavernward for a night of
adventures. As we neared the provincial city we saw the steepled mass of
the cathedral, long and high, rise far into the cloud-freckled blue; and
as we got closer stopped on a bridge and looked down at the reflexion of
the solid minster in a yellow stream. Going further yet we entered
the russet town--where surely Miss Austen's heroines, in chariots
and curricles, must often have come a-shopping for their sandals and
mittens; we lounged in the grassed and gravelled precinct and gazed
insatiably at that most soul-soothing sight, the waning wasting
afternoon light, the visible ether that feels the voices of the chimes
cling far aloft to the quiet sides of the cathedral-tower; saw it linger
and nestle and abide, as it loves to do on all perpendicular spaces,
converting them irresistibly into registers and dials; tasted too, as
deeply, of the peculiar stillness of this place of priests; saw a rosy
English lad come forth and lock the door of the old foundation-school
that dovetailed with cloister and choir, and carry his big responsible
key into one of the quiet canonical houses: and then stood musing
together on the effect on one's mind of having in one's boyhood gone and
come through cathedral-shades as a King's scholar, and yet kept ruddy
with much cricket in misty river meadows. On the third morning we betook
ourselves to Lackley, having learned that parts of the "grounds" were
open to visitors, and that indeed on application the house was sometimes
shown.

Within the range of these numerous acres the declining spurs of the
hills continued to undulate and subside. A long avenue wound and circled
from the outermost gate through an untrimmed woodland, whence you
glanced at further slopes and glades and copses and bosky recesses--at
everything except the limits of the place. It was as free and untended
as I had found a few of the large loose villas of old Italy, and I was
still never to see the angular fact of English landlordism muffle itself
in so many concessions. The weather had just become perfect; it was one
of the dozen exquisite days of the English year--days stamped with a
purity unknown in climates where fine weather is cheap. It was as if the
mellow brightness, as tender as that of the primroses which starred the
dark waysides like petals wind-scattered over beds of moss, had been
meted out to us by the cubic foot--distilled from an alchemist's
crucible. From this pastoral abundance we moved upon the more composed
scene, the park proper--passed through a second lodge-gate, with
weather-worn gilding on its twisted bars, to the smooth slopes where the
great trees stood singly and the tame deer browsed along the bed of
a woodland stream. Here before us rose the gabled grey front of the
Tudor-time, developed and terraced and gardened to some later loss, as
we were afterwards to know, of type.

"Here you can wander all day," I said to Searle, "like an exiled
prince who has come back on tiptoe and hovers about the dominion of the
usurper."

"To think of 'others' having hugged this all these years!" he answered.
"I know what I am, but what might I have been? What do such places make
of a man?"

"I dare say he gets stupidly used to them," I said. "But I dare say too,
even then, that when you scratch the mere owner you find the perfect
lover."

"What a perfect scene and background it forms!" my friend, however,
had meanwhile gone on. "What legends, what histories it knows! My heart
really breaks with all I seem to guess. There's Tennyson's Talking Oak!
What summer days one could spend here! How I could lounge the rest of my
life away on this turf of the middle ages! Haven't I some maiden-cousin
in that old hall, or grange, or court--what in the name of enchantment
do you call the thing?--who would give me kind leave?" And then he
turned almost fiercely upon me. "Why did you bring me here? Why did you
drag me into this distraction of vain regrets?"

At this moment there passed within call a decent lad who had emerged
from the gardens and who might have been an underling in the stables. I
hailed him and put the question of our possible admittance to the house.
He answered that the master was away from home, but that he thought it
probable the housekeeper would consent to do the honours. I passed my
arm into Searle's. "Come," I said; "drain the cup, bitter-sweet though
it be. We must go in." We hastened slowly and approached the fine front.
The house was one of the happiest fruits of its freshly-feeling era,
a multitudinous cluster of fair gables and intricate chimneys, brave
projections and quiet recesses, brown old surfaces weathered to silver
and mottled roofs that testified not to seasons but to centuries. Two
broad terraces commanded the wooded horizon. Our appeal was answered by
a butler who condescended to our weakness. He renewed the assertion that
Mr. Searle was away from home, but he would himself lay our case before
the housekeeper. We would be so good, however, as to give him our cards.
This request, following so directly on the assertion that Mr. Searle
was absent, was rather resented by my companion. "Surely not for the
housekeeper."

The butler gave a diplomatic cough. "Miss Searle is at home, sir."

"Yours alone will have to serve," said my friend. I took out a card and
pencil and wrote beneath my name NEW YORK. As I stood with the pencil
poised a temptation entered into it. Without in the least considering
proprieties or results I let my implement yield--I added above my name
that of Mr. Clement Searle. What would come of it?

Before many minutes the housekeeper waited upon us--a fresh rosy little
old woman in a clean dowdy cap and a scanty sprigged gown; a quaint
careful person, but accessible to the tribute of our pleasure, to say
nothing of any other. She had the accent of the country, but the manners
of the house. Under her guidance we passed through a dozen apartments,
duly stocked with old pictures, old tapestry, old carvings, old armour,
with a hundred ornaments and treasures. The pictures were especially
valuable. The two Vandykes, the trio of rosy Rubenses, the sole and
sombre Rembrandt, glowed with conscious authenticity. A Claude, a
Murillo, a Greuze, a couple of Gainsboroughs, hung there with high
complacency. Searle strolled about, scarcely speaking, pale and grave,
with bloodshot eyes and lips compressed. He uttered no comment on what
we saw--he asked but a question or two. Missing him at last from my side
I retraced my steps and found him in a room we had just left, on a faded
old ottoman and with his elbows on his knees and his face buried in
his hands. Before him, ranged on a great credence, was a magnificent
collection of old Italian majolica; plates of every shape, with their
glaze of happy colour, jugs and vases nobly bellied and embossed. There
seemed to rise before me, as I looked, a sudden vision of the young
English gentleman who, eighty years ago, had travelled by slow stages to
Italy and been waited on at his inn by persuasive toymen. "What is it,
my dear man?" I asked. "Are you unwell?"

He uncovered his haggard face and showed me the flush of a consciousness
sharper, I think, to myself than to him. "A memory of the past!
There comes back to me a china vase that used to stand on the parlour
mantel-shelf when I was a boy, with a portrait of General Jackson
painted on one side and a bunch of flowers on the other. How long do you
suppose that majolica has been in the family?"

"A long time probably. It was brought hither in the last century, into
old, old England, out of old, old Italy, by some contemporary dandy with
a taste for foreign gimcracks. Here it has stood for a hundred years,
keeping its clear firm hues in this quiet light that has never sought to
advertise it."

Searle sprang to his feet. "I say, for mercy's sake, take me away! I
can't stand this sort of thing. Before I know it I shall do something
scandalous. I shall steal some of their infernal crockery. I shall
proclaim my identity and assert my rights. I shall go blubbering to Miss
Searle and ask her in pity's name to 'put me up.'"

If he could ever have been said to threaten complications he rather
visibly did so now. I began to regret my officious presentation of
his name and prepared without delay to lead him out of the house. We
overtook the housekeeper in the last room of the series, a small unused
boudoir over whose chimney-piece hung a portrait of a young man in a
powdered wig and a brocaded waistcoat. I was struck with his resemblance
to my companion while our guide introduced him. "This is Mr. Clement
Searle, Mr. Searle's great-uncle, by Sir Joshua Reynolds. He died young,
poor gentleman; he perished at sea, going to America."

"He was the young buck who brought the majolica out of Italy," I
supplemented.

"Indeed, sir, I believe he did," said the housekeeper without wonder.

"He's the image of you, my dear Searle," I further observed.

"He's remarkably like the gentleman, saving his presence," said the
housekeeper.

My friend stood staring. "Clement Searle--at sea--going to America--?"
he broke out. Then with some sharpness to our old woman: "Why the devil
did he go to America?"

"Why indeed, sir? You may well ask. I believe he had kinsfolk there. It
was for them to come to him."

Searle broke into a laugh. "It was for them to come to him! Well, well,"
he said, fixing his eyes on our guide, "they've come to him at last!"

She blushed like a wrinkled rose-leaf. "Indeed, sir, I verily believe
you're one of US!"

"My name's the name of that beautiful youth," Searle went on. "Dear
kinsman I'm happy to meet you! And what do you think of this?" he
pursued as he grasped me by the arm. "I have an idea. He perished at
sea. His spirit came ashore and wandered about in misery till it got
another incarnation--in this poor trunk!" And he tapped his hollow
chest. "Here it has rattled about these forty years, beating its wings
against its rickety cage, begging to be taken home again. And I never
knew what was the matter with me! Now at last the bruised spirit can
escape!"

Our old lady gaped at a breadth of appreciation--if not at the
disclosure of a connexion--beyond her. The scene was really
embarrassing, and my confusion increased as we became aware of another
presence. A lady had appeared in the doorway and the housekeeper dropped
just audibly: "Miss Searle!" My first impression of Miss Searle was that
she was neither young nor beautiful. She stood without confidence on the
threshold, pale, trying to smile and twirling my card in her fingers.
I immediately bowed. Searle stared at her as if one of the pictures had
stepped out of its frame.

"If I'm not mistaken one of you gentlemen is Mr. Clement Searle," the
lady adventured.

"My friend's Mr. Clement Searle," I took upon myself to reply. "Allow me
to add that I alone am responsible for your having received his name."

"I should have been sorry not to--not to see him," said Miss Searle,
beginning to blush. "Your being from America has led me--perhaps to
intrude!"

"The intrusion, madam, has been on our part. And with just that
excuse--that we come from so far away."

Miss Searle, while I spoke, had fixed her eyes on my friend as he stood
silent beneath Sir Joshua's portrait. The housekeeper, agitated and
mystified, fairly let herself go. "Heaven preserve us, Miss! It's your
great-uncle's picture come to life."

"I'm not mistaken then," said Miss Searle--"we must be distantly
related." She had the air of the shyest of women, for whom it was almost
anguish to make an advance without help. Searle eyed her with gentle
wonder from head to foot, and I could easily read his thoughts. This
then was his maiden-cousin, prospective mistress of these hereditary
treasures. She was of some thirty-five years of age, taller than was
then common and perhaps stouter than is now enjoined. She had small
kind grey eyes, a considerable quantity of very light-brown hair and a
smiling well-formed mouth. She was dressed in a lustreless black
satin gown with a short train. Disposed about her neck was a blue
handkerchief, and over this handkerchief, in many convolutions, a string
of amber beads. Her appearance was singular; she was large yet somehow
vague, mature yet undeveloped. Her manner of addressing us spoke of all
sorts of deep diffidences. Searle, I think, had prefigured to himself
some proud cold beauty of five-and-twenty; he was relieved at finding
the lady timid and not obtrusively fair. He at once had an excellent
tone.

"We're distant cousins, I believe. I'm happy to claim a relationship
which you're so good as to remember. I hadn't counted on your knowing
anything about me."

"Perhaps I've done wrong." And Miss Searle blushed and smiled anew. "But
I've always known of there being people of our blood in America, and
have often wondered and asked about them--without ever learning much.
To-day, when this card was brought me and I understood a Clement Searle
to be under our roof as a stranger, I felt I ought to do something. But,
you know, I hardly knew what. My brother's in London. I've done what I
think he would have done. Welcome as a cousin." And with a resolution
that ceased to be awkward she put out her hand.

"I'm welcome indeed if he would have done it half so graciously!" Again
Searle, taking her hand, acquitted himself beautifully.

"You've seen what there is, I think," Miss Searle went on. "Perhaps now
you'll have luncheon." We followed her into a small breakfast-room where
a deep bay window opened on the mossy flags of a terrace. Here, for some
moments, she remained dumb and abashed, as if resting from a measurable
effort. Searle too had ceased to overflow, so that I had to relieve the
silence. It was of course easy to descant on the beauties of park and
mansion, and as I did so I observed our hostess. She had no arts, no
impulses nor graces--scarce even any manners; she was queerly, almost
frowsily dressed; yet she pleased me well. She had an antique sweetness,
a homely fragrance of old traditions. To be so simple, among those
complicated treasures, so pampered and yet so fresh, so modest and yet
so placid, told of just the spacious leisure in which Searle and I had
imagined human life to be steeped in such places as that. This figure
was to the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood what a fact is to a fairy-tale,
an interpretation to a myth. We, on our side, were to our hostess
subjects of a curiosity not cunningly veiled.

"I should like so to go abroad!" she exclaimed suddenly, as if she meant
us to take the speech for an expression of interest in ourselves.

"Have you never been?" one of us asked.

"Only once. Three years ago my brother took me to Switzerland. We
thought it extremely beautiful. Except for that journey I've always
lived here. I was born in this house. It's a dear old place indeed, and
I know it well. Sometimes one wants a change." And on my asking her
how she spent her time and what society she saw, "Of course it's very
quiet," she went on, proceeding by short steps and simple statements, in
the manner of a person called upon for the first time to analyse to that
extent her situation. "We see very few people. I don't think there are
many nice ones hereabouts. At least we don't know them. Our own family's
very small. My brother cares for nothing but riding and books. He had
a great sorrow ten years ago. He lost his wife and his only son, a dear
little boy, who of course would have had everything. Do you know that
that makes me the heir, as they've done something--I don't quite
know what--to the entail? Poor old me! Since his loss my brother has
preferred to be quite alone. I'm sorry he's away. But you must wait till
he comes back. I expect him in a day or two." She talked more and more,
as if our very strangeness led her on, about her circumstances, her
solitude, her bad eyes, so that she couldn't read, her flowers, her
ferns, her dogs, and the vicar, recently presented to the living by
her brother and warranted quite safe, who had lately begun to light his
altar candles; pausing every now and then to gasp in self-surprise, yet,
in the quaintest way in the world, keeping up her story as if it were
a slow rather awkward old-time dance, a difficult pas seul in which
she would have been better with more practice, but of which she must
complete the figure. Of all the old things I had seen in England this
exhibited mind of Miss Searle's seemed to me the oldest, the most handed
down and taken for granted; fenced and protected as it was by convention
and precedent and usage, thoroughly acquainted with its subordinate
place. I felt as if I were talking with the heroine of a last-century
novel. As she talked she rested her dull eyes on her kinsman with
wondering kindness. At last she put it to him: "Did you mean to go away
without asking for us?"

"I had thought it over, Miss Searle, and had determined not to trouble
you. You've shown me how unfriendly I should have been."

"But you knew of the place being ours, and of our relationship?"

"Just so. It was because of these things that I came down here--because
of them almost that I came to England. I've always liked to think of
them," said my companion.

"You merely wished to look then? We don't pretend to be much to look
at."

He waited; her words were too strange. "You don't know what you are,
Miss Searle."

"You like the old place then?"

Searle looked at her again in silence. "If I could only tell you!" he
said at last.

"Do tell me. You must come and stay with us."

It moved him to an oddity of mirth. "Take care, take care--I should
surprise you! I'm afraid I should bore you. I should never leave you."

"Oh you'd get homesick--for your real home!"

At this he was still more amused. "By the way, tell Miss Searle about
our real home," he said to me. And he stepped, through the window, out
upon the terrace, followed by two beautiful dogs, a setter and a young
stag-hound who from the moment we came in had established the fondest
relation with him. Miss Searle looked at him, while he went, as if she
vaguely yearned over him; it began to be plain that she was interested
in her exotic cousin. I suddenly recalled the last words I had heard
spoken by my friend's adviser in London and which, in a very crude form,
had reference to his making a match with this lady. If only Miss Searle
could be induced to think of that, and if one had but the tact to put it
in a light to her! Something assured me that her heart was virgin-soil,
that the flower of romantic affection had never bloomed there. If I
might just sow the seed! There seemed to shape itself within her the
perfect image of one of the patient wives of old.

"He has lost his heart to England," I said. "He ought to have been born
here."

"And yet he doesn't look in the least an Englishman," she still rather
guardedly prosed.

"Oh it isn't his looks, poor fellow."

"Of course looks aren't everything. I never talked with a foreigner
before; but he talks as I have fancied foreigners."

"Yes, he's foreign enough."

"Is he married?"

"His wife's dead and he's all alone in the world."

"Has he much property?"

"None to speak of."

"But he has means to travel."

I meditated. "He has not expected to travel far," I said at last. "You
know, he's in very poor health."

"Poor gentleman! So I supposed."

"But there's more of him to go on with than he thinks. He came here
because he wanted to see your place before he dies."

"Dear me--kind man!" And I imagined in the quiet eyes the hint of a
possible tear. "And he was going away without my seeing him?"

"He's very modest, you see."

"He's very much the gentleman."

I couldn't but smile. "He's ALL--"

At this moment we heard on the terrace a loud harsh cry. "It's the great
peacock!" said Miss Searle, stepping to the window and passing out while
I followed her. Below us, leaning on the parapet, stood our appreciative
friend with his arm round the neck of the setter. Before him on
the grand walk strutted the familiar fowl of gardens--a splendid
specimen--with ruffled neck and expanded tail. The other dog had
apparently indulged in a momentary attempt to abash the gorgeous biped,
but at Searle's summons had bounded back to the terrace and leaped upon
the ledge, where he now stood licking his new friend's face. The scene
had a beautiful old-time air: the peacock flaunting in the foreground
like the genius of stately places; the broad terrace, which flattered
an innate taste of mine for all deserted walks where people may have sat
after heavy dinners to drink coffee in old Sevres and where the stiff
brocade of women's dresses may have rustled over grass or gravel; and
far around us, with one leafy circle melting into another, the timbered
acres of the park. "The very beasts have made him welcome," I noted as
we rejoined our companion.

"The peacock has done for you, Mr. Searle," said his cousin, "what he
does only for very great people. A year ago there came here a great
person--a grand old lady--to see my brother. I don't think that since
then he has spread his tail as wide for any one else--not by a dozen
feathers."

"It's not alone the peacock," said Searle. "Just now there came slipping
across my path a little green lizard, the first I ever saw, the lizard
of literature! And if you've a ghost, broad daylight though it be,
I expect to see him here. Do you know the annals of your house, Miss
Searle?"

"Oh dear, no! You must ask my brother for all those things."

"You ought to have a collection of legends and traditions. You ought to
have loves and murders and mysteries by the roomful. I shall be ashamed
of you if you haven't."

"Oh Mr. Searle! We've always been a very well-behaved family," she quite
seriously pleaded. "Nothing out of the way has ever happened, I think."

"Nothing out of the way? Oh that won't do! We've managed better than
that in America. Why I myself!"--and he looked at her ruefully enough,
but enjoying too his idea that he might embody the social scandal or
point to the darkest drama of the Searles. "Suppose I should turn out
a better Searle than you--better than you nursed here in romance and
extravagance? Come, don't disappoint me. You've some history among you
all, you've some poetry, you've some accumulation of legend. I've been
famished all my days for these things. Don't you understand? Ah you
can't understand! Tell me," he rambled on, "something tremendous. When
I think of what must have happened here; of the lovers who must have
strolled on this terrace and wandered under the beeches, of all the
figures and passions and purposes that must have haunted these walls!
When I think of the births and deaths, the joys and sufferings, the
young hopes and the old regrets, the rich experience of life--!" He
faltered a moment with the increase of his agitation. His humour of
dismay at a threat of the commonplace in the history he felt about him
had turned to a deeper reaction. I began to fear however that he was
really losing his head. He went on with a wilder play. "To see it all
called up there before me, if the Devil alone could do it I'd make a
bargain with the Devil! Ah Miss Searle," he cried, "I'm a most unhappy
man!"

"Oh dear, oh dear!" she almost wailed while I turned half away.

"Look at that window, that dear little window!" I turned back to see him
point to a small protruding oriel, above us, relieved against the purple
brickwork, framed in chiselled stone and curtained with ivy.

"It's my little room," she said.

"Of course it's a woman's room. Think of all the dear faces--all of them
so mild and yet so proud--that have looked out of that lattice, and of
all the old-time women's lives whose principal view of the world has
been this quiet park! Every one of them was a cousin of mine. And you,
dear lady, you're one of them yet." With which he marched toward her and
took her large white hand. She surrendered it, blushing to her eyes
and pressing her other hand to her breast. "You're a woman of the past.
You're nobly simple. It has been a romance to see you. It doesn't matter
what I say to you. You didn't know me yesterday, you'll not know me
to-morrow. Let me to-day do a mad sweet thing. Let me imagine in you the
spirit of all the dead women who have trod the terrace-flags that lie
here like sepulchral tablets in the pavement of a church. Let me say I
delight in you!"--he raised her hand to his lips. She gently withdrew it
and for a moment averted her face. Meeting her eyes the next instant I
saw the tears had come. The Sleeping Beauty was awake.

There followed an embarrassed pause. An issue was suddenly presented by
the appearance of the butler bearing a letter. "A telegram, Miss," he
announced.

"Oh what shall I do?" cried Miss Searle. "I can't open a telegram.
Cousin, help me."

Searle took the missive, opened it and read aloud: "I shall be home to
dinner. Keep the American."




III

"KEEP the American!" Miss Searle, in compliance with the injunction
conveyed in her brother's telegram (with something certainly of
telegraphic curtness), lost no time in expressing the pleasure it would
give her that our friend should remain. "Really you must," she said;
and forthwith repaired to the house-keeper to give orders for the
preparation of a room.

"But how in the world did he know of my being here?" my companion put to
me.

I answered that he had probably heard from his solicitor of the other's
visit. "Mr. Simmons and that gentleman must have had another interview
since your arrival in England. Simmons, for reasons of his own, has
made known to him your journey to this neighbourhood, and Mr. Searle,
learning this, has immediately taken for granted that you've formally
presented yourself to his sister. He's hospitably inclined and wishes
her to do the proper thing by you. There may even," I went on, "be more
in it than that. I've my little theory that he's the very phoenix of
usurpers, that he has been very much struck with what the experts have
had to say for you, and that he wishes to have the originality of making
over to you your share--so limited after all--of the estate."

"I give it up!" my friend mused. "Come what come will!"

"You, of course," said Miss Searle, reappearing and turning to me, "are
included in my brother's invitation. I've told them to see about a room
for you. Your luggage shall immediately be sent for."

It was arranged that I in person should be driven over to our little inn
and that I should return with our effects in time to meet Mr. Searle at
dinner. On my arrival several hours later I was immediately conducted
to my room. The servant pointed out to me that it communicated by a
door and a private passage with that of my fellow visitor. I made my way
along this passage--a low narrow corridor with a broad latticed casement
through which there streamed upon a series of grotesquely sculptured
oaken closets and cupboards the vivid animating glow of the western
sun--knocked at his door and, getting no answer, opened it. In an
armchair by the open window sat my friend asleep, his arms and legs
relaxed and head dropped on his breast. It was a great relief to see him
rest thus from his rhapsodies, and I watched him for some moments before
waking him. There was a faint glow of colour in his cheek and a light
expressive parting of his lips, something nearer to ease and peace than
I had yet seen in him. It was almost happiness, it was almost health. I
laid my hand on his arm and gently shook it. He opened his eyes, gazed
at me a moment, vaguely recognised me, then closed them again. "Let me
dream, let me dream!"

"What are you dreaming about?"

A moment passed before his answer came. "About a tall woman in a quaint
black dress, with yellow hair and a sweet, sweet smile, and a soft low
delicious voice! I'm in love with her."

"It's better to see her than to dream about her," I said. "Get up and
dress; then we'll go down to dinner and meet her."

"Dinner--dinner--?" And he gradually opened his eyes again. "Yes, upon
my word I shall dine!"

"Oh you're all right!" I declared for the twentieth time as he rose to
his feet. "You'll live to bury Mr. Simmons." He told me he had spent the
hours of my absence with Miss Searle--they had strolled together half
over the place. "You must be very intimate," I smiled.

"She's intimate with ME. Goodness knows what rigmarole I've treated her
to!" They had parted an hour ago; since when, he believed, her brother
had arrived.

The slow-fading twilight was still in the great drawing-room when we
came down. The housekeeper had told us this apartment was rarely used,
there being others, smaller and more convenient, for the same needs.
It seemed now, however, to be occupied in my comrade's honour. At the
furthest end, rising to the roof like a royal tomb in a cathedral, was
a great chimney-piece of chiselled white marble, yellowed by time, in
which a light fire was crackling. Before the fire stood a small short
man, with his hands behind him; near him was Miss Searle, so transformed
by her dress that at first I scarcely knew her. There was in our
entrance and reception something remarkably chilling and solemn. We
moved in silence up the long room; Mr. Searle advanced slowly, a dozen
steps, to meet us; his sister stood motionless. I was conscious of her
masking her visage with a large white tinselled fan, and that her eyes,
grave and enlarged, watched us intently over the top of it. The master
of Lackley grasped in silence the proffered hand of his kinsman and eyed
him from head to foot, suppressing, I noted, a start of surprise at his
resemblance to Sir Joshua's portrait. "This is a happy day." And then
turning to me with an odd little sharp stare: "My cousin's friend is my
friend." Miss Searle lowered her fan.

The first thing that struck me in Mr. Searle's appearance was his very
limited stature, which was less by half a head than that of his sister.
The second was the preternatural redness of his hair and beard. They
intermingled over his ears and surrounded his head like a huge lurid
nimbus. His face was pale and attenuated, the face of a scholar, a
dilettante, a comparer of points and texts, a man who lives in a library
bending over books and prints and medals. At a distance it might have
passed for smooth and rather blankly composed; but on a nearer view
it revealed a number of wrinkles, sharply etched and scratched, of a
singularly aged and refined effect. It was the complexion of a man of
sixty. His nose was arched and delicate, identical almost with the nose
of my friend. His eyes, large and deep-set, had a kind of auburn glow,
the suggestion of a keen metal red-hot--or, more plainly, were full
of temper and spirit. Imagine this physiognomy--grave and solemn,
grotesquely solemn, in spite of the bushy brightness which made a sort
of frame for it--set in motion by a queer, quick, defiant, perfunctory,
preoccupied smile, and you will have an imperfect notion of the
remarkable presence of our host; something better worth seeing and
knowing, I perceived as I quite breathlessly took him in, than anything
we had yet encountered. How thoroughly I had entered into sympathy
with my poor picked-up friend, and how effectually I had associated my
sensibilities with his own, I had not suspected till, within the short
five minutes before the signal for dinner, I became aware, without his
giving me the least hint, of his placing himself on the defensive. To
neither of us was Mr. Searle sympathetic. I might have guessed from her
attitude that his sister entered into our thoughts. A marked change had
been wrought in her since the morning; during the hour, indeed--as
I read in the light of the wondering glance he cast at her--that had
elapsed since her parting with her cousin. She had not yet recovered
from some great agitation. Her face was pale and she had clearly
been crying. These notes of trouble gave her a new and quite perverse
dignity, which was further enhanced by something complimentary and
commemorative in her dress.

Whether it was taste or whether it was accident I know not; but the
amiable creature, as she stood there half in the cool twilight, half in
the arrested glow of the fire as it spent itself in the vastness of its
marble cave, was a figure for a painter. She was habited in some faded
splendour of sea-green crape and silk, a piece of millinery which,
though it must have witnessed a number of dull dinners, preserved still
a festive air. Over her white shoulders she wore an ancient web of the
most precious and venerable lace and about her rounded throat a single
series of large pearls. I went in with her to dinner, and Mr. Searle,
following with my friend, took his arm, as the latter afterwards told
me, and pretended jocosely to conduct him. As dinner proceeded the
feeling grew within me that a drama had begun to be played in which the
three persons before me were actors--each of a really arduous part. The
character allotted to my friend, however, was certainly the least easy
to represent with effect, though I overflowed with the desire that he
should acquit himself to his honour. I seemed to see him urge his faded
faculties to take their cue and perform. The poor fellow tried to do
himself credit more seriously than ever in his old best days. With Miss
Searle, credulous passive and pitying, he had finally flung aside all
vanity and propriety and shown the bottom of his fantastic heart.
But with our host there might be no talking of nonsense nor taking
of liberties; there and then, if ever, sat a consummate conservative,
breathing the fumes of hereditary privilege and security. For an hour,
accordingly, I saw my poor protege attempt, all in pain, to meet a new
decorum. He set himself the task of appearing very American, in order
that his appreciation of everything Mr. Searle represented might seem
purely disinterested. What his kinsman had expected him to be I know
not; but I made Mr. Searle out as annoyed, in spite of his exaggerated
urbanity, at finding him so harmless. Our host was not the man to
show his hand, but I think his best card had been a certain implicit
confidence that so provincial a parasite would hardly have good manners.

He led the conversation to the country we had left; rather as if a leash
had been attached to the collar of some lumpish and half-domesticated
animal the tendency of whose movements had to be recognised. He spoke of
it indeed as of some fabled planet, alien to the British orbit, lately
proclaimed to have the admixture of atmospheric gases required
to support animal life, but not, save under cover of a liberal
afterthought, to be admitted into one's regular conception of things. I,
for my part, felt nothing but regret that the spheric smoothness of
his universe should be disfigured by the extrusion even of such
inconsiderable particles as ourselves.

"I knew in a general way of our having somehow ramified over there," Mr.
Searle mentioned; "but had scarcely followed it more than you pretend to
pick up the fruit your long-armed pear tree may drop, on the other side
of your wall, in your neighbour's garden. There was a man I knew at
Cambridge, a very odd fellow, a decent fellow too; he and I were rather
cronies; I think he afterwards went to the Middle States. They'll be,
I suppose, about the Mississippi? At all events, there was that
great-uncle of mine whom Sir Joshua painted. He went to America, but he
never got there. He was lost at sea. You look enough like him to make
one fancy he DID get there and that you've kept him alive by one of
those beastly processes--I think you have 'em over there: what do you
call it, 'putting up' things? If you're he you've not done a wise thing
to show yourself here. He left a bad name behind him. There's a ghost
who comes sobbing about the house every now and then, the ghost of one
to whom he did a wrong."

"Oh mercy ON us!" cried Miss Searle in simple horror.

"Of course YOU know nothing of such things," he rather dryly allowed.
"You're too sound a sleeper to hear the sobbing of ghosts."

"I'm sure I should like immensely to hear the sobbing of a ghost," said
my friend, the light of his previous eagerness playing up into his eyes.
"Why does it sob? I feel as if that were what we've come above all to
learn."

Mr. Searle eyed his audience a moment gaugingly; he held the balance as
to measure his resources. He wished to do justice to his theme. With
the long finger-nails of his left hand nervously playing against the
tinkling crystal of his wineglass and his conscious eyes betraying that,
small and strange as he sat there, he knew himself, to his pleasure and
advantage, remarkably impressive, he dropped into our untutored minds
the sombre legend of his house. "Mr. Clement Searle, from all I gather,
was a young man of great talents but a weak disposition. His mother was
left a widow early in life, with two sons, of whom he was the elder and
the more promising. She educated him with the greatest affection and
care. Of course when he came to manhood she wished him to marry well.
His means were quite sufficient to enable him to overlook the want of
money in his wife; and Mrs. Searle selected a young lady who possessed,
as she conceived, every good gift save a fortune--a fine proud handsome
girl, the daughter of an old friend, an old lover I suspect, of her own.
Clement, however, as it appeared, had either chosen otherwise or was
as yet unprepared to choose. The young lady opened upon him in vain the
battery of her attractions; in vain his mother urged her cause. Clement
remained cold, insensible, inflexible. Mrs. Searle had a character which
appears to have gone out of fashion in my family nowadays; she was a
great manager, a maitresse-femme. A proud passionate imperious woman,
she had had immense cares and ever so many law-suits; they had sharpened
her temper and her will. She suspected that her son's affections had
another object, and this object she began to hate. Irritated by his
stubborn defiance of her wishes she persisted in her purpose. The more
she watched him the more she was convinced he loved in secret. If he
loved in secret of course he loved beneath him. He went about the place
all sombre and sullen and brooding. At last, with the rashness of an
angry woman, she threatened to bring the young lady of her choice--who,
by the way, seems to have been no shrinking blossom--to stay in the
house. A stormy scene was the result. He threatened that if she did
so he would leave the country and sail for America. She probably
disbelieved him; she knew him to be weak, but she overrated his
weakness. At all events the rejected one arrived and Clement Searle
departed. On a dark December day he took ship at Southampton. The two
women, desperate with rage and sorrow, sat alone in this big house,
mingling their tears and imprecations. A fortnight later, on Christmas
Eve, in the midst of a great snowstorm long famous in the country,
something happened that quickened their bitterness. A young woman,
battered and chilled by the storm, gained entrance to the house and,
making her way into the presence of the mistress and her guest, poured
out her tale. She was a poor curate's daughter out of some little hole
in Gloucestershire. Clement Searle had loved her--loved her all too
well! She had been turned out in wrath from her father's house; his
mother at least might pity her--if not for herself then for the child
she was soon to bring forth. Hut the poor girl had been a second time
too trustful. The women, in scorn, in horror, with blows possibly, drove
her forth again into the storm. In the storm she wandered and in the
deep snow she died. Her lover, as you know, perished in that hard winter
weather at sea; the news came to his mother late, but soon enough. We're
haunted by the curate's daughter!"

Mr. Searle retailed this anecdote with infinite taste and point, the
happiest art; when he ceased there was a pause of some moments. "Ah well
we may be!" Miss Searle then mournfully murmured.

Searle blazed up into enthusiasm. "Of course, you know"--with which he
began to blush violently--"I should be sorry to claim any identity
with the poor devil my faithless namesake. But I should be immensely
gratified if the young lady's spirit, deceived by my resemblance, were
to mistake me for her cruel lover. She's welcome to the comfort of it.
What one can do in the case I shall be glad to do. But can a ghost haunt
a ghost? I AM a ghost!"

Mr. Searle stared a moment and then had a subtle sneer. "I could almost
believe you are!"

"Oh brother--and cousin!" cried Miss Searle with the gentlest yet most
appealing dignity. "How can you talk so horribly?" The horrible talk,
however, evidently possessed a potent magic for my friend; and his
imagination, checked a while by the influence of his kinsman, began
again to lead him a dance. From this moment he ceased to steer his frail
bark, to care what he said or how he said it, so long as he expressed
his passionate appreciation of the scene around him. As he kept up this
strain I ceased even secretly to wish he wouldn't. I have wondered since
that I shouldn't have been annoyed by the way he reverted constantly to
himself. But a great frankness, for the time, makes its own law and
a great passion its own channel. There was moreover an irresponsible
indescribable effect of beauty in everything his lips uttered. Free
alike from adulation and from envy, the essence of his discourse was a
divine apprehension, a romantic vision free as the flight of Ariel, of
the poetry of his companions' situation and their contrasted general
irresponsiveness.

"How does the look of age come?" he suddenly broke out at dessert. "Does
it come of itself, unobserved, unrecorded, unmeasured? Or do you woo it
and set baits and traps for it, and watch it like the dawning brownness
of a meerschaum pipe, and make it fast, when it appears, just where it
peeps out, and light a votive taper beneath it and give thanks to it
daily? Or do you forbid it and fight it and resist it, and yet feel it
settling and deepening about you as irresistible as fate?"

"What the deuce is the man talking about?" said the smile of our host.

"I found a little grey hair this morning," Miss Searle incoherently
prosed.

"Well then I hope you paid it every respect!" cried her visitor.

"I looked at it for a long time in my hand-glass," she answered with
more presence of mind.

"Miss Searle can for many years to come afford to be amused at grey
hairs," I interposed in the hope of some greater ease. It had its
effect. "Ten years from last Thursday I shall be forty-four," she almost
comfortably smiled.

"Well, that's just what I am," said Searle. "If I had only come here ten
years ago! I should have had more time to enjoy the feast, but I should
have had less appetite. I needed first to get famished."

"Oh why did you wait for that?" his entertainer asked. "To think of
these ten years that we might have been enjoying you!" At the vision of
which waste and loss Mr. Searle had a fine shrill laugh.

"Well," my friend explained, "I always had a notion--a stupid vulgar
notion if there ever was one--that to come abroad properly one had to
have a pot of money. My pot was too nearly empty. At last I came with my
empty pot!"

Mr. Searle had a wait for delicacy, but he proceeded. "You're reduced,
you're--a--straitened?"

Our companion's very breath blew away the veil. "Reduced to nothing.
Straitened to the clothes on my back!"

"You don't say so!" said Mr. Searle with a large vague gasp.
"Well--well--well!" he added in a voice which might have meant
everything or nothing; and then, in his whimsical way, went on to finish
a glass of wine. His searching eye, as he drank, met mine, and for a
moment we each rather deeply sounded the other, to the effect no doubt
of a slight embarrassment. "And you," he said by way of carrying this
off--"how about YOUR wardrobe?"

"Oh his!" cried my friend; "his wardrobe's immense. He could dress up a
regiment!" He had drunk more champagne--I admit that the champagne
was good--than was from any point of view to have been desired. He was
rapidly drifting beyond any tacit dissuasion of mine. He was feverish
and rash, and all attempt to direct would now simply irritate him. As
we rose from the table he caught my troubled look. Passing his arm for
a moment into mine, "This is the great night!" he strangely and softly
said; "the night and the crisis that will settle me."

Mr. Searle had caused the whole lower portion of the house to be thrown
open and a multitude of lights to be placed in convenient and effective
positions. Such a marshalled wealth of ancient candlesticks and
flambeaux I had never beheld. Niched against the dusky wainscots,
casting great luminous circles upon the pendent stiffness of sombre
tapestries, enhancing and completing with admirable effect the variety
and mystery of the great ancient house, they seemed to people the wide
rooms, as our little group passed slowly from one to another, with a
dim expectant presence. We had thus, in spite of everything, a wonderful
hour of it. Mr. Searle at once assumed the part of cicerone, and--I had
not hitherto done him justice--Mr. Searle became almost agreeable. While
I lingered behind with his sister he walked in advance with his kinsman.
It was as if he had said: "Well, if you want the old place you shall
have it--so far as the impression goes!" He spared us no thrill--I
had almost said no pang--of that experience. Carrying a tall silver
candlestick in his left hand, he raised it and lowered it and cast the
light hither and thither, upon pictures and hangings and carvings and
cornices. He knew his house to perfection. He touched upon a hundred
traditions and memories, he threw off a cloud of rich reference to
its earlier occupants. He threw off again, in his easy elegant way, a
dozen--happily lighter--anecdotes. His relative attended with a brooding
deference. Miss Searle and I meanwhile were not wholly silent.

"I suppose that by this time you and your cousin are almost old
friends," I remarked.

She trifled a moment with her fan and then raised her kind small
eyes. "Old friends--yet at the same time strangely new! My cousin, my
cousin"--and her voice lingered on the word--"it seems so strange to
call him my cousin after thinking these many years that I've no one in
the world but my brother. But he's really so very odd!"

"It's not so much he as--well, as his situation, that deserves that
name," I tried to reason.

"I'm so sorry for his situation. I wish I could help it in some way. He
interests me so much." She gave a sweet-sounding sigh. "I wish I could
have known him sooner--and better. He tells me he's but the shadow of
what he used to be."

I wondered if he had been consciously practising on the sensibilities of
this gentle creature. If he had I believed he had gained his point. But
his position had in fact become to my sense so precarious that I hardly
ventured to be glad. "His better self just now seems again to be taking
shape," I said. "It will have been a good deed on your part if you help
to restore him to all he ought to be."

She met my idea blankly. "Dear me, what can I do?"

"Be a friend to him. Let him like you, let him love you. I dare say you
see in him now much to pity and to wonder at. But let him simply enjoy
a while the grateful sense of your nearness and dearness. He'll be
a better and stronger man for it, and then you can love him, you can
esteem him, without restriction."

She fairly frowned for helplessness. "It's a hard part for poor stupid
me to play!"

Her almost infantine innocence left me no choice but to be absolutely
frank. "Did you ever play any part at all?"

She blushed as if I had been reproaching her with her insignificance.
"Never! I think I've hardly lived."

"You've begun to live now perhaps. You've begun to care for something
else than your old-fashioned habits. Pardon me if I seem rather
meddlesome; you know we Americans are very rough and ready. It's a great
moment. I wish you joy!"

"I could almost believe you're laughing at me. I feel more trouble than
joy."

"Why do you feel trouble?"

She paused with her eyes fixed on our companions. "My cousin's arrival's
a great disturbance," she said at last.

"You mean you did wrong in coming to meet him? In that case the fault's
mine. He had no intention of giving you the opportunity."

"I certainly took too much on myself. But I can't find it in my heart to
regret it. I never shall regret it! I did the only thing I COULD, heaven
forgive me!"

"Heaven bless you, Miss Searle! Is any harm to come of it? I did the
evil; let me bear the brunt!"

She shook her head gravely. "You don't know my brother!"

"The sooner I master the subject the better then," I said. I couldn't
help relieving myself--at least by the tone of my voice--of the
antipathy with which, decidedly, this gentleman had inspired me. "Not
perhaps that we should get on so well together!" After which, as she
turned away, "Are you VERY much afraid of him?" I added.

She gave me a shuddering sidelong glance. "He's looking at me!"

He was placed with his back to us, holding a large Venetian hand-mirror,
framed in chiselled silver, which he had taken from a shelf of
antiquities, just at such an angle that he caught the reflexion of his
sister's person. It was evident that I too was under his attention, and
was resolved I wouldn't be suspected for nothing. "Miss Searle," I said
with urgency, "promise me something."

She turned upon me with a start and a look that seemed to beg me to
spare her. "Oh don't ask me--please don't!" It was as if she were
standing on the edge of a place where the ground had suddenly fallen
away, and had been called upon to make a leap. I felt retreat was
impossible, however, and that it was the greater kindness to assist her
to jump.

"Promise me," I repeated.

Still with her eyes she protested. "Oh what a dreadful day!" she cried
at last.

"Promise me to let him speak to you alone if he should ask you--any wish
you may suspect on your brother's part notwithstanding." She coloured
deeply. "You mean he has something so particular to say?"

"Something so particular!"

"Poor cousin!"

"Well, poor cousin! But promise me."

"I promise," she said, and moved away across the long room and out of
the door.

"You're in time to hear the most delightful story," Searle began to me
as I rejoined him and his host. They were standing before an old sombre
portrait of a lady in the dress of Queen Anne's time, whose ill-painted
flesh-tints showed livid, in the candle-light, against her dark drapery
and background. "This is Mrs. Margaret Searle--a sort of Beatrix
Esmond--qui se passait ses fantaisies. She married a paltry Frenchman,
a penniless fiddler, in the teeth of her whole family. Pretty Mrs.
Margaret, you must have been a woman of courage! Upon my word, she looks
like Miss Searle! But pray go on. What came of it all?"

Our companion watched him with an air of distaste for his boisterous
homage and of pity for his crude imagination. But he took up the tale
with an effective dryness: "I found a year ago, in a box of very old
papers, a letter from the lady in question to a certain Cynthia Searle,
her elder sister. It was dated from Paris and dreadfully ill-spelled.
It contained a most passionate appeal for pecuniary assistance. She
had just had a baby, she was starving and dreadfully neglected by her
husband--she cursed the day she had left England. It was a most dismal
production. I never heard she found means to return."

"So much for marrying a Frenchman!" I said sententiously.

Our host had one of his waits. "This is the only lady of the family who
ever was taken in by an adventurer."

"Does Miss Searle know her history?" asked my friend with a stare at the
rounded whiteness of the heroine's cheek.

"Miss Searle knows nothing!" said our host with expression.

"She shall know at least the tale of Mrs. Margaret," their guest
returned; and he walked rapidly away in search of her.

Mr. Searle and I pursued our march through the lighted rooms. "You've
found a cousin with a vengeance," I doubtless awkwardly enough laughed.

"Ah a vengeance?" my entertainer stiffly repeated.

"I mean that he takes as keen an interest in your annals and possessions
as yourself."

"Oh exactly so! He tells me he's a bad invalid," he added in a moment.
"I should never have supposed it."

"Within the past few hours he's a changed man. Your beautiful house,
your extreme kindness, have refreshed him immensely." Mr. Searle uttered
the vague ejaculation with which self-conscious Britons so often betray
the concussion of any especial courtesy of speech. But he followed this
by a sudden odd glare and the sharp declaration: "I'm an honest man!" I
was quite prepared to assent; but he went on with a fury of frankness,
as if it were the first time in his life he had opened himself to any
one, as if the process were highly disagreeable and he were hurrying
through it as a task. "An honest man, mind you! I know nothing about Mr.
Clement Searle! I never expected to see him. He has been to me a--a--!"
And here he paused to select a word which should vividly enough express
what, for good or for ill, his kinsman represented. "He has been to me
an Amazement! I've no doubt he's a most amiable man. You'll not deny,
however, that he's a very extraordinary sort of person. I'm sorry he's
ill. I'm sorry he's poor. He's my fiftieth cousin. Well and good. I'm
an honest man. He shall not have it to say that he wasn't received at my
house."

"He too, thank heaven, is an honest man!" I smiled.

"Why the devil then," cried Mr. Searle, turning almost fiercely on me,
"has he put forward this underhand claim to my property?"

The question, quite ringing out, flashed backward a gleam of light upon
the demeanour of our host and the suppressed agitation of his sister. In
an instant the jealous gentleman revealed itself. For a moment I was so
surprised and scandalised at the directness of his attack that I lacked
words to reply. As soon as he had spoken indeed Mr. Searle appeared to
feel he had been wanting in form. "Pardon me," he began afresh, "if I
speak of this matter with heat. But I've been more disgusted than I
can say to hear, as I heard this morning from my solicitor, of the
extraordinary proceedings of Mr. Clement Searle. Gracious goodness,
sir, for what does the man take me? He pretends to the Lord knows what
fantastic admiration for my place. Let him then show his respect for it
by not taking too many liberties! Let him, with his high-flown parade
of loyalty, imagine a tithe of what _I_ feel! I love my estate; it's my
passion, my conscience, my life! Am I to divide it up at this time of
day with a beggarly foreigner--a man without means, without appearance,
without proof, a pretender, an adventurer, a chattering mountebank? I
thought America boasted having lands for all men! Upon my soul, sir,
I've never been so shocked in my life."

I paused for some moments before speaking, to allow his passion fully to
expend itself and to flicker up again if it chose; for so far as I was
concerned in the whole awkward matter I but wanted to deal with him
discreetly. "Your apprehensions, sir," I said at last, "your not
unnatural surprise, perhaps, at the candour of our interest, have acted
too much on your nerves. You're attacking a man of straw, a creature
of unworthy illusion; though I'm sadly afraid you've wounded a man
of spirit and conscience. Either my friend has no valid claim on your
estate, in which case your agitation is superfluous; or he HAS a valid
claim--"

Mr. Searle seized my arm and glared at me; his pale face paler still
with the horror of my suggestion, his great eyes of alarm glowing and
his strange red hair erect and quivering. "A valid claim!" he shouted.
"Let him try it--let him bring it into court!"

We had emerged into the great hall and stood facing the main doorway.
The door was open into the portico, through the stone archway of which
I saw the garden glitter in the blue light of a full moon. As the master
of the house uttered the words I have just repeated my companion came
slowly up into the porch from without, bareheaded, bright in the outer
moonlight, dark in the shadow of the archway, and bright again in the
lamplight at the entrance of the hall. As he crossed the threshold the
butler made an appearance at the head of the staircase on our left,
faltering visibly a moment at sight of Mr. Searle; after which, noting
my friend, he gravely descended. He bore in his hand a small silver
tray. On the tray, gleaming in the light of the suspended lamp, lay a
folded note. Clement Searle came forward, staring a little and startled,
I think, by some quick nervous prevision of a catastrophe. The butler
applied the match to the train. He advanced to my fellow visitor, all
solemnly, with the offer of his missive. Mr. Searle made a movement as
if to spring forward, but controlled himself. "Tottenham!" he called in
a strident voice.

"Yes, sir!" said Tottenham, halting.

"Stand where you are. For whom is that note?"

"For Mr. Clement Searle," said the butler, staring straight before him
and dissociating himself from everything.

"Who gave it to you?"

"Mrs. Horridge, sir." This personage, I afterwards learned, was our
friend the housekeeper.

"Who gave it Mrs. Horridge?"

There was on Tottenham's part just an infinitesimal pause before
replying.

"My dear sir," broke in Searle, his equilibrium, his ancient ease,
completely restored by the crisis, "isn't that rather my business?"

"What happens in my house is my business, and detestable things seem to
be happening." Our host, it was clear, now so furiously detested them
that I was afraid he would snatch the bone of contention without more
ceremony. "Bring me that thing!" he cried; on which Tottenham stiffly
moved to obey.

"Really this is too much!" broke out my companion, affronted and
helpless.

So indeed it struck me, and before Mr. Searle had time to take the note
I possessed myself of it. "If you've no consideration for your sister
let a stranger at least act for her." And I tore the disputed object
into a dozen pieces.

"In the name of decency, what does this horrid business mean?" my
companion quavered.

Mr. Searle was about to open fire on him, but at that moment our hostess
appeared on the staircase, summoned evidently by our high-pitched
contentious voices. She had exchanged her dinner-dress for a dark
wrapper, removed her ornaments and begun to disarrange her hair, a
thick tress of which escaped from the comb. She hurried down with a
pale questioning face. Feeling distinctly that, for ourselves, immediate
departure was in the air, and divining Mr. Tottenham to be a person of
a few deep-seated instincts and of much latent energy, I seized the
opportunity to request him, sotto voce, to send a carriage to the door
without delay. "And put up our things," I added.

Our host rushed at his sister and grabbed the white wrist that escaped
from the loose sleeve of her dress. "What was in that note?" he quite
hissed at her.

Miss Searle looked first at its scattered fragments and then at her
cousin. "Did you read it?"

"No, but I thank you for it!" said Searle.

Her eyes, for an instant, communicated with his own as I think they had
never, never communicated with any other source of meaning; then she
transferred them to her brother's face, where the sense went out of
them, only to leave a dull sad patience. But there was something even
in this flat humility that seemed to him to mock him, so that he flushed
crimson with rage and spite and flung her away. "You always were an
idiot! Go to bed."

In poor Searle's face as well the gathered serenity had been by this
time all blighted and distorted and the reflected brightness of his
happy day turned to blank confusion. "Have I been dealing these three
hours with a madman?" he woefully cried.

"A madman, yes, if you will! A man mad with the love of his home and the
sense of its stability. I've held my tongue till now, but you've been
too much for me. Who the devil are you, and what and why and whence?"
the terrible little man continued. "From what paradise of fools do you
come that you fancy I shall make over to you, for the asking, a part
of my property and my life? I'm forsooth, you ridiculous person, to go
shares with you? Prove your preposterous claim! There isn't THAT in it!"
And he kicked one of the bits of paper on the floor.

Searle received this broadside gaping. Then turning away he went and
seated himself on a bench against the wall and rubbed his forehead
amazedly. I looked at my watch and listened for the wheels of our
carriage.

But his kinsman was too launched to pull himself up. "Wasn't it enough
that you should have plotted against my rights? Need you have come into
my very house to intrigue with my sister?"

My friend put his two hands to his face. "Oh, oh, oh!" he groaned while
Miss Searle crossed rapidly and dropped on her knees at his side.

"Go to bed, you fool!" shrieked her brother.

"Dear cousin," she said, "it's cruel you're to have so to think of us!"

"Oh I shall think of YOU as you'd like!" He laid a hand on her head.

"I believe you've done nothing wrong," she brought bravely out.

"I've done what I could," Mr. Searle went on--"but it's arrant folly to
pretend to friendship when this abomination lies between us. You were
welcome to my meat and my wine, but I wonder you could swallow them. The
sight spoiled MY appetite!" cried the master of Lackley with a laugh.
"Proceed with your trumpery case! My people in London are instructed and
prepared."

"I shouldn't wonder if your case had improved a good deal since you gave
it up," I was moved to observe to Searle.

"Oho! you don't feign ignorance then?" and our insane entertainer shook
his shining head at me. "It's very kind of you to give it up! Perhaps
you'll also give up my sister!"

Searle sat staring in distress at his adversary. "Ah miserable man--I
thought we had become such beautiful friends."

"Boh, you hypocrite!" screamed our host.

Searle seemed not to hear him. "Am I seriously expected," he slowly and
painfully pursued, "to defend myself against the accusation of any real
indelicacy--to prove I've done nothing underhand or impudent? Think what
you please!" And he rose, with an effort, to his feet. "I know what YOU
think!" he added to Miss Searle.

The wheels of the carriage resounded on the gravel, and at the same
moment a footman descended with our two portmanteaux. Mr. Tottenham
followed him with our hats and coats.

"Good God," our host broke out again, "you're not going away?"--an
ejaculation that, after all that had happened, had the grandest
comicality. "Bless my soul," he then remarked as artlessly, "of course
you're going!"

"It's perhaps well," said Miss Searle with a great effort, inexpressibly
touching in one for whom great efforts were visibly new and strange,
"that I should tell you what my poor little note contained."

"That matter of your note, madam," her brother interrupted, "you and I
will settle together!"

"Let me imagine all sorts of kind things!" Searle beautifully pleaded.

"Ah too much has been imagined!" she answered simply. "It was only a
word of warning. It was to tell you to go. I knew something painful was
coming."

He took his hat. "The pains and the pleasures of this day," he said to
his kinsman, "I shall equally never forget. Knowing you," and he offered
his hand to Miss Searle, "has been the pleasure of pleasures. I hoped
something more might have come of it."

"A monstrous deal too much has come of it!" Mr. Searle irrepressibly
declared.

His departing guest looked at him mildly, almost benignantly, from head
to foot, and then with closed eyes and some collapse of strength, "I'm
afraid so, I can't stand more," he went on. I gave him my arm and we
crossed the threshold. As we passed out I heard Miss Searle break into
loud weeping.

"We shall hear from each other yet, I take it!" her brother pursued,
harassing our retreat.

My friend stopped, turning round on him fiercely. "You very impossible
man!" he cried in his face.

"Do you mean to say you'll not prosecute?" Mr. Searle kept it up. "I
shall force you to prosecute! I shall drag you into court, and you shall
be beaten--beaten--beaten!" Which grim reiteration followed us on our
course.

We drove of course to the little wayside inn from which we had departed
in the morning so unencumbered, in all broad England, either with
enemies or friends. My companion, as the carriage rolled along, seemed
overwhelmed and exhausted. "What a beautiful horrible dream!" he
confusedly wailed. "What a strange awakening! What a long long day! What
a hideous scene! Poor me! Poor woman!" When we had resumed possession of
our two little neighbouring rooms I asked him whether Miss Searle's
note had been the result of anything that had passed between them on
his going to rejoin her. "I found her on the terrace," he said, "walking
restlessly up and down in the moonlight. I was greatly excited--I
hardly know what I said. I asked her, I think, if she knew the story of
Margaret Searle. She seemed frightened and troubled, and she used
just the words her brother had used--'I know nothing.' For the moment,
somehow, I felt as a man drunk. I stood before her and told her, with
great emphasis, how poor Margaret had married a beggarly foreigner--all
in obedience to her heart and in defiance to her family. As I talked the
sheeted moonlight seemed to close about us, so that we stood there in
a dream, in a world quite detached. She grew younger, prettier, more
attractive--I found myself talking all kinds of nonsense. Before I knew
it I had gone very far. I was taking her hand and calling her 'Margaret,
dear Margaret!' She had said it was impossible, that she could do
nothing, that she was a fool, a child, a slave. Then with a sudden
sense--it was odd how it came over me there--of the reality of my
connexion with the place, I spoke of my claim against the estate. 'It
exists,' I declared, 'but I've given it up. Be generous! Pay me for my
sacrifice.' For an instant her face was radiant. 'If I marry you,'
she asked, 'will it make everything right?' Of that I at once assured
her--in our marriage the whole difficulty would melt away like a
rain-drop in the great sea. 'Our marriage!' she repeated in wonder; and
the deep ring of her voice seemed to wake us up and show us our folly.
'I love you, but I shall never see you again,' she cried; and she
hurried away with her face in her hands. I walked up and down the
terrace for some moments, and then came in and met you. That's the only
witchcraft I've used!"

The poor man was at once so roused and so shaken by the day's events
that I believed he would get little sleep. Conscious on my own part that
I shouldn't close my eyes, I but partly undressed, stirred my fire
and sat down to do some writing. I heard the great clock in the little
parlour below strike twelve, one, half-past one. Just as the vibration
of this last stroke was dying on the air the door of communication with
Searle's room was flung open and my companion stood on the threshold,
pale as a corpse, in his nightshirt, shining like a phantom against the
darkness behind him. "Look well at me!" he intensely gasped; "touch me,
embrace me, revere me! You see a man who has seen a ghost!"

"Gracious goodness, what do you mean?"

"Write it down!" he went on. "There, take your pen. Put it into dreadful
words. How do I look? Am I human? Am I pale? Am I red? Am I speaking
English? A ghost, sir! Do you understand?"

I confess there came upon me by contact a kind of supernatural shock. I
shall always feel by the whole communication of it that I too have seen
a ghost. My first movement--I can smile at it now--was to spring to the
door, close it quickly and turn the key upon the gaping blackness from
which Searle had emerged. I seized his two hands; they were wet with
perspiration. I pushed my chair to the fire and forced him to sit down
in it; then I got on my knees and held his hands as firmly as possible.
They trembled and quivered; his eyes were fixed save that the pupil
dilated and contracted with extraordinary force. I asked no questions,
but waited there, very curious for what he would say. At last he spoke.
"I'm not frightened, but I'm--oh excited! This is life! This is living!
My nerves--my heart--my brain! They're throbbing--don't you feel it? Do
you tingle? Are you hot? Are you cold? Hold me tight--tight--tight! I
shall tremble away into waves--into surges--and know all the secrets of
things and all the reasons and all the mysteries!" He paused a moment
and then went on: "A woman--as clear as that candle: no, far clearer! In
a blue dress, with a black mantle on her head and a little black muff.
Young and wonderfully pretty, pale and ill; with the sadness of all
the women who ever loved and suffered pleading and accusing in her
wet-looking eyes. God knows I never did any such thing! But she took me
for my elder, for the other Clement. She came to me here as she would
have come to me there. She wrung her hands and she spoke to me 'marry
me!' she moaned; 'marry me and put an end to my shame!' I sat up in bed,
just as I sit here, looked at her, heard her--heard her voice melt away,
watched her figure fade away. Bless us and save us! Here I be!"

I made no attempt either to explain or to criticise this extraordinary
passage. It's enough that I yielded for the hour to the strange force
of my friend's emotion. On the whole I think my own vision was the
more interesting of the two. He beheld but the transient irresponsible
spectre--I beheld the human subject hot from the spectral presence. Yet
I soon recovered my judgement sufficiently to be moved again to try to
guard him against the results of excitement and exposure. It was easily
agreed that he was not for the night to return to his room, and I made
him fairly comfortable in his place by my fire. Wishing above all to
preserve him from a chill I removed my bedding and wrapped him in the
blankets and counterpane. I had no nerves either for writing or for
sleep; so I put out my lights, renewed the fuel and sat down on the
opposite side of the hearth. I found it a great and high solemnity just
to watch my companion. Silent, swathed and muffled to his chin, he sat
rigid and erect with the dignity of his adventure. For the most part
his eyes were closed; though from time to time he would open them with
a steady expansion and stare, never blinking, into the flame, as if he
again beheld without terror the image of the little woman with the muff.
His cadaverous emaciated face, his tragic wrinkles intensified by the
upward glow from the hearth, his distorted moustache, his extraordinary
gravity and a certain fantastical air as the red light flickered over
him, all re-enforced his fine likeness to the vision-haunted knight of
La Mancha when laid up after some grand exploit. The night passed wholly
without speech. Toward its close I slept for half an hour. When I awoke
the awakened birds had begun to twitter and Searle, unperturbed, sat
staring at me. We exchanged a long look, and I felt with a pang that his
glittering eyes had tasted their last of natural sleep. "How is it? Are
you comfortable?" I nevertheless asked.

He fixed me for a long time without replying and then spoke with a
weak extravagance and with such pauses between his words as might have
represented the slow prompting of an inner voice. "You asked me when
you first knew me what I was. 'Nothing,' I said, 'nothing of any
consequence.' Nothing I've always supposed myself to be. But I've
wronged myself--I'm a great exception. I'm a haunted man!"

If sleep had passed out of his eyes I felt with even a deeper pang that
sanity had abandoned his spirit. From this moment I was prepared for
the worst. There were in my friend, however, such confirmed habits of
mildness that I found myself not in the least fearing he would prove
unmanageable. As morning began fully to dawn upon us I brought our
curious vigil to a close. Searle was so enfeebled that I gave him
my hands to help him out of his chair, and he retained them for some
moments after rising to his feet, unable as he seemed to keep his
balance. "Well," he said, "I've been once favoured, but don't think I
shall be favoured again. I shall soon be myself as fit to 'appear' as
any of them. I shall haunt the master of Lackley! It can only mean
one thing--that they're getting ready for me on the other side of the
grave."

When I touched the question of breakfast he replied that he had his
breakfast in his pocket; and he drew from his travelling-bag a phial of
morphine. He took a strong dose and went to bed. At noon I found him
on foot again, dressed, shaved, much refreshed. "Poor fellow," he said,
"you've got more than you bargained for--not only a man with a grievance
but a man with a ghost. Well, it won't be for long!" It had of course
promptly become a question whither we should now direct our steps. "As
I've so little time," he argued for this, "I should like to see the
best, the best alone." I answered that either for time or eternity I had
always supposed Oxford to represent the English maximum, and for Oxford
in the course of an hour we accordingly departed.




IV

Of that extraordinary place I shall not attempt to speak with any order
or indeed with any coherence. It must ever remain one of the supreme
gratifications of travel for any American aware of the ancient pieties
of race. The impression it produces, the emotions it kindles in the
mind of such a visitor, are too rich and various to be expressed in the
halting rhythm of prose. Passing through the small oblique streets in
which the long grey battered public face of the colleges seems to watch
jealously for sounds that may break upon the stillness of study, you
feel it the most dignified and most educated of cities. Over and through
it all the great corporate fact of the University slowly throbs after
the fashion of some steady bass in a concerted piece or that of the
mediaeval mystical presence of the Empire in the old States of Germany.
The plain perpendicular of the so mildly conventual fronts, masking
blest seraglios of culture and leisure, irritates the imagination
scarce less than the harem-walls of Eastern towns. Within their arching
portals, however, you discover more sacred and sunless courts, and
the dark verdure soothing and cooling to bookish eyes. The grey-green
quadrangles stand for ever open with a trustful hospitality. The seat of
the humanities is stronger in her own good manners than in a marshalled
host of wardens and beadles. Directly after our arrival my friend and
I wandered forth in the luminous early dusk. We reached the bridge
that under-spans the walls of Magdalen and saw the eight-spired tower,
delicately fluted and embossed, rise in temperate beauty--the perfect
prose of Gothic--wooing the eyes to the sky that was slowly drained
of day. We entered the low monkish doorway and stood in the dim little
court that nestles beneath the tower, where the swallows niche more
lovingly in the tangled ivy than elsewhere in Oxford, and passed into
the quiet cloister and studied the small sculptured monsters on the
entablature of the arcade. I rejoiced in every one of my unhappy
friend's responsive vibrations, even while feeling that they might as
direfully multiply as those that had preceded them. I may say that from
this time forward I found it difficult to distinguish in his company
between the riot of fancy and the labour of thought, or to fix the
balance between what he saw and what he imagined. He had already begun
playfully to exchange his identity for that of the earlier Clement
Searle, and he now delivered himself almost wholly in the character of
his old-time kinsman.

"THIS was my college, you know," he would almost anywhere break out,
applying the words wherever we stood--"the sweetest and noblest in
the whole place. How often have I strolled in this cloister with my
intimates of the other world! They are all dead and buried, but many a
young fellow as we meet him, dark or fair, tall or short, reminds me of
the past age and the early attachment. Even as we stand here, they say,
the whole thing feels about its massive base the murmurs of the tide of
time; some of the foundation-stones are loosened, some of the breaches
will have to be repaired. Mine was the old unregenerate Oxford, the home
of rank abuses, of distinctions and privileges the most delicious and
invidious. What cared I, who was a perfect gentleman and with my pockets
full of money? I had an allowance of a thousand a year."

It was at once plain to me that he had lost the little that remained of
his direct grasp on life and was unequal to any effort of seeing things
in their order. He read my apprehension in my eyes and took pains to
assure me I was right. "I'm going straight down hill. Thank heaven it's
an easy slope, coated with English turf and with an English churchyard
at the foot." The hysterical emotion produced by our late dire
misadventure had given place to an unruffled calm in which the scene
about us was reflected as in an old-fashioned mirror. We took an
afternoon walk through Christ-Church meadow and at the river-bank
procured a boat which I pulled down the stream to Iffley and to the
slanting woods of Nuneham--the sweetest flattest reediest stream-side
landscape that could be desired. Here of course we encountered the
scattered phalanx of the young, the happy generation, clad in white
flannel and blue, muscular fair-haired magnificent fresh, whether
floated down the current by idle punts and lounging in friendly couples
when not in a singleness that nursed ambitions, or straining together
in rhythmic crews and hoarsely exhorted from the near bank. When to the
exhibition of so much of the clearest joy of wind and limb we added the
great sense of perfumed protection shed by all the enclosed lawns and
groves and bowers, we felt that to be young in such scholastic shades
must be a double, an infinite blessing. As my companion found himself
less and less able to walk we repaired in turn to a series of gardens
and spent long hours sitting in their greenest places. They struck us as
the fairest things in England and the ripest and sweetest fruit of the
English system. Locked in their antique verdure, guarded, as in the case
of New College, by gentle battlements of silver-grey, outshouldering the
matted leafage of undisseverable plants, filled with nightingales and
memories, a sort of chorus of tradition; with vaguely-generous youths
sprawling bookishly on the turf as if to spare it the injury of
their boot-heels, and with the great conservative college countenance
appealing gravely from the restless outer world, they seem places to
lie down on the grass in for ever, in the happy faith that life is all
a green old English garden and time an endless summer afternoon. This
charmed seclusion was especially grateful to my friend, and his sense of
it reached its climax, I remember, on one of the last of such occasions
and while we sat in fascinated flanerie over against the sturdy back of
Saint John's. The wide discreetly-windowed wall here perhaps broods upon
the lawn with a more effective air of property than elsewhere. Searle
dropped into fitful talk and spun his humour into golden figures. Any
passing undergraduate was a peg to hang a fable, every feature of the
place a pretext for more embroidery.

"Isn't it all a delightful lie?" he wanted to know. "Mightn't one fancy
this the very central point of the world's heart, where all the echoes
of the general life arrive but to falter and die? Doesn't one feel the
air just thick with arrested voices? It's well there should be such
places, shaped in the interest of factitious needs, invented to minister
to the book-begotten longing for a medium in which one may dream unwaked
and believe unconfuted; to foster the sweet illusion that all's well in
a world where so much is so damnable, all right and rounded, smooth and
fair, in this sphere of the rough and ragged, the pitiful unachieved
especially, and the dreadful uncommenced. The world's made--work's over.
Now for leisure! England's safe--now for Theocritus and Horace, for
lawn and sky! What a sense it all gives one of the composite life of
the country and of the essential furniture of its luckier minds! Thank
heaven they had the wit to send me here in the other time. I'm not much
visibly the braver perhaps, but think how I'm the happier! The misty
spires and towers, seen far off on the level, have been all these years
one of the constant things of memory. Seriously, what do the spires and
towers do for these people? Are they wiser, gentler, finer, cleverer?
My diminished dignity reverts in any case at moments to the naked
background of our own education, the deadly dry air in which we gasp for
impressions and comparisons. I assent to it all with a sort of desperate
calmness; I accept it with a dogged pride. We're nursed at the opposite
pole. Naked come we into a naked world. There's a certain grandeur
in the lack of decorations, a certain heroic strain in that young
imagination of ours which finds nothing made to its hands, which has to
invent its own traditions and raise high into our morning-air, with
a ringing hammer and nails, the castles in which we dwell. Noblesse
oblige--Oxford must damnably do so. What a horrible thing not to rise
to such examples! If you pay the pious debt to the last farthing of
interest you may go through life with her blessing; but if you let it
stand unhonoured you're a worse barbarian than we! But for the better or
worse, in a myriad private hearts, think how she must be loved! How the
youthful sentiment of mankind seems visibly to brood upon her! Think of
the young lives now taking colour in her cloisters and halls. Think of
the centuries' tale of dead lads--dead alike with the end of the young
days to which these haunts were a present world, and the close of
the larger lives which the general mother-scene has dropped into less
bottomless traps. What are those two young fellows kicking their heels
over on the grass there? One of them has the Saturday Review; the
other--upon my soul--the other has Artemus Ward! Where do they live,
how do they live, to what end do they live? Miserable boys! How can they
read Artemus Ward under those windows of Elizabeth? What do you think
loveliest in all Oxford? The poetry of certain windows. Do you see that
one yonder, the second of those lesser bays, with the broken cornice
and the lattice? That used to be the window of my bosom friend a hundred
years ago. Remind me to tell you the story of that broken cornice. Don't
pretend it's not a common thing to have one's bosom friend at another
college. Pray was I committed to common things? He was a charming
fellow. By the way, he was a good deal like you. Of course his cocked
hat, his long hair in a black ribbon, his cinnamon velvet suit and his
flowered waistcoat made a difference. We gentlemen used to wear swords."

There was really the touch of grace in my poor friend's divagations--the
disheartened dandy had so positively turned rhapsodist and seer. I
was particularly struck with his having laid aside the diffidence and
self-consciousness of the first days of our acquaintance. He had become
by this time a disembodied observer and critic; the shell of sense,
growing daily thinner and more transparent, transmitted the tremor of
his quickened spirit. He seemed to pick up acquaintances, in the course
of our contemplations, merely by putting out his hand. If I left him for
ten minutes I was sure to find him on my return in earnest conversation
with some affable wandering scholar. Several young men with whom he had
thus established relations invited him to their rooms and entertained
him, as I gathered, with rather rash hospitality. For myself, I chose
not to be present at these symposia; I shrank partly from being held
in any degree responsible for his extravagance, partly from the pang of
seeing him yield to champagne and an admiring circle. He reported such
adventures with less keen a complacency than I had supposed he might
use, but a certain method in his madness, a certain dignity in his
desire to fraternise, appeared to save him from mischance. If they
didn't think him a harmless lunatic they certainly thought him a
celebrity of the Occident. Two things, however, grew evident--that he
drank deeper than was good for him and that the flagrant freshness of
his young patrons rather interfered with his predetermined sense of the
element of finer romance. At the same time it completed his knowledge
of the place. Making the acquaintance of several tutors and fellows,
he dined in hall in half a dozen colleges, alluding afterwards to these
banquets with religious unction. One evening after a participation
indiscreetly prolonged he came back to the hotel in a cab, accompanied
by a friendly undergraduate and a physician and looking deadly pale. He
had swooned away on leaving table and remained so rigidly unconscious
as much to agitate his banqueters. The following twenty-four hours he of
course spent in bed, but on the third day declared himself strong enough
to begin afresh. On his reaching the street his strength once more
forsook him, so that I insisted on his returning to his room. He
besought me with tears in his eyes not to shut him up. "It's my last
chance--I want to go back for an hour to that garden of Saint John's.
Let me eat and drink--to-morrow I die." It seemed to me possible that
with a Bath-chair the expedition might be accomplished. The hotel, it
appeared, possessed such a convenience, which was immediately produced.
It became necessary hereupon that we should have a person to propel the
chair. As there was no one on the spot at liberty I was about to perform
the office; but just as my patient had got seated and wrapped--he now
had a perpetual chill--an elderly man emerged from a lurking-place near
the door and, with a formal salute, offered to wait upon the gentleman.
We assented, and he proceeded solemnly to trundle the chair before him.
I recognised him as a vague personage whom I had observed to lounge
shyly about the doors of the hotels, at intervals during our stay, with
a depressed air of wanting employment and a poor semblance of finding
it. He had once indeed in a half-hearted way proposed himself as an
amateur cicerone for a tour through the colleges; and I now, as I
looked at him, remembered with a pang that I had too curtly declined his
ministrations. Since then his shyness, apparently, had grown less or
his misery greater, for it was with a strange grim avidity that he
now attached himself to our service. He was a pitiful image of shabby
gentility and the dinginess of "reduced circumstances." He would
have been, I suppose, some fifty years of age; but his pale haggard
unwholesome visage, his plaintive drooping carriage and the irremediable
disarray of his apparel seemed to add to the burden of his days and
tribulations. His eyes were weak and bloodshot, his bold nose was sadly
compromised, and his reddish beard, largely streaked with grey, bristled
under a month's neglect of the razor. In all this rusty forlornness
lurked a visible assurance of our friend's having known better days.
Obviously he was the victim of some fatal depreciation in the market
value of pure gentility. There had been something terribly affecting in
the way he substituted for the attempt to touch the greasy rim of his
antiquated hat some such bow as one man of the world might make another.
Exchanging a few words with him as we went I was struck with the
decorum of his accent. His fine whole voice should have been congruously
cracked.

"Take me by some long roundabout way," said Searle, "so that I may see
as many college-walls as possible."

"You know," I asked of our attendant, "all these wonderful ins and
outs?"

"I ought to, sir," he said, after a moment, with pregnant gravity. And
as we were passing one of the colleges, "That used to be my place," he
added.

At these words Searle desired him to stop and come round within sight.
"You say that's YOUR college?"

"The place might deny me, sir; but heaven forbid I should seem to take
it ill of her. If you'll allow me to wheel you into the quad I'll show
you my windows of thirty years ago."

Searle sat staring, his huge pale eyes, which now left nothing else
worth mentioning in his wasted face, filled with wonder and pity. "If
you'll be so kind," he said with great deference. But just as this
perverted product of a liberal education was about to propel him across
the threshold of the court he turned about, disengaged the mercenary
hands, with one of his own, from the back of the chair, drew their owner
alongside and turned to me. "While we're here, my dear fellow," he said,
"be so good as to perform this service. You understand?" I gave our
companion a glance of intelligence and we resumed our way. The latter
showed us his window of the better time, where a rosy youth in a scarlet
smoking-fez now puffed a cigarette at the open casement. Thence we
proceeded into the small garden, the smallest, I believe, and certainly
the sweetest, of all the planted places of Oxford. I pushed the chair
along to a bench on the lawn, turned it round, toward the front of
the college and sat down by it on the grass. Our attendant shifted
mournfully from one foot to the other, his patron eyeing him
open-mouthed. At length Searle broke out: "God bless my soul, sir, you
don't suppose I expect you to stand! There's an empty bench."

"Thank you," said our friend, who bent his joints to sit.

"You English are really fabulous! I don't know whether I most admire or
most abominate you! Now tell me: who are you? what are you? what brought
you to this?"

The poor fellow blushed up to his eyes, took off his hat and wiped his
forehead with an indescribable fabric drawn from his pocket. "My name's
Rawson, sir. Beyond that it's a long story."

"I ask out of sympathy," said Searle. "I've a fellow-feeling. If you're
a poor devil I'm a poor devil as well."

"I'm the poorer devil of the two," said the stranger with an assurance
for once presumptuous.

"Possibly. I suppose an English poor devil's the poorest of all
poor devils. And then you've fallen from a height. From a gentleman
commoner--is that what they called you?--to a propeller of Bath-chairs.
Good heavens, man, the fall's enough to kill you!"

"I didn't take it all at once, sir. I dropped a bit one time and a bit
another."

"That's me, that's me!" cried Searle with all his seriousness.

"And now," said our friend, "I believe I can't drop any further."

"My dear fellow"--and Searle clasped his hand and shook it--"I too am at
the very bottom of the hole."

Mr. Rawson lifted his eyebrows. "Well, sir, there's a difference between
sitting in such a pleasant convenience and just trudging behind it!"

"Yes--there's a shade. But I'm at my last gasp, Mr. Rawson."

"I'm at my last penny, sir."

"Literally, Mr. Rawson?"

Mr. Rawson shook his head with large loose bitterness. "I've almost come
to the point of drinking my beer and buttoning my coat figuratively; but
I don't talk in figures."

Fearing the conversation might appear to achieve something like gaiety
at the expense of Mr. Rawson's troubles, I took the liberty of asking
him, with all consideration, how he made a living.

"I don't make a living," he answered with tearful eyes; "I can't make
a living. I've a wife and three children--and all starving, sir. You
wouldn't believe what I've come to. I sent my wife to her mother's, who
can ill afford to keep her, and came to Oxford a week ago, thinking I
might pick up a few half-crowns by showing people about the colleges.
But it's no use. I haven't the assurance. I don't look decent. They
want a nice little old man with black gloves and a clean shirt and a
silver-headed stick. What do I look as if I knew about Oxford, sir?"

"Mercy on us," cried Searle, "why didn't you speak to us before?"

"I wanted to; half a dozen times I've been on the point of it. I knew
you were Americans."

"And Americans are rich!" cried Searle, laughing. "My dear Mr. Rawson,
American as I am I'm living on charity."

"And I'm exactly not, sir! There it is. I'm dying for the lack of that
same. You say you're a pauper, but it takes an American pauper to go
bowling about in a Bath-chair. America's an easy country."

"Ah me!" groaned Searle. "Have I come to the most delicious corner of
the ancient world to hear the praise of Yankeeland?"

"Delicious corners are very well, and so is the ancient world," said Mr.
Rawson; "but one may sit here hungry and shabby, so long as one isn't
too shabby, as well as elsewhere. You'll not persuade me that it's not
an easier thing to keep afloat yonder than here. I wish _I_ were in
Yankeeland, that's all!" he added with feeble force. Then brooding for
a moment on his wrongs: "Have you a bloated brother? or you, sir? It
matters little to you. But it has mattered to me with a vengeance!
Shabby as I sit here I can boast that advantage--as he his five thousand
a year. Being but a twelvemonth my elder he swaggers while I go thus.
There's old England for you! A very pretty place for HIM!"

"Poor old England!" said Searle softly.

"Has your brother never helped you?" I asked.

"A five-pound note now and then! Oh I don't say there haven't been times
when I haven't inspired an irresistible sympathy. I've not been what I
should. I married dreadfully out of the way. But the devil of it is that
he started fair and I started foul; with the tastes, the desires, the
needs, the sensibilities of a gentleman--and not another blessed 'tip.'
I can't afford to live in England."

"THIS poor gentleman fancied a couple of months ago that he couldn't
afford to live in America," I fondly explained.

"I'd 'swap'--do you call it?--chances with him!" And Mr. Rawson looked
quaintly rueful over his freedom of speech.

Searle sat supported there with his eyes closed and his face twitching
for violent emotion, and then of a sudden had a glare of gravity. "My
friend, you're a dead failure! Be judged! Don't talk about 'swapping.'
Don't talk about chances. Don't talk about fair starts and false starts.
I'm at that point myself that I've a right to speak. It lies neither
in one's chance nor one's start to make one a success; nor in anything
one's brother--however bloated--can do or can undo. It lies in one's
character. You and I, sir, have HAD no character--that's very plain.
We've been weak, sir; as weak as water. Here we are for it--sitting
staring in each other's faces and reading our weakness in each other's
eyes. We're of no importance whatever, Mr. Rawson!"

Mr. Rawson received this sally with a countenance in which abject
submission to the particular affirmed truth struggled with the
comparative propriety of his general rebellion against fate. In the
course of a minute a due self-respect yielded to the warm comfortable
sense of his being relieved of the cares of an attitude. "Go on, sir, go
on," he said. "It's wholesome doctrine." And he wiped his eyes with what
seemed his sole remnant of linen.

"Dear, dear," sighed Searle, "I've made you cry! Well, we speak as from
man to man. I should be glad to think you had felt for a moment the
side-light of that great undarkening of the spirit which precedes--which
precedes the grand illumination of death."

Mr. Rawson sat silent a little, his eyes fixed on the ground and his
well-cut nose but the more deeply dyed by his agitation. Then at last
looking up: "You're a very good-natured man, sir, and you'll never
persuade me you don't come of a kindly race. Say what you please about a
chance; when a man's fifty--degraded, penniless, a husband and father--a
chance to get on his legs again is not to be despised. Something tells
me that my luck may be in your country--which has brought luck to so
many. I can come on the parish here of course, but I don't want to come
on the parish. Hang it, sir, I want to hold up my head. I see thirty
years of life before me yet. If only by God's help I could have a real
change of air! It's a fixed idea of mine. I've had it for the last ten
years. It's not that I'm a low radical. Oh I've no vulgar opinions. Old
England's good enough for me, but I'm not good enough for old England.
I'm a shabby man that wants to get out of a room full of staring
gentlefolk. I'm for ever put to the blush. It's a perfect agony of
spirit; everything reminds me of my younger and better self. The thing
for me would be a cooling cleansing plunge into the unknowing and the
unknown! I lie awake thinking of it."

Searle closed his eyes, shivering with a long-drawn tremor which I
hardly knew whether to take for an expression of physical or of mental
pain. In a moment I saw it was neither. "Oh my country, my country,
my country!" he murmured in a broken voice; and then sat for some time
abstracted and lost. I signalled our companion that it was time we
should bring our small session to a close, and he, without hesitating,
possessed himself of the handle of the Bath-chair and pushed it before
him. We had got halfway home before Searle spoke or moved. Suddenly
in the High Street, as we passed a chop-house from whose open doors we
caught a waft of old-fashioned cookery and other restorative elements,
he motioned us to halt. "This is my last five pounds"--and he drew a
note from his pocket-book. "Do me the favour, Mr. Rawson, to accept
it. Go in there and order the best dinner they can give you. Call for a
bottle of Burgundy and drink it to my eternal rest!"

Mr. Rawson stiffened himself up and received the gift with fingers
momentarily irresponsive. But Mr. Rawson had the nerves of a gentleman.
I measured the spasm with which his poor dispossessed hand closed upon
the crisp paper, I observed his empurpled nostril convulsive under the
other solicitation. He crushed the crackling note in his palm with a
passionate pressure and jerked a spasmodic bow. "I shall not do you the
wrong, sir, of anything but the best!" The next moment the door swung
behind him.

Searle sank again into his apathy, and on reaching the hotel I helped
him to get to bed. For the rest of the day he lay without motion or
sound and beyond reach of any appeal. The doctor, whom I had constantly
in attendance, was sure his end was near. He expressed great surprise
that he should have lasted so long; he must have been living for a
month on the very dregs of his strength. Toward evening, as I sat by his
bedside in the deepening dusk, he roused himself with a purpose I had
vaguely felt gathering beneath his stupor. "My cousin, my cousin," he
said confusedly. "Is she here?" It was the first time he had spoken of
Miss Searle since our retreat from her brother's house, and he continued
to ramble. "I was to have married her. What a dream! That day was like
a string of verses--rhymed hours. But the last verse is bad measure.
What's the rhyme to 'love'? ABOVE! Was she a simple woman, a kind sweet
woman? Or have I only dreamed it? She had the healing gift; her touch
would have cured my madness. I want you to do something. Write three
lines, three words: 'Good-bye; remember me; be happy.'" And then after
a long pause: "It's strange a person in my state should have a wish. Why
should one eat one's breakfast the day one's hanged? What a creature
is man! What a farce is life! Here I lie, worn down to a mere throbbing
fever-point; I breathe and nothing more, and yet I DESIRE! My desire
lives. If I could see her! Help me out with it and let me die."

Half an hour later, at a venture, I dispatched by post a note to Miss
Searle: "Your cousin is rapidly sinking. He asks to see you." I was
conscious of a certain want of consideration in this act, since it would
bring her great trouble and yet no power to face the trouble; but out
of her distress I fondly hoped a sufficient force might be born. On the
following day my friend's exhaustion had become so great that I began
to fear his intelligence altogether broken up. But toward evening he
briefly rallied, to maunder about many things, confounding in a sinister
jumble the memories of the past weeks and those of bygone years. "By the
way," he said suddenly, "I've made no will. I haven't much to bequeath.
Yet I have something." He had been playing listlessly with a large
signet-ring on his left hand, which he now tried to draw off. "I leave
you this"--working it round and round vainly--"if you can get it off.
What enormous knuckles! There must be such knuckles in the mummies of
the Pharaohs. Well, when I'm gone--! No, I leave you something more
precious than gold--the sense of a great kindness. But I've a little
gold left. Bring me those trinkets." I placed on the bed before him
several articles of jewellery, relics of early foppery: his watch
and chain, of great value, a locket and seal, some odds and ends
of goldsmith's work. He trifled with them feebly for some moments,
murmuring various names and dates associated with them. At last, looking
up with clearer interest, "What has become," he asked, "of Mr. Rawson?"

"You want to see him?"

"How much are these things worth?" he went on without heeding me. "How
much would they bring?" And he weighed them in his weak hands. "They're
pretty heavy. Some hundred or so? Oh I'm richer than I thought!
Rawson--Rawson--you want to get out of this awful England?"

I stepped to the door and requested the servant whom I kept in constant
attendance in our adjacent sitting-room to send and ascertain if Mr.
Rawson were on the premises. He returned in a few moments, introducing
our dismal friend. Mr. Rawson was pale even to his nose and derived from
his unaffectedly concerned state an air of some distinction. I led him
up to the bed. In Searle's eyes, as they fell on him, there shone for a
moment the light of a human message.

"Lord have mercy!" gasped Mr. Rawson.

"My friend," said Searle, "there's to be one American the less--so let
there be at the same time one the more. At the worst you'll be as good a
one as I. Foolish me! Take these battered relics; you can sell them; let
them help you on your way. They're gifts and mementoes, but this is a
better use. Heaven speed you! May America be kind to you. Be kind, at
the last, to your own country!"

"Really this is too much; I can't," the poor man protested, almost
scared and with tears in his eyes. "Do come round and get well and I'll
stop here. I'll stay with you and wait on you."

"No, I'm booked for my journey, you for yours. I hope you don't mind the
voyage."

Mr. Rawson exhaled a groan of helpless gratitude, appealing piteously
from so strange a windfall. "It's like the angel of the Lord who bids
people in the Bible to rise and flee!"

Searle had sunk back upon his pillow, quite used up; I led Mr. Rawson
back into the sitting-room, where in three words I proposed to him
a rough valuation of our friend's trinkets. He assented with perfect
good-breeding; they passed into my possession and a second bank-note
into his.

From the collapse into which this wondrous exercise of his imagination
had plunged him my charge then gave few signs of being likely to emerge.
He breathed, as he had said, and nothing more. The twilight deepened; I
lighted the night-lamp. The doctor sat silent and official at the foot
of the bed; I resumed my constant place near the head. Suddenly our
patient opened his eyes wide. "She'll not come," he murmured. "Amen!
she's an English sister." Five minutes passed; he started forward.
"She's come, she's here!" he confidently quavered. His words conveyed to
my mind so absolute an assurance that I lightly rose and passed into the
sitting-room. At the same moment, through the opposite door, the
servant introduced a lady. A lady, I say; for an instant she was simply
such--tall pale dressed in deep mourning. The next instant I had uttered
her name--"Miss Searle!" She looked ten years older.

She met me with both hands extended and an immense question in her
face. "He has just announced you," I said. And then with a fuller
consciousness of the change in her dress and countenance: "What has
happened?"

"Oh death, death!" she wailed. "You and I are left."

There came to me with her words a sickening shock, the sense of poetic
justice somehow cheated, defeated. "Your brother?" I panted.

She laid her hand on my arm and I felt its pressure deepen as she spoke.
"He was thrown from his horse in the park. He died on the spot. Six days
have passed. Six months!"

She accepted my support and a moment later we had entered the room and
approached the bedside, from which the doctor withdrew. Searle opened
his eyes and looked at her from head to foot. Suddenly he seemed to make
out her mourning. "Already!" he cried audibly and with a smile, as I
felt, of pleasure.

She dropped on her knees and took his hand. "Not for you, cousin," she
whispered. "For my poor brother."

He started, in all his deathly longitude, as with a galvanic shock.
"Dead! HE dead! Life itself!" And then after a moment and with a slight
rising inflexion: "You're free?"

"Free, cousin. Too sadly free. And now--NOW--with what use for freedom?"

He looked steadily into her eyes, dark in the heavy shadow of her musty
mourning-veil. "For me wear colours!"

In a moment more death had come, the doctor had silently attested it,
and she had burst into sobs.

We buried him in the little churchyard in which he had expressed the
wish to lie; beneath one of the blackest and widest of English yews and
the little tower than which none in all England has a softer and hoarier
grey. A year has passed; Miss Searle, I believe, has begun to wear
colours.







I


In the attempt to place together some particulars of the early life of
William James and present him in his setting, his immediate native and
domestic air, so that any future gathered memorials of him might become
the more intelligible and interesting, I found one of the consequences
of my interrogation of the past assert itself a good deal at the expense
of some of the others. For it was to memory in the first place that my
main appeal for particulars had to be made; I had been too near a
witness of my brother's beginnings of life, and too close a participant,
by affection, admiration and sympathy, in whatever touched and moved
him, not to feel myself in possession even of a greater quantity of
significant truth, a larger handful of the fine substance of history,
than I could hope to express or apply. To recover anything like the full
treasure of scattered, wasted circumstance was at the same time to live
over the spent experience itself, so deep and rich and rare, with
whatever sadder and sorer intensities, even with whatever poorer and
thinner passages, after the manner of every one's experience; and the
effect of this in turn was to find discrimination among the parts of my
subject again and again difficult--so inseparably and beautifully they
seemed to hang together and the comprehensive case to decline mutilation
or refuse to be treated otherwise than handsomely. This meant that
aspects began to multiply and images to swarm, so far at least as they
showed, to appreciation, as true terms and happy values; and that I
might positively and exceedingly rejoice in my relation to most of them,
using it for all that, as the phrase is, it should be worth. To knock at
the door of the past was in a word to see it open to me quite wide--to
see the world within begin to "compose" with a grace of its own round
the primary figure, see it people itself vividly and insistently. Such
then is the circle of my commemoration and so much these free and
copious notes a labour of love and loyalty. We were, to my sense, the
blest group of us, such a company of characters and such a picture of
differences, and withal so fused and united and interlocked, that each
of us, to that fond fancy, pleads for preservation, and that in respect
to what I speak of myself as possessing I think I shall be ashamed, as
of a cold impiety, to find any element altogether negligible. To which I
may add perhaps that I struggle under the drawback, innate and inbred,
of seeing the whole content of memory and affection in each enacted and
recovered moment, as who should say, in the vivid image and the very
scene; the light of the only terms in which life has treated me to
experience. And I cherish the moment and evoke the image and repaint the
scene; though meanwhile indeed scarce able to convey how prevailingly
and almost exclusively, during years and years, the field was animated
and the adventure conditioned for me by my brother's nearness and that
play of genius in him of which I had never had a doubt from the first.

The "first" then--since I retrace our steps to the start, for the
pleasure, strangely mixed though it be, of feeling our small feet plant
themselves afresh and artlessly stumble forward again--the first began
long ago, far off, and yet glimmers at me there as out of a thin golden
haze, with all the charm, for imagination and memory, of pressing
pursuit rewarded, of distinctness in the dimness, of the flush of life
in the grey, of the wonder of consciousness in everything; everything
having naturally been all the while but the abject little matter of
course. Partly doubtless as the effect of a life, now getting to be a
tolerably long one, spent in the older world, I see the world of our
childhood as very young indeed, young with its own juvenility as well as
with ours; as if it wore the few and light garments and had gathered in
but the scant properties and breakable toys of the tenderest age, or
were at the most a very unformed young person, even a boisterous
hobbledehoy. It exhaled at any rate a simple freshness, and I catch its
pure breath, at our infantile Albany, as the very air of long summer
afternoons--occasions tasting of ample leisure, still bookless, yet
beginning to be bedless, or cribless; tasting of accessible garden
peaches in a liberal backward territory that was still almost part of a
country town; tasting of many-sized uncles, aunts, cousins, of strange
legendary domestics, inveterately but archaically Irish, and whose
familiar remarks and "criticism of life" were handed down, as well as of
dim family ramifications and local allusions--mystifications
always--that flowered into anecdote as into small hard plums; tasting
above all of a big much-shaded savoury house in which a softly-sighing
widowed grandmother, Catherine Barber by birth, whose attitude was a
resigned consciousness of complications and accretions, dispensed an
hospitality seemingly as joyless as it was certainly boundless. What she
_liked_, dear gentle lady of many cares and anxieties, was the "fiction
of the day," the novels, at that time promptly pirated, of Mrs. Trollope
and Mrs. Gore, of Mrs. Marsh, Mrs. Hubback and the Misses Kavanagh and
Aguilar, whose very names are forgotten now, but which used to drive
her away to quiet corners whence her figure comes back to me bent
forward on a table with the book held out at a distance and a tall
single candle placed, apparently not at all to her discomfort, in that
age of sparer and braver habits, straight between the page and her eyes.
There is a very animated allusion to one or two of her aspects in the
fragment of a "spiritual autobiography," the reminiscences of a
so-called Stephen Dewhurst printed by W. J. (1885) in The Literary
Remains of Henry James; a reference which has the interest of being very
nearly as characteristic of my father himself (which his references in
almost any connection were wont to be) as of the person or the occasion
evoked. I had reached my sixteenth year when she died, and as my only
remembered grandparent she touches the chord of attachment to a
particular vibration. She represented for us in our generation the only
English blood--that of both her own parents--flowing in our veins; I
confess that out of that association, for reasons and reasons, I feel
her image most beneficently bend. We were, as to three parts, of two
other stocks; and I recall how from far back I reflected--for I see I
must have been always reflecting--that, mixed as such a mixture, our
Scotch with our Irish, might be, it had had still a grace to borrow from
the third infusion or dimension. If I could freely have chosen moreover
it was precisely from my father's mother that, fond votary of the finest
faith in the vivifying and characterising force of mothers, I should
have wished to borrow it; even while conscious that Catherine Barber's
own people had drawn breath in American air for at least two generations
before her. Our father's father, William James, an Irishman and a
Protestant born (of county Cavan) had come to America, a very young man
and then sole of his family, shortly after the Revolutionary War; my
father, the second son of the third of the marriages to which the
country of his adoption was liberally to help him, had been born in
Albany in 1811. Our maternal greatgrandfather on the father's side, Hugh
Walsh, had reached our shores from a like Irish home, Killyleagh, county
Down, somewhat earlier, in 1764, he being then nineteen; he had settled
at Newburgh-on-the-Hudson, half way to Albany, where some of his
descendants till lately lingered. Our maternal greatgrandfather on the
mother's side--that is our mother's mother's father, Alexander Robertson
of Polmont near Edinburgh--had likewise crossed the sea in the
mid-century and prospered in New York very much as Hugh Walsh was
prospering and William James was still more markedly to prosper, further
up the Hudson; as unanimous and fortunate beholders of the course of
which admirable stream I like to think of them. I find Alexander
Robertson inscribed in a wee New York directory of the close of the
century as Merchant; and our childhood in that city was passed, as to
some of its aspects, in a sense of the afterglow, reduced and
circumscribed, it is true, but by no means wholly inanimate, of his
shining solidity.

The sweet taste of Albany probably lurked most in its being our admired
antithesis to New York; it was holiday, whereas New York was home; at
least that presently came to be the relation, for to my very very first
fleeting vision, I apprehend, Albany itself must have been the scene
exhibited. Our parents had gone there for a year or two to be near our
grandmother on their return from their first (that is our mother's
first) visit to Europe, which had quite immediately followed my birth,
which appears to have lasted some year and a half, and of which I shall
have another word to say. The Albany experiment would have been then
their first founded housekeeping, since I make them out to have betaken
themselves for the winter following their marriage to the ancient Astor
House--not indeed at that time ancient, but the great and appointed
modern hotel of New York, the only one of such pretensions, and which
somehow continued to project its massive image, that of a great square
block of granite with vast dark warm interiors, across some of the later
and more sensitive stages of my infancy. Clearly--or I should perhaps
rather say dimly--recourse to that hospitality was again occasionally
had by our parents; who had originally had it to such a happy end that
on January 9th, 1842, my elder brother had come into the world there. It
remained a tradition with him that our father's friend from an early
time, R. W. Emerson, then happening to be in New York and under that
convenient roof, was proudly and pressingly "taken upstairs" to admire
and give his blessing to the lately-born babe who was to become the
second American William James. The blessing was to be renewed, I may
mention, in the sense that among the impressions of the next early years
I easily distinguish that of the great and urbane Emerson's occasional
presence in Fourteenth Street, a centre of many images, where the
parental tent was before long to pitch itself and rest awhile. I am
interested for the moment, however, in identifying the scene of our very
first perceptions--of my very own at least, which I can here best speak
for.

One of these, and probably the promptest in order, was that of my
brother's occupying a place in the world to which I couldn't at all
aspire--to any approach to which in truth I seem to myself ever
conscious of having signally forfeited a title. It glimmers back to me
that I quite definitely and resignedly thought of him as in the most
exemplary manner already beforehand with me, already seated at his task
when the attempt to drag me crying and kicking to the first hour of my
education failed on the threshold of the Dutch House in Albany after the
fashion I have glanced at in a collection of other pages than these
(just as I remember to have once borrowed a hint from our grandmother's
"interior" in a work of imagination). That failure of my powers or that
indifference to them, my retreat shrieking from the Dutch House, was to
leave him once for all already there an embodied demonstration of the
possible--already wherever it might be that there was a question of my
arriving, when arriving at all, belatedly and ruefully; as if he had
gained such an advance of me in his sixteen months' experience of the
world before mine began that I never for all the time of childhood and
youth in the least caught up with him or overtook him. He was always
round the corner and out of sight, coming back into view but at his
hours of extremest ease. We were never in the same schoolroom, in the
same game, scarce even in step together or in the same phase at the same
time; when our phases overlapped, that is, it was only for a moment--he
was clean out before I had got well in. How far he had really at any
moment dashed forward it is not for me now to attempt to say; what
comes to me is that I at least hung inveterately and woefully back, and
that this relation alike to our interests and to each other seemed
proper and preappointed. I lose myself in wonder at the loose ways, the
strange process of waste, through which nature and fortune may deal on
occasion with those whose faculty for application is all and only in
their imagination and their sensibility. There may be during those
bewildered and brooding years so little for them to "show" that I liken
the individual dunce--as he so often must appear--to some commercial
traveller who has lost the key to his packed case of samples and can but
pass for a fool while other exhibitions go forward.

I achieve withal a dim remembrance of my final submission, though it is
the faintest ghost of an impression and consists but of the bright blur
of a dame's schoolroom, a mere medium for small piping shuffling sound
and suffered heat, as well as for the wistfulness produced by
"glimmering squares" that were fitfully screened, though not to any
revival of cheer, by a huge swaying, yet dominant object. This dominant
object, the shepherdess of the flock, was Miss Bayou or Bayhoo--I
recover but the alien sound of her name, which memory caresses only
because she may have been of like race with her temple of learning,
which faced my grandmother's house in North Pearl Street and really
justified its exotic claim by its yellow archaic gable-end: I think of
the same as of brick baked in the land of dykes and making a series of
small steps from the base of the gable to the point. These images are
subject, I confess, to a soft confusion--which is somehow consecrated,
none the less, and out of which, with its shade of contributory truth,
some sort of scene insists on glancing. The very flush of the uneven
bricks of the pavement lives in it, the very smell of the street
cobbles, the imputed grace of the arching umbrage--I see it all as from
under trees; the form of Steuben Street, which crossed our view, as
steep even to the very essence of adventure, with a summit, and still
more with a nethermost and riskiest incline, very far away. There lives
in it the aspect of the other house--the other and much smaller than my
grandmother's, conveniently near it and within sight; which was
pinkish-red picked out with white, whereas my grandmother's was
greyish-brown and very grave, and which must have stood back a little
from the street, as I seem even now to swing, or at least to perch, on a
relaxed gate of approach that was conceived to work by an iron chain
weighted with a big ball; all under a spreading tree again and with the
high, oh so high white stone steps (mustn't they have been marble?) and
fan-lighted door of the pinkish-red front behind me. I lose myself in
ravishment before the marble and the pink. There were other houses
too--one of them the occasion of the first "paid" visit that struggles
with my twilight of social consciousness; a call with my father,
conveying me presumably for fond exhibition (since if my powers were not
exhibitional my appearance and my long fair curls, of which I distinctly
remember the lachrymose sacrifice, suppositiously were), on one of our
aunts, the youngest of his three sisters, lately married and who,
predestined to an early death, hovers there for me, softly spectral, in
long light "front" ringlets, the fashion of the time and the capital
sign of all our paternal aunts seemingly; with the remembered
enhancement of her living in Elk Street, the name itself vaguely
portentous, as through beasts of the forest not yet wholly exorcised,
and more or less under the high brow of that Capitol which, as aloft
somewhere and beneath the thickest shades of all, loomed, familiar yet
impressive, at the end of almost any Albany vista of reference. I have
seen other capitols since, but the whole majesty of the matter must have
been then distilled into my mind--even though the connection was
indirect and the concrete image, that of the primitive structure, long
since pretentiously and insecurely superseded--so that, later on, the
impression was to find itself, as the phrase is, discounted. Had it not
moreover been reinforced at the time, for that particular Capitoline
hour, by the fact that our uncle, our aunt's husband, was a son of Mr.
Martin Van Buren, and that _he_ was the President? This at least led the
imagination on--or leads in any case my present imagination of that one;
ministering to what I have called the soft confusion.

The confusion clears, however, though the softness remains, when,
ceasing to press too far backward, I meet the ampler light of conscious
and educated little returns to the place; for the education of New York,
enjoyed up to my twelfth year, failed to blight its romantic appeal. The
images I really distinguish flush through the maturer medium, but with
the sense of them only the more wondrous. The other house, the house of
my parents' limited early sojourn, becomes that of those of our cousins,
numerous at that time, who pre-eminently figured for us; the various
brood presided over by my father's second sister, Catherine James, who
had married at a very early age Captain Robert Temple, U.S.A. Both these
parents were to die young, and their children, six in number, the two
eldest boys, were very markedly to people our preliminary scene; this
being true in particular of three of them, the sharply differing
brothers and the second sister, Mary Temple, radiant and rare,
extinguished in her first youth, but after having made an impression on
many persons, and on ourselves not least, which was to become in the
harmonious circle, for all time, matter of sacred legend and reference,
of associated piety. Those and others with them were the numerous
dawnings on which in many cases the deepening and final darknesses were
so soon to follow: our father's family was to offer such a chronicle of
early deaths, arrested careers, broken promises, orphaned children. It
sounds cold-blooded, but part of the charm of our grandmother's house
for us--or I should perhaps but speak for myself--was in its being so
much and so sociably a nurseried and playroomed orphanage. The children
of her lost daughters and daughters-in-law overflowed there, mainly as
girls; on whom the surviving sons-in-law and sons occasionally and most
trustingly looked in. Parentally bereft cousins were somehow more
thrilling than parentally provided ones; and most thrilling when, in the
odd fashion of that time, they were sent to school in New York as a
preliminary to their being sent to school in Europe. They spent scraps
of holidays with us in Fourteenth Street, and I think my first childish
conception of the enviable lot, formed amid these associations, was to
be so little fathered or mothered, so little sunk in the short range,
that the romance of life seemed to lie in some constant improvisation,
by vague overhovering authorities, of new situations and horizons. We
were intensely domesticated, yet for the very reason perhaps that we
felt our young bonds easy; and they were so easy compared to other small
plights of which we had stray glimpses that my first assured conception
of true richness was that we should be sent separately off among cold or
even cruel aliens in order to be there thrillingly homesick.
Homesickness was a luxury I remember craving from the tenderest age--a
luxury of which I was unnaturally, or at least prosaically, deprived.
Our motherless cousin Augustus Barker came up from Albany to the
Institution Charlier--unless it was, as I suspect, a still earlier
specimen, with a name that fades from me, of that type of French
establishment for boys which then and for years after so incongruously
flourished in New York; and though he professed a complete satisfaction
with pleasures tasted in our innocent society I felt that he was engaged
in a brave and strenuous adventure while we but hugged the comparatively
safe shore.




II


We were day-boys, William and I, at dispensaries of learning the number
and succession of which to-day excite my wonder; we couldn't have
changed oftener, it strikes me as I look back, if our presence had been
inveterately objected to, and yet I enjoy an inward certainty that, my
brother being vividly bright and I quite blankly innocuous, this
reproach was never brought home to our house. It was an humiliation to
me at first, small boys though we were, that our instructors kept being
instructresses and thereby a grave reflection both on our attainments
and our spirit. A bevy of these educative ladies passes before me, I
still possess their names; as for instance that of Mrs. Daly and that of
Miss Rogers (previously of the "Chelsea Female Institute," though at the
moment of Sixth Avenue this latter), whose benches indeed my brother
didn't haunt, but who handled us literally with gloves--I still see the
elegant objects as Miss Rogers beat time with a long black ferule to
some species of droning chant or chorus in which we spent most of our
hours; just as I see her very tall and straight and spare, in a light
blue dress, her firm face framed in long black glossy ringlets and the
stamp of the Chelsea Female Institute all over her. Mrs. Daly, clearly
the immediate successor to the nebulous Miss Bayou, remains quite
substantial--perhaps because the sphere of her small influence has
succeeded in not passing away, up to this present writing; so that in
certain notes on New York published a few years since I was moved to
refer to it with emotion as one of the small red houses on the south
side of Waverley Place that really carry the imagination back to a
vanished social order. They carry mine to a stout red-faced lady with
grey hair and a large apron, the latter convenience somehow suggesting,
as she stood about with a resolute air, that she viewed her little
pupils as so many small slices cut from the loaf of life and on which
she was to dab the butter of arithmetic and spelling, accompanied by way
of jam with a light application of the practice of prize-giving. I
recall an occasion indeed, I must in justice mention, when the jam
really was thick--my only memory of a schoolfeast, strange to say,
throughout our young annals: something uncanny in the air of the
schoolroom at the unwonted evening or late afternoon hour, and tables
that seemed to me prodigiously long and on which the edibles were chunky
and sticky. The stout red-faced lady must have been Irish, as the name
she bore imported--or do I think so but from the indescribably Irish
look of her revisited house? It refers itself at any rate to a New York
age in which a little more or a little less of the colour was scarce
notable in the general flush.

Of pure unimported strain, however, were Miss Sedgwick and Mrs. Wright
(Lavinia D.), the next figures in the procession--the procession that
was to wind up indeed with two foreign recruits, small brown snappy
Mademoiselle Delavigne, who plied us with the French tongue at home and
who had been introduced to us as the niece--or could it have been the
grandniece?--of the celebrated Casimir, and a large Russian lady in an
extraordinarily short cape (I like to recall the fashion of short capes)
of the same stuff as her dress, and Merovingian sidebraids that seemed
to require the royal crown of Frédégonde or Brunéhaut to complete their
effect. This final and aggravational representative of the compromising
sex looms to my mind's eye, I should add, but as the creature of an
hour, in spite of her having been domiciled with us; whereas I think of
Mademoiselle Delavigne as flitting in and out on quick, fine, more or
less cloth-shod feet of exemplary neatness, the flat-soled feet of Louis
Philippe and of the female figures in those volumes of Gavarni then
actual, then contemporaneous, which were kept in a piece of furniture
that stood between the front-parlour windows in Fourteenth Street,
together with a set of Béranger enriched by steel engravings to the
strange imagery of which I so wonderingly responded that all other art
of illustration, ever since, has been for me comparatively weak and
cold. These volumes and the tall entrancing folios of Nash's
lithographed Mansions of England in the Olden Time formed a store
lending itself particularly to distribution on the drawingroom carpet,
with concomitant pressure to the same surface of the small student's
stomach and relieving agitation of his backward heels. I make out that
it had decidedly been given to Mlle. Delavigne to represent to my first
perception personal France; she was, besides not being at all pink or
shy, oval and fluent and mistress somehow of the step--the step of
levity that involved a whisk of her short skirts; there she was, to the
life, on the page of Gavarni, attesting its reality, and there again did
that page in return (I speak not of course of the unplumbed depths of
the appended text) attest her own felicity. I was later on to feel--that
is I was to learn--how many impressions and appearances, how large a
sense of things, her type and tone prefigured. The evanescence of the
large Russian lady, whom I think of as rather rank, I can't express it
otherwise, may have been owing to some question of the purity of her
accent in French; it was one of her attributes and her grounds of appeal
to us that she had come straight from Siberia, and it is distinct to me
that the purity was challenged by a friend of the house, and
without--pathetically enough!--provoking the only answer, the plea that
the missing Atticism would have been wasted on young barbarians. The
Siberian note, on our inmate's part, may perhaps have been the least of
her incongruities; she was above all too big for a little job, towered
over us doubtless too heroically; and her proportions hover but to lose
themselves--with the successors to her function awaiting us a little
longer.

Meanwhile, to revert an instant, if the depressed consciousness of our
still more or less quailing, educationally, beneath the female eye--and
there was as well the deeper depth, there was the degrading fact, that
with us literally consorted and contended Girls, that we sat and strove,
even though we drew the line at playing with them and at knowing them,
when not of the swarming cousinship, at home--if that felt awkwardness
didn't exactly coincide with the ironic effect of "Gussy's" appearances,
his emergence from rich mystery and his return to it, our state was but
comparatively the braver: he always had so much more to tell us than we
could possibly have to tell him. On reflection I see that the most
completely rueful period couldn't after all greatly have prolonged
itself; since the female eye last bent on us would have been that of
Lavinia D. Wright, to our connection with whom a small odd reminiscence
attaches a date. A little schoolmate displayed to me with pride, while
the connection lasted, a beautiful coloured, a positively iridescent and
gilded card representing the first of all the "great exhibitions" of our
age, the London Crystal Palace of 1851--his father having lately gone
out to it and sent him the dazzling memento. In 1851 I was eight years
old and my brother scarce more than nine; in addition to which it is
distinct to me in the first place that we were never faithful long, or
for more than one winter, to the same studious scene, and in the second
that among our instructors Mrs. Lavinia had no successor of her own sex
unless I count Mrs. Vredenburg, of New Brighton, where we spent the
summer of 1854, when I had reached the age of eleven and found myself
bewildered by recognition of the part that "attendance at school" was so
meanly to play in the hitherto unclouded long vacation. This was true at
least for myself and my next younger brother, Wilky, who, under the
presumption now dawning of his "community of pursuits" with my own, was
from that moment, off and on, for a few years, my extremely easy
yokefellow and playfellow. On William, charged with learning--I thought
of him inveterately from our younger time as charged with learning--no
such trick was played; he rested or roamed, that summer, on his
accumulations; a fact which, as I was sure I saw these more and more
richly accumulate, didn't in the least make me wonder. It comes back to
me in truth that I had been prepared for anything by his having said to
me toward the end of our time at Lavinia D's and with characteristic
authority--his enjoyment of it coming from my character, I mean, quite
as much as from his own--that that lady was a very able woman, as shown
by the Experiments upstairs. He was upstairs of course, and I was down,
and I scarce even knew what Experiments were, beyond their indeed
requiring capability. The region of their performance was William's
natural sphere, though I recall that I had a sense of peeping into it to
a thrilled effect on seeing our instructress illustrate the proper way
to extinguish a candle. She firmly pressed the flame between her thumb
and her two forefingers, and, on my remarking that I didn't see how she
could do it, promptly replied that I of course couldn't do it myself (as
_he_ could) because I should be afraid.

That reflection on my courage awakes another echo of the same scant
season--since the test involved must have been that of our taking our
way home through Fourth Avenue from some point up town, and Mrs.
Wright's situation in East Twenty-first Street was such a point. The
Hudson River Railroad was then in course of construction, or was being
made to traverse the upper reaches of the city, through that part of
which raged, to my young sense, a riot of explosion and a great shouting
and waving of red flags when the gunpowder introduced into the rocky
soil was about to take effect. It was our theory that our passage there,
in the early afternoon, was beset with danger, and our impression that
we saw fragments of rock hurtle through the air and smite to the earth
another and yet another of the persons engaged or exposed. The point of
honour, among several of us, was of course nobly to defy the danger, and
I feel again the emotion with which I both hoped and feared that the red
flags, lurid signals descried from afar, would enable or compel us to
renew the feat. That I didn't for myself inveterately renew it I seem to
infer from the memory of other perambulations of the period--as to which
I am divided between their still present freshness and my sense of
perhaps making too much of these tiny particles of history. My stronger
rule, however, I confess, and the one by which I must here consistently
be guided, is that, from the moment it is a question of projecting a
picture, no particle that counts for memory or is appreciable to the
spirit _can_ be too tiny, and that experience, in the name of which one
speaks, is all compact of them and shining with them. There was at any
rate another way home, with other appeals, which consisted of getting
straight along westward to Broadway, a sphere of a different order of
fascination and bristling, as I seem to recall, with more vivid aspects,
greater curiosities and wonderments. _The_ curiosity was of course the
country-place, as I supposed it to be, on the northeast corner of
Eighteenth Street, if I am not mistaken; a big brown house in "grounds"
peopled with animal life, which, little as its site may appear to know
it to-day, lingered on into considerably later years. I have but to
close my eyes in order to open them inwardly again, while I lean against
the tall brown iron rails and peer through, to a romantic view of
browsing and pecking and parading creatures, not numerous, but all of
distinguished appearance: two or three elegant little cows of refined
form and colour, two or three nibbling fawns and a larger company, above
all, of peacocks and guineafowl, with, doubtless--though as to this I am
vague--some of the commoner ornaments of the barnyard. I recognise that
the scene as I evoke it fails of grandeur; but it none the less had for
me the note of greatness--all of which but shows of course what a very
town-bred small person I was, and was to remain.

I see myself moreover as somehow always alone in these and like New York
_flâneries_ and contemplations, and feel how the sense of my being so,
being at any rate master of my short steps, such as they were, through
all the beguiling streets, was probably the very savour of each of my
chance feasts. Which stirs in me at the same time some wonder at the
liberty of range and opportunity of adventure allowed to my tender age;
though the puzzle may very well drop, after all, as I ruefully reflect
that I couldn't have been judged at home reckless or adventurous. What I
look back to as my infant license can only have had for its ground some
timely conviction on the part of my elders that the only form of riot or
revel ever known to me would be that of the visiting mind. Wasn't I
myself for that matter even at that time all acutely and yet resignedly,
even quite fatalistically, aware of what to think of this? I at any rate
watch the small boy dawdle and gape again. I smell the cold dusty paint
and iron as the rails of the Eighteenth Street corner rub his
contemplative nose, and, feeling him foredoomed, withhold from him no
grain of my sympathy. He is a convenient little image or warning of all
that was to be for him, and he might well have been even happier than he
was. For there was the very pattern and measure of all he was to demand:
just to _be_ somewhere--almost anywhere would do--and somehow receive an
impression or an accession, feel a relation or a vibration. He was to go
without many things, ever so many--as all persons do in whom
contemplation takes so much the place of action; but everywhere, in the
years that came soon after, and that in fact continued long, in the
streets of great towns, in New York still for some time, and then for a
while in London, in Paris, in Geneva, wherever it might be, he was to
enjoy more than anything the so far from showy practice of wondering and
dawdling and gaping: he was really, I think, much to profit by it. What
it at all appreciably gave him--that is gave him in producible
form--would be difficult to state; but it seems to him, as he even now
thus indulges himself, an education like another: feeling, as he has
come to do more and more, that no education avails for the intelligence
that doesn't stir in it some subjective passion, and that on the other
hand almost anything that does so act is largely educative, however
small a figure the process might make in a scheme of training. Strange
indeed, furthermore, are some of the things that _have_ stirred a
subjective passion--stirred it, I mean, in young persons predisposed to
a more or less fine inspired application.




III


But I positively dawdle and gape here--I catch myself in the act; so
that I take up the thread of fond reflection that guides me through that
mystification of the summer school, which I referred to a little way
back, at the time when the Summer School as known in America to-day was
so deep in the bosom of the future. The seat of acquisition I speak of
must have been contiguous to the house we occupied--I recall it as most
intimately and objectionably near--and carried on in the interest of
those parents from New York who, in villeggiatura under the queer
conditions of those days, with the many modern mitigations of the
gregarious lot still unrevealed and the many refinements on the
individual one still undeveloped, welcomed almost any influence that
might help at all to form their children to civility. Yet I remember
that particular influence as more noisy and drowsy and dusty than
anything else--as to which it must have partaken strongly of the general
nature of New Brighton; a neighbourhood that no apt agency whatever had
up to that time concerned itself to fashion, and that was indeed to
remain shabbily shapeless for years; since I recall almost as dire an
impression of it received in the summer of 1875. I seem more or less to
have begun life, for that matter, with impressions of New Brighton;
there comes back to me another, considerably more infantile than that of
1854, so infantile indeed that I wonder at its having stuck--that of a
place called the Pavilion, which must have been an hotel sheltering us
for July and August, and the form of which to childish retrospect,
unprejudiced by later experience, was that of a great Greek temple
shining over blue waters in the splendour of a white colonnade and a
great yellow pediment. The elegant image remained, though imprinted in a
child so small as to be easily portable by a stout nurse, I remember,
and not less easily duckable; I gasp again, and was long to gasp, with
the sense of salt immersion received at her strong hands. Wonderful
altogether in fact, I find as I write, the quantity, the intensity of
picture recoverable from even the blankest and tenderest state of the
little canvas.

I connect somehow with the Pavilion period a visit paid with my
father--who decidedly must have liked to take me about, I feel so rich
in that general reminiscence--to a family whom we reached in what struck
me as a quite lovely embowered place, on a very hot day, and among whom
luxuries and eccentricities flourished together. They were numerous, the
members of this family, they were beautiful, they partook of their
meals, or were at the moment partaking of one, out of doors, and the
then pre-eminent figure in the group was a very big Newfoundland dog on
whose back I was put to ride. That must have been my first vision of the
liberal life--though I further ask myself what my age could possibly
have been when my weight was so fantastically far from hinting at later
developments. But the romance of the hour was particularly in what I
have called the eccentric note, the fact that the children, my
entertainers, riveted my gaze to stockingless and shoeless legs and
feet, conveying somehow at the same time that they were not poor and
destitute but rich and provided--just as I took their garden-feast for a
sign of overflowing food--and that their state as of children of nature
was a refinement of freedom and grace. They were to become great and
beautiful, the household of that glimmering vision, they were to figure
historically, heroically, and serve great public ends; but always, to my
remembering eyes and fond fancy, they were to move through life as with
the bare white feet of that original preferred fairness and wildness.
This is rank embroidery, but the old surface itself insists on
spreading--it waits at least with an air of its own. The rest is
silence; I can--extraordinary encumbrance even for the most doating of
parents on a morning call--but have returned with my father to "our
hotel"; since I feel that I must not only to this but to a still further
extent face the historic truth that we were for considerable periods,
during our earliest time, nothing less than hotel children. Between the
far-off and the later phases at New Brighton stretched a series of
summers that had seen us all regularly installed for a couple of months
at an establishment passing in the view of that simpler age for a vast
caravansery--the Hamilton House, on the south Long Island shore, so
called from its nearness to the Fort of that name, which had Fort
Lafayette, the Bastille of the Civil War, out in the channel before it
and which probably cast a stronger spell upon the spirit of our
childhood, William's and mine at least, than any scene presented to us
up to our reaching our teens.

I find that I draw from the singularly unobliterated memory of the
particulars of all that experience the power quite to glory in our
shame; of so entrancing an interest did I feel it at the time to _be_ an
hotel child, and so little would I have exchanged my lot with that of
any small person more privately bred. We were private enough in all
conscience, I think I must have felt, the rest of the year; and at what
age mustn't I quite have succumbed to the charm of the world seen in a
larger way? For there, incomparably, was the chance to dawdle and gape;
there were human appearances in endless variety and on the
exhibition-stage of a piazza that my gape measured almost as by miles;
it was even as if I had become positively conscious that the social
scene so peopled would pretty well always say more to me than anything
else. What it did say I of course but scantly understood; but I none the
less knew it spoke, and I listened to its voice, I seem to recall, very
much as "young Edwin," in Dr. Beattie's poem, listened to the roar of
tempests and torrents from the nobler eminence of beetling crags and in
exposure to still deeper abysses. I cling for the moment, however, to
the small story of our Vredenburg summer, as we were for long afterwards
invidiously to brand it; the more that it so plays its part in
illustration, under the light of a later and happier age, of the growth,
when not rather of the arrest, of manners and customs roundabout our
birthplace. I think we had never been so much as during these particular
months disinherited of the general and public amenities that reinforce
for the young private precept and example--disinherited in favour of
dust and glare and mosquitoes and pigs and shanties and rumshops, of no
walks and scarce more drives, of a repeated no less than of a strong
emphasis on the more sordid sides of the Irish aspect in things. There
was a castellated residence on the hill above us--very high I remember
supposing the hill and very stately the structure; it had towers and
views and pretensions and belonged to a Colonel, whom we thought very
handsome and very costumed, (as if befrogged and high-booted, which he
couldn't have been at all, only _ought_ to have been, would even
certainly have been at a higher pitch of social effect,) and whose son
and heir, also very handsome and known familiarly and endearingly as
Chick, had a velvet coat and a pony and I think spurs, all luxuries we
were without, and was cousin to boys, the De Coppets, whom we had come
to know at our school of the previous winter and who somehow--doubtless
partly as guests of the opulent Chick--hovered again about the field of
idleness.

The De Coppets, particularly in the person of the first-born Louis, had
been a value to us, or at any rate to me--for though I was, in common
with my elders then, unacquainted with the application of that word as I
use it here, what was my incipient sense of persons and things, what
were my first stirred observant and imaginative reactions,
discriminations and categories, but a vague groping for it? The De
Coppets (again as more especially and most impressively interpreted by
the subtle Louis) enjoyed the pre-eminence of being European; they had
dropped during the scholastic term of 1853-4 straight from the lake of
Geneva into the very bosom of Mr. Richard Pulling Jenks's select resort
for young gentlemen, then situated in Broadway below Fourth Street; and
had lately been present at an historic pageant--whether or no
celebrating the annals of the town of Coppet I know not--in which
representatives of their family had figured in armour and on horseback
as the Barons (to our comprehension) de Coup or Cou. Their father was
thus of the Canton de Vaud--only their mother had been native among
ourselves and sister to the Colonel of the castellations. But what was
the most vivid mark of the brothers, and vividest on the part of the
supersubtle Louis, was his French treatment of certain of our native
local names, Ohio and Iowa for instance, which he rendered, as to their
separate vowels, with a daintiness and a delicacy invidious and
imperturbable, so that he might have been Chateaubriand declaiming Les
Natchez at Madame Récamier's--O-ee-oh and Ee-o-wah; a proceeding in him,
a violence offered to his serried circle of little staring and glaring
New Yorkers supplied with the usual allowance of fists and boot-toes,
which, as it was clearly conscious, I recollect thinking unsurpassed for
cool calm courage. Those _were_ the right names--which we owed wholly to
the French explorers and Jesuit Fathers; so much the worse for us if we
vulgarly didn't know it. I lose myself in admiration of the consistency,
the superiority, the sublimity, of the not at all game-playing, yet in
his own way so singularly sporting, Louis. He was naturally and
incorruptibly French--as, so oddly, I have known other persons of both
sexes to be whose English was naturally and incorruptibly American; the
appearance being thus that the possession of indigenous English alone
forms the adequate barrier and the assured racial ground. (Oh the queer
reversions observed on the part of Latinized compatriots in the course
of a long life--the remarkable drops from the quite current French or
Italian to the comparatively improvised native idiom, with the resulting
effect of the foreign tongue used as a domestic and the domestic, that
is the original American, used as a foreign tongue, or without inherited
confidence!)

Louis De Coppet, though theoretically American and domiciled, was
_naturally_ French, and so pressed further home to me that "sense of
Europe" to which I feel that my very earliest consciousness waked--a
perversity that will doubtless appear to ask for all the justification I
can supply and some of which I shall presently attempt to give. He
opened vistas, and I count ever as precious anyone, everyone, who
betimes does that for the small straining vision; performing this office
never so much, doubtless, as when, during that summer, he invited me to
collaborate with him in the production of a romance which _il se fit
fort_ to get printed, to get published, when success, or in other words
completion, should crown our effort. Our effort, alas, failed of the
crown, in spite of sundry solemn and mysterious meetings--so much
devoted, I seem to remember, to the publishing question that others more
fundamental dreadfully languished; leaving me convinced, however, that
my friend would have got our fiction published if he could only have got
it written. I think of my participation in this vain dream as of the
very first gage of visiting approval offered to the exercise of a
gift--though quite unable to conceive my companion's ground for
suspecting a gift of which I must at that time quite have failed to
exhibit a single in the least "phenomenal" symptom. It had none the less
by his overtures been handsomely _imputed_ to me; that was in a manner a
beginning--a small start, yet not wholly unattended with bravery. Louis
De Coppet, I must add, brought to light later on, so far as I know, no
compositions of his own; we met him long after in Switzerland and
eventually heard of his having married a young Russian lady and settled
at Nice. If I drop on his memory this apology for a bay-leaf it is from
the fact of his having given the earliest, or at least the most
personal, tap to that pointed prefigurement of the manners of "Europe,"
which, inserted wedge-like, if not to say peg-like, into my young
allegiance, was to split the tender organ into such unequal halves. His
the toy hammer that drove in the very point of the golden nail.

It was as if there had been a mild magic in that breath, however scant,
of another world; but when I ask myself what element of the pleasing or
the agreeable may have glimmered through the then general, the outer and
enveloping conditions, I recover many more of the connections in which
forms and civilities lapsed beyond repair than of those in which they
struggled at all successfully. It is for some record of the question of
taste, of the consciousness of an æsthetic appeal, as reflected in forms
and aspects, that I shall like best to testify; as the promise and the
development of these things on our earlier American scene are the more
interesting to trace for their doubtless demanding a degree of the finer
attention. The plain and happy profusions and advances and successes, as
one looks back, reflect themselves at every turn; the quick beats of
material increase and multiplication, with plenty of people to tell of
them and throw up their caps for them; but the edifying matters to
recapture would be the adventures of the "higher criticism" so far as
there was any--and so far too as it might bear on the real quality and
virtue of things; the state of manners, the terms of intercourse, the
care for excellence, the sense of appearances, the intellectual reaction
generally. However, any breasting of those deep waters must be but in
the form for me of an occasional dip. It meanwhile fairly overtakes and
arrests me here as a contributive truth that our general medium of life
in the situation I speak of was such as to make a large defensive
verandah, which seems to have very stoutly and completely surrounded us,
play more or less the part of a raft of rescue in too high a tide--too
high a tide there beneath us, as I recover it, of the ugly and the
graceless. My particular perspective may magnify a little wildly--when
it doesn't even more weirdly diminish; but I read into the great hooded
and guarded resource in question an evidential force: as if it must
really have played for us, so far as its narrowness and its exposure
permitted, the part of a buffer-state against the wilderness immediately
near, that of the empty, the unlovely and the mean. Interposing a little
ease, didn't it interpose almost all the ease we knew?--so that when
amiable friends, arriving from New York by the boat, came to see us,
there was no rural view for them but that of our great shame, a view of
the pigs and the shanties and the loose planks and scattered refuse and
rude public ways; never even a field-path for a gentle walk or a garden
nook in afternoon shade. I recall my prompt distaste, a strange
precocity of criticism, for so much aridity--since of what lost Arcadia,
at that age, had I really had the least glimpse?

Our scant margin must have affected me more nobly, I should in justice
add, when old Mrs. L. passed or hovered, for she sometimes caustically
joined the circle and sometimes, during the highest temperatures, which
were very high that summer, but flitted across it in a single flowing
garment, as we amazedly conceived; one of the signs of that grand
impertinence, I supposed, which belonged to "dowagers"--dowagers who
were recognised characters and free speakers, doing and saying what they
liked. This ancient lady was lodged in some outlying tract of the
many-roomed house, which in more than one quarter stretched away into
mystery; but the piazza, to which she had access, was unbroken, and
whenever she strayed from her own territory she swam afresh into ours. I
definitely remember that, having heard and perhaps read of dowagers,
who, as I was aware, had scarce been provided for in our social scheme,
I said to myself at first sight of our emphatic neighbour, a person
clearly used to exceptional deference, "This must be a perfect
specimen;" which was somehow very wonderful. The absolute first sight,
however, had preceded the New Brighton summer, and it makes me lose
myself in a queer dim vision, all the obscurities attendant on my having
been present, as a very small boy indeed, at an evening entertainment
where Mrs. L. figured in an attire that is still vivid to me: a blue
satin gown, a long black lace shawl and a head-dress consisting in
equally striking parts of a brown wig, a plume of some sort waving over
it and a band or fillet, whether of some precious metal or not I forget,
keeping it in place by the aid of a precious stone which adorned the
centre of her brow. Such was my first view of the _féronnière_ of our
grandmothers, when not of our greatgrandmothers. I see its wearer at
this day bend that burdened brow upon me in a manner sufficiently awful,
while her knuckly white gloves toyed with a large fan and a vinaigrette
attached to her thumb by a chain; and as she was known to us afterwards
for a friend of my Albany grandmother's it may have been as a tribute to
this tie that she allowed me momentarily to engage her attention. _Then_
it predominantly must have been that I knew her for a dowager--though
this was a light in which I had never considered my grandmother herself;
but what I have quite lost the clue to is the question of my
extraordinary footing in such an assembly, the occasion of a dance of my
elders, youthful elders but young married people, into which, really, my
mother, as a participant, must have introduced me.




IV


It took place in the house of our cousins Robert and Kitty Emmet the
elder--for we were to have two cousin Kittys of that ilk and yet another
consanguineous Robert at least; the latter name being naturally, among
them all, of a pious, indeed of a glorious, tradition, and three of my
father's nieces marrying three Emmet brothers, the first of these the
Robert aforesaid. Catherine James, daughter of my uncle Augustus, his
then quite recent and, as I remember her, animated and attractive bride,
whose fair hair framed her pointed smile in full and far-drooping
"front" curls, I easily evoke as my first apprehended image of the free
and happy young woman of fashion, a sign of the wondrous fact that
ladies might live for pleasure, pleasure always, pleasure alone. She was
distinguished for nothing whatever so much as for an insatiable love of
the dance; that passion in which I think of the "good," the best, New
York society of the time as having capered and champagned itself away.
Her younger sister Gertrude, afterwards married to James--or more
inveterately Jim--Pendleton, of Virginia, followed close upon her heels,
literally speaking, and though emulating her in other respects too, was
to last, through many troubles, much longer (looking extraordinarily the
while like the younger portraits of Queen Victoria) and to have much
hospitality, showing it, and showing everything, in a singularly natural
way, for a considerable collection of young hobbledehoy kinsmen. But I
am solicited a moment longer by the queer little issues involved--as if
a social light would somehow stream from them--in my having been taken,
a mere mite of observation, to Kitty Emmet's "grown-up" assembly. Was it
that my mother really felt that to the scrap that I was other scraps
would perhaps strangely adhere, to the extent thus of something to
distinguish me by, nothing else probably having as yet declared
itself--such a scrap for instance as the fine germ of this actual
ferment of memory and play of fancy, a retroactive vision almost intense
of the faded hour and a fond surrender to the questions with which it
bristles? All the female relatives on my father's side who reappear to
me in these evocations strike me as having been intensely and admirably,
but at the same time almost indescribably, _natural_; which fact
connects itself for the brooding painter and fond analyst with fifty
other matters and impressions, his vision of a whole social order--if
the American scene might indeed have been said at that time to be
positively ordered. Wasn't the fact that the dancing passion was so out
of proportion to any social resource just one of the signs of the
natural?--and for that matter in both sexes alike of the artless
kindred. It was shining to us that Jim Pendleton had a yacht--though I
was not smuggled aboard it; there the line was drawn--but the deck must
have been more used for the "German" than for other manoeuvres, often
doubtless under the lead of our cousin Robert, the eldest of the many
light irresponsibles to whom my father was uncle: distinct to me still
being the image of that phenomenally lean and nimble choreographic hero,
"Bob" James to us always, who, almost ghost-fashion, led the cotillion
on from generation to generation, his skull-like smile, with its accent
from the stiff points of his long moustache and the brightly hollow
orbits of his eyes, helping to make of him an immemorial elegant
skeleton.

It is at all events to the sound of fiddles and the popping of corks
that I see even young brides, as well as young grooms, originally so
formed to please and to prosper as our hosts of the restless little
occasion I have glanced at, vanish untimely, become mysterious and
legendary, with such unfathomed silences and significant headshakes
replacing the earlier concert; so that I feel how one's impression of so
much foredoomed youthful levity received constant and quite thrilling
increase. It was of course an impression then obscurely gathered, but
into which one was later on to read strange pages--to some of which I
may find myself moved to revert. Mere mite of observation though I have
dubbed myself, I won't pretend to have deciphered any of them amid the
bacchanal sounds that, on the evening so suggestively spent, floated out
into the region of Washington Place. It is round that general centre
that my richest memories of the "gay" little life in general cluster--as
if it had been, for the circle in which I seem justified in pretending
to have "moved," of the finer essence of "town"; covering as it did the
stretch of Broadway down to Canal Street, with, closer at hand, the New
York Hotel, which figured somehow inordinately in our family annals (the
two newer ones, the glory of their brief and discredited, their flouted
and demolished age, the brown Metropolitan and the white St. Nicholas,
were much further down) and rising northward to the Ultima Thule of
Twenty-third Street, only second then in the supposedly ample scheme of
the regular ninth "wide" street. I can't indeed have moved much on that
night of revelations and yet of enigmas over which I still hang
fascinated; I must have kept intensely still in my corner, all wondering
and all fearing--fearing notice most; and in a definite way I but
remember the formidable interest of my so convincing dowager (to hark
back for a second to _her_) and the fact that a great smooth white cloth
was spread across the denuded room, converted thus into a field of
frolic the prospect of which much excited my curiosity. I but recover
the preparations, however, without recovering the performance; Mrs. L.
and I must have been the only persons not shaking a foot, and premature
unconsciousness clearly in my case supervened. Out of it peeps again the
riddle, the so quaint _trait de moeurs_, of my infant participation.
But I set that down as representative and interesting, and have done
with it.

The manners of the time had obviously a _bonhomie_ of their
own--certainly so on our particularly indulgent and humane little field;
as to which general proposition the later applications and
transformations of the bonhomie would be interesting to trace. It has
lingered and fermented and earned other names, but I seem on the track
of its prime evidence with that note of the sovereign ease of all the
young persons with whom we grew up. In the after-time, as our view took
in, with new climes and new scenes, other examples of the class, these
were always to affect us as more formed and finished, more tutored and
governessed, warned and armed at more points for, and doubtless often
against, the social relation; so that this prepared state on their part,
and which at first appeared but a preparation for shyness or silence or
whatever other ideal of the unconversable, came to be for us the normal,
since it was the relative and not the positive, still less the
superlative, state. No charming creatures of the growing girl sort were
ever to be natural in the degree of these nearer and remoter ornaments
of our family circle in youth; when after intervals and absences the
impression was renewed we saw how right we had been about it, and I feel
as if we had watched it for years under the apprehension and the vision
of some inevitable change, wondering with an affectionate interest what
effect the general improvement in manners might, perhaps all
unfortunately, have upon it. I make out as I look back that it was
really to succumb at no point to this complication, that it was to keep
its really quite inimitable freshness to the end, or, in other words,
when it had been the first free growth of the old conditions, was to
pass away but with the passing of those themselves for whom it had been
the sole possible expression. For it was as of an altogether special
shade and sort that the New York young naturalness of our prime was
touchingly to linger with us--so that to myself, at present, with only
the gentle ghosts of the so numerous exemplars of it before me, it
becomes the very stuff of the soft cerements in which their general mild
mortality is laid away. We used to have in the after-time, amid fresh
recognitions and reminders, the kindest "old New York" identifications
for it. The special shade of its identity was thus that it was not
conscious--really not conscious of anything in the world; or was
conscious of so few possibilities at least, and these so immediate and
so a matter of course, that it came almost to the same thing. That was
the testimony that the slight subjects in question strike me as having
borne to their surrounding medium--the fact that their unconsciousness
could be so preserved. They played about in it so happily and serenely
and sociably, as unembarrassed and loquacious as they were unadmonished
and uninformed--only aware at the most that a good many people within
their horizon were "dissipated"; as in point of fact, alas, a good many
_were_. What it was to be dissipated--that, however, was but in the most
limited degree a feature of their vision; they would have held, under
pressure, that it consisted more than anything else in getting tipsy.

Infinitely queer and quaint, almost incongruously droll, the sense
somehow begotten in ourselves, as very young persons, of our being
surrounded by a slightly remote, yet dimly rich, outer and quite kindred
circle of the tipsy. I remember how, once, as a very small boy, after
meeting in the hall a most amiable and irreproachable gentleman, all
but closely consanguineous, who had come to call on my mother, I
anticipated his further entrance by slipping in to report to that parent
that I thought _he_ must be tipsy. And I was to recall perfectly
afterwards the impression I so made on her--in which the general
proposition that the gentlemen of a certain group or connection might on
occasion be best described by the term I had used sought to destroy the
particular presumption that our visitor wouldn't, by his ordinary
measure, show himself for one of those. He didn't, to all appearance,
for I was afterwards disappointed at the lapse of lurid evidence: that
memory remained with me, as well as a considerable subsequent wonder at
my having leaped to so baseless a view. The truth was indeed that we had
too, in the most innocent way in the world, our sense of "dissipation"
as an abounding element in family histories; a sense fed quite directly
by our fondness for making our father--I can at any rate testify for the
urgency of my own appeal to him--tell us stories of the world of his
youth. He regaled us with no scandals, yet it somehow rarely failed to
come out that each contemporary on his younger scene, each hero of each
thrilling adventure, had, in spite of brilliant promise and romantic
charm, ended badly, as badly as possible. This became our gaping
generalisation--it gaped even under the moral that the anecdote was
always, and so familiarly, humanly and vividly, designed to convey:
everyone in the little old Albany of the Dutch houses and the steep
streets and the recurrent family names--Townsends, Clintons, Van
Rensselaers, Pruyns: I pick them up again at hazard, and all
uninvidiously, out of reverberations long since still--everyone without
exception had at last taken a turn as far as possible from edifying. And
what they had most in common, the hovering presences, the fitful
apparitions that, speaking for myself, so engaged my imagination, was
just the fine old Albany drama--in the light of which a ring of mystery
as to their lives (mainly carried on at the New York Hotel aforesaid)
surrounded them, and their charm, inveterate, as I believed, shone out
as through vaguely-apprehended storm-clouds. Their charm was in various
marks of which I shall have more to say--for as I breathe all this
hushed air again even the more broken things give out touching human
values and faint sweet scents of character, flushes of old beauty and
good-will.

The grim little generalisation remained, none the less, and I may speak
of it--since I speak of everything--as still standing: the striking
evidence that scarce aught but disaster _could_, in that so unformed and
unseasoned society, overtake young men who were in the least exposed.
Not to have been immediately launched in business of a rigorous sort
was to _be_ exposed--in the absence I mean of some fairly abnormal
predisposition to virtue; since it was a world so simply constituted
that whatever wasn't business, or exactly an office or a "store," places
in which people sat close and made money, was just simply pleasure,
sought, and sought only, in places in which people got tipsy. There was
clearly no mean, least of all the golden one, for it was just the ready,
even when the moderate, possession of gold that determined, that hurried
on, disaster. There were whole sets and groups, there were
"sympathetic," though too susceptible, races, that seemed scarce to
recognise or to find possible any practical application of moneyed, that
is of transmitted, ease, however limited, but to go more or less rapidly
to the bad with it--which meant even then going as often as possible to
Paris. The bright and empty air was as void of "careers" for a choice as
of cathedral towers for a sketcher, and I passed my younger time, till
within a year or two of the Civil War, with an absolute vagueness of
impression as to how the political life of the country was carried on.
The field was strictly covered, to my young eyes, I make out, by three
classes, the busy, the tipsy, and Daniel Webster. This last great man
must have represented for us a class in himself; as if to be "political"
was just to _be_ Daniel Webster in his proper person and with room left
over for nobody else. That he should have filled the sky of public life
from pole to pole, even to a childish consciousness not formed in New
England and for which that strenuous section was but a name in the
geography-book, is probably indeed a sign of how large, in the general
air, he comparatively loomed. The public scene was otherwise a blank to
our young vision, I discern, till, later on, in Paris, I saw--for at
that unimproved period we of the unfledged didn't suppose ourselves to
"meet"--Charles Sumner; with whose name indeed there further connects
itself the image of a thrilled hour in the same city some months before:
the gathering of a group of indignant persons on the terrace of a small
old-world _hôtel_ or pavilion looking out on the Avenue des Champs
Elysées, slightly above the Rond-Point and just opposite the
antediluvian Jardin d'Hiver (who remembers the Jardin d'Hiver, who
remembers the ancient lodges of the _octroi_, the pair of them facing
each other at the Barrière de l'Étoile?) and among them a passionate
lady in tears over the news, fresh that morning, of the assault on
Sumner by the South Carolina ruffian of the House. The wounded Senator,
injured in health, had come to Europe later on to recuperate, and he
offered me my first view, to the best of my belief, not only of a
"statesman," but of any person whomsoever concerned in political life. I
distinguish in the earlier twilight of Fourteenth Street my father's
return to us one November day--we knew he had been out to vote--with the
news that General Winfield Scott, his and the then "Whig" candidate, had
been defeated for the Presidency; just as I rescue from the same limbo
my afterwards proud little impression of having "met" that high-piled
hero of the Mexican War, whom the Civil War was so soon and with so
little ceremony to extinguish, literally met him, at my father's side,
in Fifth Avenue, where he had just emerged from a cross-street. I remain
vague as to what had then happened and scarce suppose I was, at the age
probably of eight or nine, "presented"; but we must have been for some
moments face to face while from under the vast amplitude of a dark blue
military cloak with a big velvet collar and loosened silver clasp, which
spread about him like a symbol of the tented field, he greeted my
parent--so clear is my sense of the time it took me to gape _all_ the
way up to where he towered aloft.




V


The not very glorious smoke of the Mexican War, I note for another
touch, had been in the air when I was a still smaller boy, and I have an
association with it that hovers between the definite and the dim, a
vision of our uncle (Captain as he then was) Robert Temple, U.S.A., in
regimentals, either on his way to the scene of action or on the return
from it. I see him as a person half asleep sees some large object across
the room and against the window-light--even if to the effect of my now
asking myself why, so far from the scene of action, he was in panoply of
war. I seem to see him cock-hatted and feathered too--an odd vision of
dancing superior plumes which doesn't fit if he was only a captain.
However, I cultivate the wavering shade merely for its value as my
earliest glimpse of any circumstance of the public order--unless indeed
another, the reminiscence to which I owe to-day my sharpest sense of
personal antiquity, had already given me the historic thrill. The scene
of this latter stir of consciousness is, for memory, an apartment in one
of the three Fifth Avenue houses that were not long afterward swallowed
up in the present Brevoort Hotel, and consists of the admired
appearance of my uncles "Gus" and John James to announce to my father
that the Revolution had triumphed in Paris and Louis Philippe had fled
to England. These last words, the flight of the king, linger on my ear
at this hour even as they fell there; we had somehow waked early to a
perception of Paris, and a vibration of my very most infantine
sensibility under its sky had by the same stroke got itself preserved
for subsequent wondering reference. I had been there for a short time in
the second year of my life, and I was to communicate to my parents later
on that as a baby in long clothes, seated opposite to them in a carriage
and on the lap of another person, I had been impressed with the view,
framed by the clear window of the vehicle as we passed, of a great
stately square surrounded with high-roofed houses and having in its
centre a tall and glorious column. I had naturally caused them to
marvel, but I had also, under cross-questioning, forced them to compare
notes, as it were, and reconstitute the miracle. They knew what my
observation of monumental squares had been--and alas hadn't; neither New
York nor Albany could have offered me the splendid perspective, and, for
that matter, neither could London, which moreover I had known at a
younger age still. Conveyed along the Rue St.-Honoré while I waggled my
small feet, as I definitely remember doing, under my flowing robe, I had
crossed the Rue de Castiglione and taken in, for all my time, the
admirable aspect of the Place and the Colonne Vendôme. I don't now
pretend to measure the extent to which my interest in the events of
1848--I was five years old--was quickened by that _souvenir_, a
tradition further reinforced, I should add, by the fact that some
relative or other, some member of our circle, was always either "there"
("there" being of course generally Europe, but particularly and
pointedly Paris) or going there or coming back from there: I at any rate
revert to the sound of the rich words on my uncles' lips as to my
positive initiation into History. It was as if I had been ready for them
and could catch on; I had heard of kings presumably, and also of
fleeing: but that kings had sometimes to flee was a new and striking
image, to which the apparent consternation of my elders added dramatic
force. So much, in any case, for what I may claim--perhaps too idly--on
behalf of my backward reach.

It has carried me far from my rather evident proposition that if we saw
the "natural" so happily embodied about us--and in female maturity, or
comparative maturity, scarce less than in female adolescence--this was
because the artificial, or in other words the complicated, was so
little there to threaten it. The complicated, as we were later on to
define it, was but another name for those more massed and violent
assaults upon the social sense that we were to recognise subsequently by
their effects--observing thus that a sense more subtly social had so
been created, and that it quite differed from that often almost complete
inward blankness, in respect to any circumjacent, any constituted, order
to the exhibition of which our earlier air and our family scene had
inimitably treated us. We came more or less to see that our young
contemporaries of another world, the trained and admonished, the
disciplined and governessed, or in a word the formed, relatively
speaking, had been made aware of many things of which those at home
hadn't been; yet we were also to note--so far as we may be conceived as
so precociously "noting," though we were certainly incorrigible
observers--that, the awareness in question remaining at the best
imperfect, our little friends as distinguished from our companions of
the cousinship, greater and less, advanced and presumed but to flounder
and recede, elated at once and abashed and on the whole but _feebly_
sophisticated. The cousinship, on the other hand, all unalarmed and
unsuspecting and unembarrassed, lived by pure serenity, sociability and
loquacity; the oddest fact about its members being withal that it didn't
make them bores, I seem to feel as I look back, or at least not worse
bores than sundry specimens of the other growth. There can surely never
have been anything like their good faith and, generally speaking, their
amiability. I should have but to let myself go a little to wish to cite
examples--save that in doing so I should lose sight of my point; which
is to recall again that whether we were all amiable or not (and,
frankly, I claim it in a high degree for most of us) the scene on which
we so freely bloomed does strike me, when I reckon up, as
extraordinarily unfurnished. How came it then that for the most part so
simple we yet weren't more inane? This was doubtless by reason of the
quantity of our inward life--ours of our father's house in especial I
mean--which made an excellent, in some cases almost an incomparable,
_fond_ for a thicker civility to mix with when growing experience should
begin to take that in. It was also quaint, among us, I may be reminded,
to have _begun_ with the inward life; but we began, after the manner of
all men, as we could, and I hold that if it comes to that we might have
begun much worse.

I was in my seventeenth year when the raid and the capture of John
Brown, of Harper's Ferry fame, enjoyed its sharp reverberation among us,
though we were then on the other side of the world; and I count this as
the very first reminder that reached me of our living, on our side, in
a political order: I had perfectly taken in from the pages of "Punch,"
which contributed in the highest degree to our education, that the
peoples on the other side so lived. As there was no American "Punch,"
and to this time has been none, to give small boys the sense and the
imagination of living with their public administrators, Daniel Webster
and Charles Sumner had never become, for my fancy, members of a class, a
class which numbered in England, by John Leech's showing, so many other
members still than Lords Brougham, Palmerston and John Russell. The war
of Secession, soon arriving, was to cause the field to bristle with
features and the sense of the State, in our generation, infinitely to
quicken; but that alarm came upon the country like a thief at night, and
we might all have been living in a land in which there seemed at least
nothing save a comparatively small amount of quite private property to
steal. Even private property in other than the most modest amounts
scarce figured for our particular selves; which doubtless came partly
from the fact that amid all the Albany issue there was ease, with the
habit of ease, thanks to our grandfather's fine old ability--he had
decently provided for so large a generation; but our consciousness was
positively disfurnished, as that of young Americans went, of the
actualities of "business" in a world of business. As to that we all
formed together quite a monstrous exception; business in a world of
business was the thing we most agreed (differ as we might on minor
issues) in knowing nothing about. We touched it and it touched us
neither directly nor otherwise, and I think our fond detachment, not to
say our helpless ignorance and on occasion (since I can speak for one
fine instance) our settled density of understanding, made us an
unexampled and probably, for the ironic "smart" gods of the American
heaven, a lamentable case. Of course even the office and the "store"
leave much of the provision for an approximately complete scheme of
manners to be accounted for; still there must have been vast numbers of
people about us for whom, under the usages, the assault on the
imagination from without was much stronger and the filling-in of the
general picture much richer. It was exactly by the lack of that
filling-in that we--we more especially who lived at near view of my
father's admirable example--had been thrown so upon the inward life. No
one could ever have taken to it, even in the face of discouragement,
more kindly and naturally than he; but the situation had at least that
charm that, in default of so many kinds of the outward, people had their
choice of as many kinds of the inward as they would, and might practise
those kinds with whatever consistency, intensity and brilliancy. Of our
father's perfect gift for practising _his_ kind I shall have more to
say; but I meanwhile glance yet again at those felicities of destitution
which kept us, collectively, so genially interested in almost nothing
but each other and which come over me now as one of the famous blessings
in disguise.

There were "artists" in the prospect--didn't Mr. Tom Hicks and Mr. Paul
Duggan and Mr. C. P. Cranch and Mr. Felix Darley, this last worthy of a
wider reputation, capable perhaps even of a finer development, than he
attained, more or less haunt our friendly fireside, and give us also the
sense of others, landscapist Cropseys and Coles and Kensetts, and
bust-producing Iveses and Powerses and Moziers, hovering in an outer
circle? There were authors not less, some of them vague and female and
in this case, as a rule, glossily ringletted and monumentally
breastpinned, but mostly frequent and familiar, after the manner of
George Curtis and Parke Godwin and George Ripley and Charles Dana and N.
P. Willis and, for brighter lights or those that in our then comparative
obscurity almost deceived the morn, Mr. Bryant, Washington Irving and E.
A. Poe--the last-named of whom I cite not so much because he was
personally present (the extremity of personal absence had just overtaken
him) as by reason of that predominant lustre in him which our small
opening minds themselves already recognised and which makes me wonder
to-day at the legend of the native neglect of him. Was he not even at
that time on all lips, had not my brother, promptly master of the
subject, beckoned on my lagging mind with a recital of The Gold-Bug and
The Pit and the Pendulum?--both of which, however, I was soon enough to
read for myself, adding to them The Murders in the Rue Morgue. Were we
not also forever mounting on little platforms at our infant schools to
"speak" The Raven and Lenore and the verses in which we phrased the
heroine as Annabellee?--falling thus into the trap the poet had so
recklessly laid for us, as he had laid one for our interminable droning,
not less, in the other pieces I have named. So far from misprizing our
ill-starred magician we acclaimed him surely at every turn; he lay upon
our tables and resounded in our mouths, while we communed to satiety,
even for boyish appetites, over the thrill of his choicest pages. Don't
I just recognise the ghost of a dim memory of a children's Christmas
party at the house of Fourteenth Street neighbours--they come back to me
as "the Beans": who and what and whence and whither the kindly
Beans?--where I admired over the chimney piece the full-length portrait
of a lady seated on the ground in a Turkish dress, with hair flowing
loose from a cap which was not as the caps of ladies known to me, and I
think with a tambourine, who was somehow identified to my enquiring
mind as the wife of the painter of the piece, Mr. Osgood, and the so
ministering friend of the unhappy Mr. Poe. There she throned in honour,
like Queen Constance on the "huge firm earth"--all for _that_ and her
tambourine; and surely we could none of us have done more for the
connection.

Washington Irving I "met," with infant promptitude, very much as I had
met General Scott; only this time it was on a steamboat that I
apprehended the great man; my father, under whose ever-patient
protection I then was--during the summer afternoon's sail from New York
to Fort Hamilton--having named him to me, for this long preservation,
before they greeted and talked, and having a fact of still more moment
to mention, with the greatest concern, afterwards: Mr. Irving had given
him the news of the shipwreck of Margaret Fuller in those very waters
(Fire Island at least was but just without our big Bay) during the great
August storm that had within the day or two passed over us. The
unfortunate lady was essentially of the Boston connection; but she must
have been, and probably through Emerson, a friend of my parents--mustn't
she have held "conversations," in the finest exotic Bostonese, in New
York, Emerson himself lecturing there to admiration?--since the more I
squeeze the sponge of memory the more its stored secretions flow, to
remind me here again that, being with those elders late one evening at
an exhibition of pictures, possibly that of the National Academy, then
confined to scant quarters, I was shown a small full-length portrait of
Miss Fuller, seated as now appears to me and wrapped in a long white
shawl, the failure of which to do justice to its original my companions
denounced with some emphasis. Was this work from the hand of Mr. Tom
Hicks aforesaid, or was that artist concerned only with the life-sized,
the enormous (as I took it to be) the full-length, the violently
protruded accessories in which come back to me with my infant sense of
the wonder and the beauty of them, as expressed above all in the image
of a very long and lovely lady, the new bride of the artist, standing at
a window before a row of plants or bulbs in tall coloured glasses. The
light of the window playing over the figure and the "treatment" of its
glass and of the flower-pots and the other furniture, passed, by my
impression, for the sign of the master hand; and _was_ it all brave and
charming, or was it only very hard and stiff, quite ugly and helpless? I
put these questions as to a vanished world and by way of pressing back
into it only the more clingingly and tenderly--wholly regardless in
other words of whether the answers to them at all matter. They matter
doubtless but for fond evocation, and if one tries to evoke one must
neglect none of the arts, one must do it with all the forms. Why I
_should_ so like to do it is another matter--and what "outside
interest" I may suppose myself to create perhaps still another: I
fatuously proceed at any rate, I make so far as I can the small warm
dusky homogeneous New York world of the mid-century close about us.




VI


I see a small and compact and ingenuous society, screened in somehow
conveniently from north and west, but open wide to the east and
comparatively to the south and, though perpetually moving up Broadway,
none the less constantly and delightfully walking down it. Broadway was
the feature and the artery, the joy and the adventure of one's
childhood, and it stretched, and prodigiously, from Union Square to
Barnum's great American Museum by the City Hall--or only went further on
the Saturday mornings (absurdly and deplorably frequent alas) when we
were swept off by a loving aunt, our mother's only sister, then much
domesticated with us and to whom the ruthless care had assigned itself
from the first, to Wall Street and the torture chamber of Dr. Parkhurst,
our tremendously respectable dentist, who was so old and so empurpled
and so polite, in his stock and dress-coat and dark and glossy wig, that
he had been our mother's and our aunt's haunting fear in _their_ youth
as well, since, in their quiet Warren Street, not far off, they were,
dreadful to think, comparatively under his thumb. He extremely
resembles, to my mind's eye, certain figures in Phiz's illustrations to
Dickens, and it was clear to us through our long ordeal that our elders
must, by some mistaken law of compensation, some refinement of the
vindictive, be making us "pay" for what they in like helplessness had
suffered from him: as if _we_ had done them any harm! Our analysis was
muddled, yet in a manner relieving, and for us too there were
compensations, which we grudged indeed to allow, but which I could
easily, even if shyly, have named. One of these was Godey's Lady's Book,
a sallow pile of which (it shows to me for sallow in the warmer and less
stony light of the Wall Street of those days and through the smell of
ancient anodynes) lay on Joey Bagstock's table for our beguilement while
we waited: I was to encounter in Phiz's Dombey and Son that design for
our tormentor's type. There is no doubt whatever that I succumbed to the
spell of Godey, who, unlike the present essences, was an anodyne before
the fact as well as after; since I remember poring, in his pages, over
tales of fashionable life in Philadelphia while awaiting my turn in the
chair, not less than doing so when my turn was over and to the music of
my brother's groans. This must have been at the hours when we were left
discreetly to our own fortitude, through our aunt's availing herself of
the relative proximity to go and shop at Stewart's and then come back
for us; the ladies' great shop, vast, marmorean, plate-glassy and
notoriously fatal to the female nerve (we ourselves had wearily trailed
through it, hanging on the skirts, very literally, of indecision) which
bravely waylaid custom on the Broadway corner of Chambers Street. Wasn't
part of the charm of life--since I assume that there _was_ such a
charm--in its being then (I allude to life itself) so much more
down-towny, on the supposition at least that our young gravitation in
that sense for most of the larger joys consorted with something of the
general habit? The joy that had to be fished out, like Truth, from the
very bottom of the well was attendance at Trinity Church, still in that
age supereminent, pointedly absolute, the finest feature of the
southward scene; to the privilege of which the elder Albany cousins were
apt to be treated when they came on to stay with us; an indulgence
making their enjoyment of our city as down-towny as possible too, for I
seem otherwise to see them but as returning with the familiar Stewart
headache from the prolonged strain of selection.

The great reward dispensed to us for our sessions in the house of
pain--as to which it became our subsequent theory that we had been
regularly dragged there on alternate Saturdays--was our being carried on
the return to the house of delight, or to one of them, for there were
specifically two, where we partook of ice-cream, deemed sovereign for
sore mouths, deemed sovereign in fact, all through our infancy, for
everything. Two great establishments for the service of it graced the
prospect, one Thompson's and the other Taylor's, the former, I perfectly
recall, grave and immemorial, the latter upstart but dazzling, and
having together the effect that whichever we went to we wondered if we
hadn't better have gone to the other--with that capacity of childhood
for making the most of its adventures after a fashion that may look so
like making the least. It is in our father's company indeed that, as I
press the responsive spring, I see the bedizened saucers heaped up for
our fond consumption (they bore the Taylor-title painted in blue and
gilded, with the Christian name, as parentally pointed out to us,
perverted to "Jhon" for John, whereas the Thompson-name scorned such
vulgar and above all such misspelt appeals;) whence I infer that still
other occasions for that experience waited on us--as almost any would
serve, and a paternal presence so associated with them was not in the
least conceivable in the Wall Street _repaire_. That presence is in fact
not associated for me, to any effect of distinctness, with the least of
our suffered shocks or penalties--though partly doubtless because our
acquaintance with such was of the most limited; a conclusion I form even
while judging it to have been on the whole sufficient for our virtue.
This sounds perhaps as if we had borne ourselves as prodigies or
prigs--which was as far as possible from being the case; we were bred in
horror of _conscious_ propriety, of what my father was fond of calling
"flagrant" morality; what I myself at any rate read back into our rare
educational ease, for the memory of some sides of which I was ever to be
thankful, is, besides the _general_ humanisation of our apprehended
world and our "social" tone, the unmistakeable appearance that my father
was again and again accompanied in public by his small second son: so
many young impressions come back to me as gathered at his side and in
his personal haunts. Not that he mustn't have offered his firstborn at
least equal opportunities; but I make out that he seldom led us forth,
such as we were, together, and my brother must have had in _his_ turn
many a mild adventure of which the secret--I like to put it so--perished
with him. He was to remember, as I perceived later on, many things that
I didn't, impressions I sometimes wished, as with a retracing jealousy,
or at least envy, that I might also have fallen direct heir to; but he
professed amazement, and even occasionally impatience, at my reach of
reminiscence--liking as he did to brush away old moral scraps in favour
of new rather than to hoard and so complacently exhibit them. If in my
way I collected the new as well I yet cherished the old; the ragbag of
memory hung on its nail in my closet, though I learnt with time to
control the habit of bringing it forth. And I say that with a due sense
of my doubtless now appearing to empty it into these pages.

I keep picking out at hazard those passages of our earliest age that
help to reconstruct for me even by tiny touches the experience of our
parents, any shade of which seems somehow to signify. I cherish, to the
extent of here reproducing, an old daguerreotype all the circumstances
of the taking of which I intensely recall--though as I was lately turned
twelve when I figured for it the feat of memory is perhaps not
remarkable. It documents for me in so welcome and so definite a manner
my father's cultivation of my company. It documents at the same time the
absurdest little legend of my small boyhood--the romantic tradition of
the value of being taken up from wherever we were staying to the queer
empty dusty smelly New York of midsummer: I apply that last term because
we always arrived by boat and I have still in my nostril the sense of
the _abords_ of the hot town, the rank and rubbishy waterside quarters,
where big loose cobbles, for the least of all the base items, lay
wrenched from their sockets of pungent black mud and where the dependent
streets managed by a law of their own to be all corners and the corners
to be all groceries; groceries indeed largely of the "green" order, so
far as greenness could persist in the torrid air, and that bristled, in
glorious defiance of traffic, with the overflow of their wares and
implements. Carts and barrows and boxes and baskets, sprawling or
stacked, familiarly elbowed in its course the bumping hack (the
comprehensive "carriage" of other days, the only vehicle of hire then
known to us) while the situation was accepted by the loose citizen in
the garb of a freeman save for the brass star on his breast--and the New
York garb of the period was, as I remember it, an immense attestation of
liberty. Why the throb of romance should have beat time for me to such
visions I can scarce explain, or can explain only by the fact that the
squalor was a squalor wonderfully mixed and seasoned, and that I should
wrong the whole impression if I didn't figure it first and foremost as
that of some vast succulent cornucopia. What did the stacked boxes and
baskets of our youth represent but the boundless fruitage of that more
bucolic age of the American world, and what was after all of so strong
an assault as the rankness of such a harvest? Where is that fruitage
now, where in particular are the peaches _d'antan_? where the mounds of
Isabella grapes and Seckel pears in the sticky sweetness of which our
childhood seems to have been steeped? It was surely, save perhaps for
oranges, a more informally and familiarly fruit-eating time, and bushels
of peaches in particular, peaches big and peaches small, peaches white
and peaches yellow, played a part in life from which they have somehow
been deposed; every garden, almost every bush and the very boys' pockets
grew them; they were "cut up" and eaten with cream at every meal;
domestically "brandied" they figured, the rest of the year, scarce less
freely--if they were rather a "party dish" it was because they made the
party whenever they appeared, and when ice-cream was added, or they were
added _to_ it, they formed the highest revel we knew. Above all the
public heaps of them, the high-piled receptacles at every turn, touched
the street as with a sort of southern plenty; the note of the rejected
and scattered fragments, the memory of the slippery skins and rinds and
kernels with which the old dislocated flags were bestrown, is itself
endeared to me and contributes a further pictorial grace. We ate
everything in those days by the bushel and the barrel, as from stores
that were infinite; we handled watermelons as freely as cocoanuts, and
the amount of stomach-ache involved was negligible in the general
Eden-like consciousness.

The glow of this consciousness even in so small an organism was part of
the charm of these retreats offered me cityward upon our base of
provisions; a part of the rest of which, I disengage, was in my fond
perception of that almost eccentrically home-loving habit in my father
which furnished us with half the household humour of our
childhood--besides furnishing _him_ with any quantity of extravagant
picture of his so prompt pangs of anguish in absence for celebration of
his precipitate returns. It was traditional for us later on, and
especially on the European scene, that for him to leave us in pursuit of
some advantage or convenience, some improvement of our condition, some
enlargement of our view, was for him breathlessly to reappear, after the
shortest possible interval, with no account at all to give of the
benefit aimed at, but instead of this a moving representation, a far
richer recital, of his spiritual adventures at the horrid inhuman inns
and amid the hard alien races which had stayed his advance. He reacted,
he rebounded, in favour of his fireside, from whatever brief
explorations or curiosities; these passionate spontaneities were the
pulse of his life and quite some of the principal events of ours; and,
as he was nothing if not expressive, whatever happened to him for inward
intensity happened abundantly to us for pity and terror, as it were, as
well as for an ease and a quality of amusement among ourselves that was
really always to fail us among others. Comparatively late in life, after
his death, I had occasion to visit, in lieu of my brother, then in
Europe, an American city in which he had had, since his own father's
death, interests that were of importance to us all. On my asking the
agent in charge when the owner had last taken personal cognisance of his
property that gentleman replied only half to my surprise that he had
never in all his years of possession performed such an act. Then it was
perhaps that I most took the measure of his fine faith in human
confidence as an administrative function. He had to have a _relation_,
somehow expressed--and as he was the vividest and happiest of
letter-writers it rarely failed of coming; but once it was established
it served him, in every case, much better than fussy challenges, which
had always the drawback of involving lapses and inattentions in regard
to solicitudes more pressing. He incurably took for granted--incurably
because whenever he did so the process succeeded; with which
association, however, I perhaps overdrench my complacent vision of our
summer snatches at town. Through a grave accident in early life country
walks on rough roads were, in spite of his great constitutional
soundness, tedious and charmless to him; he liked on the other hand the
peopled pavement, the thought of which made him restless when away.
Hence the fidelities and sociabilities, however superficial, that he
couldn't _not_ reaffirm--if he could only reaffirm the others, the
really intimate and still more communicable, soon enough afterwards.

It was these of the improvised and casual sort that I shared with him
thus indelibly; for truly if we took the boat to town to do things I did
them quite as much as he, and so that a little boy could scarce have
done them more. My part may indeed but have been to surround his part
with a thick imaginative aura; but that constituted for me an activity
than which I could dream of none braver or wilder. We went to the office
of The New York Tribune--my father's relations with that journal were
actual and close; and that was a wonderful world indeed, with strange
steepnesses and machineries and noises and hurrying bare-armed,
bright-eyed men, and amid the agitation clever, easy, kindly, jocular,
partly undressed gentlemen (it was always July or August) some of whom I
knew at home, taking it all as if it were the most natural place in the
world. It was big to me, big to me with the breath of great vague
connections, and I supposed the gentlemen very old, though since aware
that they must have been, for the connections, remarkably young; and the
conversation of one of them, the one I saw oftenest up town, who
attained to great local and to considerable national eminence
afterwards, and who talked often and thrillingly about the theatres, I
retain as many bright fragments of as if I had been another little
Boswell. It was as if he had dropped into my mind the germ of certain
interests that were long afterwards to flower--as for instance on his
announcing the receipt from Paris of news of the appearance at the
Théâtre Français of an actress, Madame Judith, who was formidably to
compete with her coreligionary Rachel and to endanger that artist's
laurels. Why should Madame Judith's name have stuck to me through all
the years, since I was never to see her and she is as forgotten as
Rachel is remembered? Why should that scrap of gossip have made a date
for my consciousness, turning it to the Comédie with an intensity that
was long afterwards to culminate? Why was it equally to abide for me
that the same gentleman had on one of these occasions mentioned his
having just come back from a wonderful city of the West, Chicago, which,
though but a year or two old, with plank sidewalks when there were any,
and holes and humps where there were none, and shanties where there were
not big blocks, and everything where there had yesterday been nothing,
had already developed a huge energy and curiosity, and also an appetite
for lectures? I became aware of the Comédie, I became aware of Chicago;
I also became aware that even the most alluring fiction was not always
for little boys to read. It was mentioned at the Tribune office that one
of its reporters, Mr. Solon Robinson, had put forth a novel rather oddly
entitled "Hot Corn" and more or less having for its subject the career
of a little girl who hawked that familiar American luxury in the
streets. The volume, I think, was put into my father's hand, and I
recall my prompt desire to make acquaintance with it no less than the
remark, as promptly addressed to my companion, that the work, however
engaging, was not one that should be left accessible to an innocent
child. The pang occasioned by this warning has scarcely yet died out for
me, nor my sense of my first wonder at the discrimination--so great
became from that moment the mystery of the tabooed book, of whatever
identity; the question, in my breast, of why, if it was to be so right
for others, it was only to be wrong for me. I remember the soreness of
the thought that it was I rather who was wrong for the book--which was
somehow humiliating: in that amount of discredit one couldn't but be
involved. Neither then nor afterwards was the secret of "Hot Corn"
revealed to me, and the sense of privation was to be more prolonged, I
fear, than the vogue of the tale, which even as a success of scandal
couldn't have been great.




VII


Dimly queer and "pathetic" to me were to remain through much of the
after time indeed most of those early indigenous vogues and literary
flurries: so few of those that brushed by my childhood had been other
than a tinkling that suddenly stopped. I am afraid I mean that what was
touching was rather the fact that the tinkle _could_ penetrate than the
fact that it died away; the light of criticism might have beat so
straight--if the sense of proportion and the fact of compassion hadn't
waved it away--on the æsthetic phase during which the appeal was mainly
_by_ the tinkle. The Scarlet Letter and The Seven Gables had the deep
tone as much as one would; but of the current efforts of the imagination
they were alone in having it till Walt Whitman broke out in the later
fifties--and I was to know nothing of that happy genius till long after.
An absorbed perusal of The Lamplighter was what I was to achieve at the
fleeting hour I continue to circle round; that romance was on every
one's lips, and I recollect it as more or less thrust upon me in amends
for the imposed sacrifice of a ranker actuality--that of the improper
Mr. Robinson, I mean, as to whom there revives in me the main question
of where his impropriety, in so general a platitude of the bourgeois,
could possibly have dwelt. It was to be true indeed that Walt Whitman
achieved an impropriety of the first magnitude; that success, however,
but showed us the platitude returning in a genial rage upon itself and
getting out of control by generic excess. There was no rage at any rate
in The Lamplighter, over which I fondly hung and which would have been
my first "grown-up" novel--it had been soothingly offered me for
that--had I consented to take it as really and truly grown-up. I
couldn't have said what it lacked for the character, I only had my
secret reserves, and when one blest afternoon on the New Brighton boat I
waded into The Initials I saw how right I had been. The Initials _was_
grown-up and the difference thereby exquisite; it came over me with the
very first page, assimilated in the fluttered little cabin to which I
had retired with it--all in spite of the fact too that my attention was
distracted by a pair of remarkable little girls who lurked there out of
more public view as to hint that they weren't to be seen for nothing.

That must have been a rich hour, for I mix the marvel of the Boon
Children, strange pale little flowers of the American theatre, with my
conscious joy in bringing back to my mother, from our forage in New
York, a gift of such happy promise as the history of the long-legged Mr.
Hamilton and his two Bavarian beauties, the elder of whom, Hildegarde,
was to figure for our small generation as the very type of the haughty
as distinguished from the forward heroine (since I think our categories
really came to no more than those). I couldn't have got very far with
Hildegarde in moments so scant, but I memorably felt that romance was
thick round me--everything, at such a crisis, seeming to make for it at
once. The Boon Children, conveyed thus to New Brighton under care of a
lady in whose aspect the strain of the resolute triumphed over the note
of the battered, though the showy in it rather succumbed at the same
time to the dowdy, were already "billed," as infant phenomena, for a
performance that night at the Pavilion, where our attendance, it was a
shock to feel, couldn't be promised; and in gazing without charge at the
pair of weary and sleepy little mountebanks I found the histrionic
character and the dramatic profession for the first time revealed to me.
They filled me with fascination and yet with fear; they expressed a
melancholy grace and a sort of peevish refinement, yet seemed awfully
detached and indifferent, indifferent perhaps even to being pinched and
slapped, for art's sake, at home; they honoured me with no notice
whatever and regarded me doubtless as no better than one of the little
louts peeping through the tent of the show. In return I judged their
appearance dissipated though fascinating, and sought consolation for the
memory of their scorn and the loss of their exhibition, as time went on,
in noting that the bounds of their fame seemed somehow to have been
stayed. I neither "met" them nor heard of them again. The little
Batemans must have obscured their comparatively dim lustre, flourishing
at the same period and with a larger command of the pictorial poster and
the other primitive symbols in Broadway--such posters and such symbols
as they were at that time!--the little Batemans who were to be reserved,
in maturer form, for my much later and more grateful appreciation.

This weak reminiscence has obstructed, however, something more to the
purpose, the retained impression of those choicest of our loiterings
that took place, still far down-town, at the Bookstore, home of delights
and haunt of fancy. It was at the Bookstore we had called on the day of
The Initials and the Boon Children--and it was thence we were returning
with our spoil, of which the charming novel must have been but a
fragment. My impression composed itself of many pieces; a great and
various practice of burying my nose in the half-open book for the strong
smell of paper and printer's ink, known to us as the English smell, was
needed to account for it. _That_ was the exercise of the finest sense
that hung about us, my brother and me--or of one at least but little
less fine than the sense for the satisfaction of which we resorted to
Thompson's and to Taylor's: it bore me company during all our returns
from forages and left me persuaded that I had only to snuff up hard
enough, fresh uncut volume in hand, to taste of the very substance of
London. All our books in that age were English, at least all our
down-town ones--I personally recall scarce any that were not; and I take
the perception of that quality in them to have associated itself with
more fond dreams and glimmering pictures than any other one principle of
growth. It was all a result of the deeply _infected_ state: I had been
prematurely poisoned--as I shall presently explain. The Bookstore,
fondest of my father's resorts, though I remember no more of its public
identity than that it further enriched the brave depth of Broadway, was
overwhelmingly and irresistibly English, as not less tonically English
was our principal host there, with whom we had moreover, my father and
I, thanks to his office, such personal and genial relations that I
recall seeing him grace our board at home, in company with his wife,
whose vocal strain and complexion and coiffure and flounces I found none
the less informing, none the less "racial," for my not being then versed
in the language of analysis.

The true inwardness of these rich meanings--those above all of the
Bookstore itself--was that a tradition was thus fed, a presumption thus
created, a vague vision thus filled in: all expression is clumsy for so
mystic a process. What else can have happened but that, having taken
over, under suggestion and with singular infant promptitude, a
particular throbbing consciousness, I had become aware of the source at
which it could best be refreshed? That consciousness, so communicated,
was just simply of certain impressions, certain _sources_ of impression
again, proceeding from over the sea and situated beyond it--or even much
rather of my parents' own impression of such, the fruit of a happy time
spent in and about London with their two babies and reflected in that
portion of their talk with each other to which I best attended. Had
_all_ their talk for its subject, in my infant ears, that happy
time?--did it deal only with London and Piccadilly and the Green Park,
where, over against their dwelling, their two babies mainly took the air
under charge of Fanny of Albany, their American nurse, whose remark as
to the degree to which the British Museum fell short for one who had had
the privilege of that of Albany was handed down to us? Did it never
forbear from Windsor and Richmond and Sudbrook and Ham Common, amid the
rich complexity of which, crowding their discourse with echoes, they
had spent their summer?--all a scattering of such pearls as it seemed
that their second-born could most deftly and instinctively pick up. Our
sole maternal aunt, already mentioned as a devoted and cherished
presence during those and many later years, was in a position to share
with them the treasure of these mild memories, which strike me as having
for the most part, through some bright household habit, overflowed at
the breakfast-table, where I regularly attended with W. J.; she had
imbibed betimes in Europe the seeds of a long nostalgia, and I think of
her as ever so patiently communicative on that score under pressure of
my artless appeal. That I should have been so inquiring while still so
destitute of primary data was doubtless rather an anomaly; and it was
for that matter quite as if my infant divination proceeded by the light
of nature: I divined that it would matter to me in the future that
"English life" should be of this or that fashion. My father had
subscribed for me to a small periodical of quarto form, covered in
yellow and entitled The Charm, which shed on the question the softest
lustre, but of which the appearances were sadly intermittent, or then
struck me as being; inasmuch as many of our visits to the Bookstore were
to ask for the new number--only to learn with painful frequency that the
last consignment from London had arrived without it. I feel again the
pang of that disappointment--as if through the want of what I needed
most for going on; the English smell was exhaled by The Charm in a
peculiar degree, and I see myself affected by the failure as by that of
a vital tonic. It was not, at the same time, by a Charm the more or the
less that my salvation was to be, as it were, worked out, or my
imagination at any rate duly convinced; conviction was the result of the
very air of home, so far as I most consciously inhaled it. This
represented, no doubt, a failure to read into matters close at hand all
the interest they were capable of yielding; but I had taken the twist,
had sipped the poison, as I say, and was to feel it to that end the most
salutary cup. I saw my parents homesick, as I conceived, for the ancient
order and distressed and inconvenienced by many of the more immediate
features of the modern, as the modern pressed upon us, and since their
theory of our better living was from an early time that we should renew
the quest of the ancient on the very first possibility I simply grew
greater in the faith that somehow to manage that would constitute
success in life. I never found myself deterred from this fond view,
which was implied in every question I asked, every answer I got, and
every plan I formed.

Those are great words for the daydream of infant ignorance, yet if
success in life may perhaps be best defined as the performance in age of
some intention arrested in youth I may frankly put in a claim to it. To
press my nose against the sources of the English smell, so different for
young bibliophiles from any American, was to adopt that sweetness as the
sign of my "atmosphere"; roundabout might be the course to take, but one
was in motion from the first and one never lost sight of the goal. The
very names of places and things in the other world--the marked opposite
in most ways of that in which New York and Albany, Fort Hamilton and New
Brighton formed so fallacious a maximum--became to me values and secrets
and shibboleths; they were probably often on my tongue and employed as
ignorance determined, but I quite recall being ashamed to use them as
much as I should have liked. It was New Brighton, I reconstruct (and
indeed definitely remember) that "finished" us at last--that and our
final sordid school, W. J.'s and mine, in New York: the ancient order
_had_ somehow to be invoked when such "advantages" as those were the
best within our compass and our means. Not further to anticipate, at all
events, that climax was for a while but vaguely in sight, and the
illusion of felicity continued from season to season to shut us in. It
is only of what I took for felicity, however few the years and however
scant the scene, that I am pretending now to speak; though I shall have
strained the last drop of romance from this vision of our towny summers
with the quite sharp reminiscence of my first sitting for my
daguerreotype. I repaired with my father on an August day to the great
Broadway establishment of Mr. Brady, supreme in that then beautiful art,
and it is my impression--the only point vague with me--that though we
had come up by the Staten Island boat for the purpose we were to keep
the affair secret till the charming consequence should break, at home,
upon my mother. Strong is my conviction that our mystery, in the event,
yielded almost at once to our elation, for no tradition had a brighter
household life with us than that of our father's headlong impatience. He
moved in a cloud, if not rather in a high radiance, of precipitation and
divulgation, a chartered rebel against cold reserves. The good news in
his hand refused under any persuasion to grow stale, the sense of
communicable pleasure in his breast was positively explosive; so that we
saw those "surprises" in which he had conspired with our mother for our
benefit converted by him in every case, under our shamelessly encouraged
guesses, into common conspiracies against her--against her knowing, that
is, how thoroughly we were all compromised. He had a special and
delightful sophistry at the service of his overflow, and never so fine a
fancy as in defending it on "human" grounds. He was something very
different withal from a parent of weak mercies; weakness was never so
positive and plausible, nor could the attitude of sparing you be more
handsomely or on occasion even more comically aggressive.

My small point is simply, however, that the secresy of our conjoined
portrait was probably very soon, by his act, to begin a public and
shining life and to enjoy it till we received the picture; as to which
moreover still another remembrance steals on me, a proof of the fact
that our adventure was improvised. Sharp again is my sense of not being
so adequately dressed as I should have taken thought for had I foreseen
my exposure; though the resources of my wardrobe as then constituted
could surely have left me but few alternatives. The main resource of a
small New York boy in this line at that time was the little sheath-like
jacket, tight to the body, closed at the neck and adorned in front with
a single row of brass buttons--a garment of scant grace assuredly and
compromised to my consciousness, above all, by a strange ironic light
from an unforgotten source. It was but a short time before those days
that the great Mr. Thackeray had come to America to lecture on The
English Humourists, and still present to me is the voice proceeding from
my father's library, in which some glimpse of me hovering, at an opening
of the door, in passage or on staircase, prompted him to the formidable
words: "Come here, little boy, and show me your extraordinary jacket!"
My sense of my jacket became from that hour a heavy one--further
enriched as my vision is by my shyness of posture before the seated, the
celebrated visitor, who struck me, in the sunny light of the animated
room, as enormously big and who, though he laid on my shoulder the hand
of benevolence, bent on my native costume the spectacles of wonder. I
was to know later on why he had been so amused and why, after asking me
if this were the common uniform of my age and class, he remarked that in
England, were I to go there, I should be addressed as "Buttons." It had
been revealed to me thus in a flash that we were somehow _queer_, and
though never exactly crushed by it I became aware that I at least felt
so as I stood with my head in Mr. Brady's vise. Beautiful most decidedly
the lost art of the daguerreotype; I remember the "exposure" as on this
occasion interminably long, yet with the result of a facial anguish far
less harshly reproduced than my suffered snapshots of a later age. Too
few, I may here interject, were to remain my gathered impressions of the
great humourist, but one of them, indeed almost the only other, bears
again on the play of his humour over our perversities of dress. It
belongs to a later moment, an occasion on which I see him familiarly
seated with us, in Paris, during the spring of 1857, at some repast at
which the younger of us too, by that time, habitually flocked, in our
affluence of five. Our youngest was beside him, a small sister, then not
quite in her eighth year, and arrayed apparently after the fashion of
the period and place; and the tradition lingered long of his having
suddenly laid his hand on her little flounced person and exclaimed with
ludicrous horror: "Crinoline?--I was suspecting it! So young and so
depraved!"

A fainter image, that of one of the New York moments, just eludes me,
pursue it as I will; I recover but the setting and the fact of his brief
presence in it, with nothing that was said or done beyond my being left
with my father to watch our distinguished friend's secretary, who was
also a young artist, establish his easel and proceed to paint. The
setting, as I recall it, was an odd, oblong, blank "private parlour" at
the Clarendon Hotel, then the latest thing in hotels, but whose ancient
corner of Fourth Avenue and--was it Eighteenth Street?--long ago ceased
to know it; the gentle, very gentle, portraitist was Mr. Eyre Crowe and
the obliging sitter my father, who sat in response to Mr. Thackeray's
desire that his protégé should find employment. The protector after a
little departed, blessing the business, which took the form of a small
full-length of the model seated, his arm extended and the hand on the
knob of his cane. The work, it may at this time of day be mentioned,
fell below its general possibilities; but I note the scene through which
I must duly have gaped and wondered (for I had as yet seen no one, least
of all a casual acquaintance in an hotel parlour, "really paint"
before,) as a happy example again of my parent's positive cultivation of
my society, it would seem, and thought for my social education. And then
there are other connections; I recall it as a Sunday morning, I recover
the place itself as a featureless void--bleak and bare, with its
developments all to come, the hotel parlour of other New York days--but
vivid still to me is my conscious assistance for the first time at
operations that were to mean much for many of my coming years. Those of
quiet Mr. Crowe held me spellbound--I was to circle so wistfully, as
from that beginning, round the practice of his art, which in spite of
these earnest approaches and intentions never on its own part in the
least acknowledged our acquaintance; scarcely much more than it was ever
to respond, for that matter, to the overtures of the mild aspirant
himself, known to my observation long afterwards, in the London years,
as the most touchingly resigned of the children of disappointment. Not
only by association was he a Thackerayan figure, but much as if the
master's hand had stamped him with the outline and the value, with life
and sweetness and patience--shown, as after the long futility, seated
in a quiet wait, very long too, for the end. That was sad, one couldn't
but feel; yet it was in the oddest way impossible to take him for a
failure. He might have been one of fortune's, strictly; but what was
that when he was one of Thackeray's own successes?--in the minor line,
but with such a grace and such a truth, those of some dim second cousin
to Colonel Newcome.




VIII


I feel that at such a rate I remember too much, and yet this mild
apparitionism is only part of it. To look back at all is to meet the
apparitional and to find in its ghostly face the silent stare of an
appeal. When I fix it, the hovering shade, whether of person or place,
it fixes me back and seems the less lost--not to my consciousness, for
that is nothing, but to its own--by my stopping however idly for it. The
day of the daguerreotype, the August afternoon, what was it if not one
of the days when we went to Union Square for luncheon and for more
ice-cream and more peaches and even more, even most, enjoyment of ease
accompanied by stimulation of wonder? It may have been indeed that a
visit to Mrs. Cannon rather on that occasion engaged us--memory selects
a little confusedly from such a wealth of experience. For the wonder was
the experience, and that was everywhere, even if I didn't so much find
it as take it with me, to be sure of not falling short. Mrs. Cannon
lurked near Fourth Street--_that_ I abundantly grasp, not more
definitely placing her than in what seemed to me a labyrinth of grave
bye-streets westwardly "back of" Broadway, yet at no great distance
from it, where she must have occupied a house at a corner, since we
reached her not by steps that went up to a front door but by others that
went slightly down and formed clearly an independent side access, a
feature that affected me as rich and strange. What the steps went down
to was a spacious room, light and friendly, so that it couldn't have
been compromised by an "area," which offered the brave mystification,
amid other mystifications, of being at once a parlour and a shop, a shop
in particular for the relief of gentlemen in want of
pockethandkerchiefs, neckties, collars, umbrellas and straw-covered
bottles of the essence known in old New York as "Cullone"--with a very
long and big O. Mrs. Cannon was always seated at some delicate white or
other needlework, as if she herself made the collars and the neckties
and hemmed the pockethandkerchiefs, though the air of this conflicts
with the sense of importation from remoter centres of fashion breathed
by some of the more thrilling of the remarks I heard exchanged, at the
same time that it quickened the oddity of the place. For the oddity was
in many things--above all perhaps in there being no counter, no rows of
shelves and no vulgar till for Mrs. Cannon's commerce; the parlour
clearly dissimulated the shop--and positively to that extent that I
might uncannily have wondered what the shop dissimulated. It
represented, honestly, I made out in the course of visits that seem to
me to have been delightfully repeated, the more informal of the
approaches to our friend's brave background or hinterland, the realm of
her main industry, the array of the furnished apartments for
gentlemen--gentlemen largely for whom she imported the Eau de Cologne
and the neckties and who struck me as principally consisting of the ever
remarkable Uncles, desirous at times, on their restless returns from
Albany or wherever, of an intimacy of comfort that the New York Hotel
couldn't yield. Fascinating thus the implications of Mrs. Cannon's
establishment, where the talk took the turn, in particular, of Mr. John
and Mr. Edward and Mr. Howard, and where Miss Maggie or Miss Susie, who
were on the spot in other rocking chairs and with other poised needles,
made their points as well as the rest of us. The interest of the place
was that the uncles were somehow always under discussion--as to where
they at the moment might be, or as to when they were expected, or above
all as to how (the "how" was the great matter and the fine emphasis)
they had last appeared and might be conceived as carrying themselves;
and that their consumption of neckties and Eau de Cologne was somehow
inordinate: I might have been judging it in my innocence as their only
_consommation_. I refer to those sources, I say, the charm of the
scene, the finer part of which must yet have been that it didn't, as it
regularly lapsed, dispose of _all_ mystifications. If I didn't
understand, however, the beauty was that Mrs. Cannon understood (that
was what she did most of all, even more than hem pockethandkerchiefs and
collars) and my father understood, and each understood that the other
did, Miss Maggie and Miss Susie being no whit behind. It was only I who
didn't understand--save in so far as I understood _that_, which was a
kind of pale joy; and meanwhile there would be more to come from uncles
so attachingly, so almost portentously, discussable. The vision at any
rate was to stick by me as through its old-world friendly grace, its
light on the elder amenity; the prettier manners, the tender personal
note in the good lady's importations and anxieties, that of the
hand-made fabric and the discriminating service. Fit to figure as a
value anywhere--by which I meant in the right corner of any social
picture, I afterwards said to myself--that refined and composed
significance of Mrs. Cannon's scene.

Union Square was a different matter, though with the element there also
that I made out that I _didn't_ make out (my sense of drama was in this
case, I think, rather more frightened off than led on;) a drawback for
which, however, I consoled myself by baked apples and custards, an
inveterate feature of our Sunday luncheon there (those of weekdays
being various and casual) and by a study of a great store, as it seemed
to me, of steel-plated volumes, devoted mainly to the heroines of
Romance, with one in particular, presenting those of Shakespeare, in
which the plates were so artfully coloured and varnished, and complexion
and dress thereby so endeared to memory, that it was for long afterwards
a shock to me at the theatre not to see just those bright images, with
their peculiar toggeries, come on. I was able but the other day,
moreover, to renew almost on the very spot the continuity of
contemplation; large lumpish presences, precarious creations of a day,
seemed to have elbowed out of the Square all but one or two of the minor
monuments, pleasant appreciable things, of the other time; yet close to
University Place the old house of the picture-books and the custards and
the domestic situation had, though disfigured and overscored, not quite
received its death-stroke; I disengaged, by a mere identification of
obscured window and profaned portico, a whole chapter of history; which
fact should indeed be a warning to penetration, a practical plea here
for the superficial--by its exhibition of the rate at which the
relations of any gage of experience multiply and ramify from the moment
the mind begins to handle it. I pursued a swarm of such relations, on
the occasion I speak of, up and down West Fourteenth Street and over to
Seventh Avenue, running most of them to earth with difficulty, but
finding them at half a dozen points quite confess to a queer stale
sameness. The gage of experience, as I say, had in these cases been
strangely spared--the sameness had in two or three of them held out as
with conscious craft. But these are impressions I shall presently find
it impossible not to take up again at any cost.

I first "realised" Fourteenth Street at a very tender age, and I
perfectly recall that flush of initiation, consisting as it did of an
afternoon call with my father at a house there situated, one of an
already fairly mature row on the south side and quite near Sixth Avenue.
It was as "our" house, just acquired by us, that he thus invited my
approval of it--heaping as that does once more the measure of my small
adhesiveness. I thoroughly approved--quite as if I had foreseen that the
place was to become to me for ever so long afterwards a sort of
anchorage of the spirit, being at the hour as well a fascination for the
eyes, since it was there I first fondly gaped at the process of
"decorating." I saw charming men in little caps ingeniously formed of
folded newspaper--where in the roaring city are those quaint badges of
the handicrafts now?--mounted on platforms and casting plaster into
moulds; I saw them in particular paste long strips of yellowish grained
paper upon walls, and I vividly remember thinking the grain and the
pattern (for there was a pattern from waist-high down, a complication of
dragons and sphinxes and scrolls and other fine flourishes) a wonderful
and sumptuous thing. I would give much, I protest, to recover its lost
secret, to see what it really was--so interesting ever to retrace, and
sometimes so difficult of belief, in a community of one's own knowing,
is the general æsthetic adventure, are the dangers and delusions, the
all but fatal accidents and mortal ailments, that Taste has smilingly
survived and after which the fickle creature may still quite brazenly
look one in the face. Our quarter must have bristled in those years with
the very worst of the danger-signals--though indeed they figured but as
coarse complacencies; the age of "brown stone" had just been ushered in,
and that material, in deplorable, in monstrous form, over all the vacant
spaces and eligible sites then numerous between the Fifth and Sixth
Avenues, more and more affronted the day. We seemed to have come up from
a world of quieter harmonies, the world of Washington Square and
thereabouts, so decent in its dignity, so instinctively unpretentious.
There were even there spots of shabbiness that I recall, such as the
charmless void reaching westward from the two houses that formed the
Fifth Avenue corner to our grandfather's, our New York grandfather's
house, itself built by him, with the happiest judgment, not so long
before, and at no distant time in truth to be solidly but much less
pleasingly neighboured. The ancient name of the Parade-ground still hung
about the central space, and the ancient wooden palings, then so
generally accounted proper for central spaces--the whole image
infinitely recedes--affected even my innocent childhood as rustic and
mean. Union Square, at the top of the Avenue--or what practically then
counted for the top--was encased, more smartly, in iron rails and
further adorned with a fountain and an aged amateur-looking constable,
awful to my generation in virtue of his star and his switch. I associate
less elegance with the Parade-ground, into which we turned for
recreation from my neighbouring dame's-school and where the parades
deployed on no scale to check our own evolutions; though indeed the
switch of office abounded there, for what I best recover in the
connection is a sense and smell of perpetual autumn, with the ground so
muffled in the leaves and twigs of the now long defunct ailanthus-tree
that most of our own motions were a kicking of them up--the semi-sweet
rankness of the plant was all in the air--and small boys pranced about
as cavaliers whacking their steeds. There were bigger boys, bolder
still, to whom this vegetation, or something kindred that escapes me,
yielded long black beanlike slips which they lighted and smoked, the
smaller ones staring and impressed; I at any rate think of the small one
I can best speak for as constantly wading through an Indian summer of
these _disjecta_, fascinated by the leaf-kicking process, the joy of
lonely trudges, over a course in which those parts and the slightly more
northward pleasantly confound themselves. These were the homely joys of
the nobler neighbourhood, elements that had their match, and more, hard
by the Fourteenth Street home, in the poplars, the pigs, the poultry,
and the "Irish houses," two or three in number, exclusive of a very fine
Dutch one, seated then, this last, almost as among gardens and groves--a
breadth of territory still apparent, on the spot, in that marginal ease,
that spread of occupation, to the nearly complete absence of which New
York aspects owe their general failure of "style."

But there were finer vibrations as well--for the safely-prowling infant,
though none perhaps so fine as when he stood long and drank deep at
those founts of romance that gushed from the huge placards of the
theatre. These announcements, at a day when advertisement was
contentedly but information, had very much the form of magnified
playbills; they consisted of vast oblong sheets, yellow or white, pasted
upon tall wooden screens or into hollow sockets, and acquainting the
possible playgoer with every circumstance that might seriously interest
him. These screens rested sociably against trees and lamp-posts as well
as against walls and fences, to all of which they were, I suppose,
familiarly attached; but the sweetest note of their confidence was that,
in parallel lines and the good old way, characters facing performers,
they gave the whole cast, which in the "palmy days" of the drama often
involved many names. I catch myself again in the fact of endless
stations in Fifth Avenue near the southwest corner of Ninth Street, as I
think it must have been, since the dull long "run" didn't exist then for
the young _badaud_ and the poster there was constantly and bravely
renewed. It engaged my attention, whenever I passed, as the canvas of a
great master in a great gallery holds that of the pious tourist, and
even though I can't at this day be sure of its special reference I was
with precocious passion "at home" among the theatres--thanks to our
parents' fond interest in them (as from this distance I see it flourish
for the time) and to the liberal law and happy view under which the
addiction was shared with us, they never caring much for things we
couldn't care for and generally holding that what was good to them would
be also good for their children. It had the effect certainly of
preparing for these, so far as we should incline to cherish it, a
strange little fund of theatrical reminiscence, a small hoard of
memories maintaining itself in my own case for a lifetime and causing
me to wonder to-day, before its abundance, on how many evenings of the
month, or perhaps even of the week, we were torn from the pursuits of
home.




IX


The truth is doubtless, however, much less in the wealth of my
experience than in the tenacity of my impression, the fact that I have
lost nothing of what I saw and that though I can't now quite divide the
total into separate occasions the various items surprisingly swarm for
me. I shall return to some of them, wishing at present only to make my
point of when and how the seeds were sown that afterwards so thickly
sprouted and flowered. I was greatly to love the drama, at its best, as
a "form"; whatever variations of faith or curiosity I was to know in
respect to the infirm and inadequate theatre. There was of course
anciently no question for us of the drama at its best; and indeed while
I lately by chance looked over a copious collection of theatrical
portraits, beginning with the earliest age of lithography and
photography as so applied, and documentary in the highest degree on the
personalities, as we nowadays say, of the old American stage,
stupefaction grew sharp in me and scepticism triumphed, so vulgar, so
barbarous, seemed the array of types, so extraordinarily provincial the
note of every figure, so less than scant the claim of such
physiognomies and such reputations. Rather dismal, everywhere, I admit,
the histrionic image with the artificial lights turned off--the fatigued
and disconnected face reduced to its mere self and resembling some
closed and darkened inn with the sign still swung but the place blighted
for want of custom. That consideration weighs; but what a "gang," all
the same, when thus left to their own devices, the performers, men and
women alike, of that world of queer appreciations! I ought perhaps to
bear on them lightly in view of what in especial comes back to me; the
sense of the sacred thrill with which I began to watch the green
curtain, the particular one that was to rise to The Comedy of Errors on
the occasion that must have been, for what I recall of its almost
unbearable intensity, the very first of my ever sitting at a play. I
should have been indebted for the momentous evening in that case to Mr.
William Burton, whose small theatre in Chambers Street, to the rear of
Stewart's big shop and hard by the Park, as the Park was at that time
understood, offered me then my prime initiation. Let me not complain of
my having owed the adventure to a still greater William as well, nor
think again without the right intensity, the scarce tolerable throb, of
the way the torment of the curtain was mixed, half so dark a defiance
and half so rich a promise. One's eyes bored into it in vain, and yet
one knew it _would_ rise at the named hour, the only question being if
one could exist till then. The play had been read to us during the day;
a celebrated English actor, whose name I inconsistently forget, had
arrived to match Mr. Burton as the other of the Dromios; and the
agreeable Mrs. Holman, who had to my relentless vision too retreating a
chin, was so good as to represent Adriana. I regarded Mrs. Holman as a
friend, though in no warmer light than that in which I regarded Miss
Mary Taylor--save indeed that Mrs. Holman had the pull, on one's
affections, of "coming out" to sing in white satin and quite
irrelevantly between the acts; an advantage she shared with the younger
and fairer and more dashing, the dancing, Miss Malvina, who footed it
and tambourined it and shawled it, irruptively, in lonely state. When
not admiring Mr. Burton in Shakespeare we admired him as Paul Pry, as
Mr. Toodles and as Aminadab Sleek in The Serious Family, and we must
have admired him very much--his huge fat person, his huge fat face and
his vast slightly pendulous cheek, surmounted by a sort of elephantine
wink, to which I impute a remarkable baseness, being still perfectly
present to me.

We discriminated, none the less; we thought Mr. Blake a much finer
comedian, much more of a gentleman and a scholar--"mellow" Mr. Blake,
whom with the brave and emphatic Mrs. Blake (_how_ they must have made
their points!) I connect partly with the Burton scene and partly with
that, of slightly subsequent creation, which, after flourishing awhile
slightly further up Broadway under the charmlessly commercial name of
Brougham's Lyceum (we had almost only Lyceums and Museums and Lecture
Rooms and Academies of Music for playhouse and opera then,) entered upon
a long career and a migratory life as Wallack's Theatre. I fail
doubtless to keep _all_ my associations clear, but what is important, or
what I desire at least to make pass for such, is that when we most
admired Mr. Blake we also again admired Miss Mary Taylor; and it was at
Brougham's, not at Burton's, that we rendered _her_ that
tribute--reserved for her performance of the fond theatrical daughter in
the English version of Le Père de la Débutante, where I see the charming
panting dark-haired creature, in flowing white classically relieved by a
gold tiara and a golden scarf, rush back from the supposed stage to the
represented green-room, followed by thunders of applause, and throw
herself upon the neck of the broken-down old gentleman in a blue coat
with brass buttons who must have been after all, on second thoughts, Mr.
Placide. Greater flights or more delicate shades the art of pathetic
comedy was at that time held not to achieve; only I straighten it out
that Mr. and Mrs. Blake, not less than Miss Mary Taylor (who
preponderantly haunts my vision, even to the disadvantage of Miss Kate
Horn in Nan the Good-for-Nothing, until indeed she is displaced by the
brilliant Laura Keene) did migrate to Brougham's, where we found them
all themselves as Goldsmith's Hardcastle pair and other like matters. We
rallied especially to Blake as Dogberry, on the occasion of my second
Shakespearean night, for as such I seem to place it, when Laura Keene
and Mr. Lester--the Lester Wallack that was to be--did Beatrice and
Benedick. I yield to this further proof that we had our proportion of
Shakespeare, though perhaps antedating that rapt vision of Much Ado,
which may have been preceded by the dazzled apprehension of A Midsummer
Night's Dream at the Broadway (there _was_ a confessed Theatre;) this
latter now present to me in every bright particular. It supplied us, we
must have felt, our greatest conceivable adventure--I cannot otherwise
account for its emerging so clear. Everything here is as of yesterday,
the identity of the actors, the details of their dress, the charm
imparted by the sisters Gougenheim, the elegant elder as the infatuated
Helena and the other, the roguish "Joey" as the mischievous Puck. Hermia
was Mrs. Nagle, in a short salmon-coloured peplum over a white
petticoat, the whole bulgingly confined by a girdle of shining gilt and
forming a contrast to the loose scarves of Helena, while Mr. Nagle, not
devoid, I seem to remember, of a blue chin and the latency of a fine
brogue, was either Lysander or Demetrius; Mr. Davidge (also, I surmise,
with a brogue) was Bottom the weaver and Madame Ponisi Oberon--Madame
Ponisi whose range must have been wide, since I see her also as the
white-veiled heroine of The Cataract of the Ganges, where, preferring
death to dishonour, she dashes up the more or less perpendicular
waterfall on a fiery black steed and with an effect only a little
blighted by the chance flutter of a drapery out of which peeps the leg
of a trouser and a big male foot; and then again, though presumably at a
somewhat later time or, in strictness, _after_ childhood's fond hour, as
this and that noble matron or tragedy queen. I descry her at any rate as
representing all characters alike with a broad brown face framed in
bands or crowns or other heavy headgear out of which cropped a row of
very small tight black curls. The Cataract of the Ganges is all there as
well, a tragedy of temples and idols and wicked rajahs and real water,
with Davidge and Joey Gougenheim again for comic relief--though all in a
coarser radiance, thanks to the absence of fairies and Amazons and
moonlit mechanical effects, the charm above all, so seen, of the play
within the play; and I rank it in that relation with Green Bushes,
despite the celebrity in the latter of Madame Céleste, who came to us
straight out of London and whose admired walk up the stage as Miami the
huntress, a wonderful majestic and yet voluptuous stride enhanced by a
short kilt, black velvet leggings and a gun haughtily borne on the
shoulder, is vividly before me as I write. The piece in question was, I
recall, from the pen of Mr. Bourcicault, as he then wrote his name--he
was so early in the field and must have been from long before, inasmuch
as he now appears to me to have supplied Mr. Brougham, of the Lyceum
aforesaid, with his choicest productions.

I sit again at London Assurance, with Mrs. Wallack--"Fanny" Wallack, I
think, not that I quite know who she was--as Lady Gay Spanker, flushed
and vociferous, first in a riding-habit with a tail yards long and
afterwards in yellow satin with scarce a tail at all; I am present also
at Love in a Maze, in which the stage represented, with primitive art I
fear, a supposedly intricate garden-labyrinth, and in which I admired
for the first time Mrs. Russell, afterwards long before the public as
Mrs. Hoey, even if opining that she wanted, especially for the
low-necked ordeal, less osseous a structure. There are pieces of that
general association, I admit, the clue to which slips from me; the drama
of modern life and of French origin--though what was then not of French
origin?--in which Miss Julia Bennett, fresh from triumphs at the
Haymarket, made her first appearance, in a very becoming white bonnet,
either as a brilliant adventuress or as the innocent victim of
licentious design, I forget which, though with a sense somehow that the
white bonnet, when of true elegance, was the note at that period of the
adventuress; Miss Julia Bennett with whom at a later age one was to
renew acquaintance as the artful and ample Mrs. Barrow, full of manner
and presence and often Edwin Booth's Portia, Desdemona and Julie de
Mortemer. I figure her as having in the dimmer phase succeeded to Miss
Laura Keene at Wallack's on the secession thence of this original
charmer of our parents, the flutter of whose prime advent is perfectly
present to me, with the relish expressed for that "English" sweetness of
her speech (I already wondered why it _shouldn't_ be English) which was
not as the speech mostly known to us. The Uncles, within my hearing,
even imitated, for commendation, some of her choicer sounds, to which I
strained my ear on seeing her afterwards as Mrs. Chillington in the
refined comedietta of A Morning Call, where she made delightful game of
Mr. Lester as Sir Edward Ardent, even to the point of causing him to
crawl about on all fours and covered with her shawl after the fashion of
a horse-blanket. That delightful impression was then unconscious of the
blight to come--that of my apprehending, years after, that the
brilliant comedietta was the tribute of our Anglo-Saxon taste to Alfred
de Musset's elegant proverb of the Porte Ouverte ou Fermée, in which
nothing could find itself less at home than the horseplay of the English
version. Miss Laura Keene, with a native grace at the start, a fresh and
delicate inspiration, I infer from the kind of pleasure she appears to
have begun with giving, was to live to belie her promise and, becoming
hard and raddled, forfeit (on the evidence) all claim to the higher
distinction; a fact not surprising under the lurid light projected by
such a sign of the atmosphere of ineptitude as an accepted and condoned
perversion to vulgarity of Musset's perfect little work. How _could_
quality of talent consort with so dire an absence of quality in the
material offered it? where could such lapses lead but to dust and
desolation and what happy instinct not be smothered in an air so
dismally non-conducting? Is it a foolish fallacy that these matters may
have been on occasion, at that time, worth speaking of? is it only
presumable that everything was perfectly cheap and common and everyone
perfectly bad and barbarous and that even the least corruptible of our
typical spectators were too easily beguiled and too helplessly kind? The
beauty of the main truth as to any remembered matter looked at in due
detachment, or in other words through the haze of time, is that
comprehension has then become one with criticism, compassion, as it may
really be called, one with musing vision, and the whole company of the
anciently restless, with their elations and mistakes, their sincerities
and fallacies and vanities and triumphs, embalmed for us in the mild
essence of their collective submission to fate. We needn't be strenuous
about them unless we particularly want to, and are glad to remember in
season all that this would imply of the strenuous about our own
_origines_, our muddled initiations. If nothing is more certain for us
than that many persons, within our recollection, couldn't help being
rather generally unadmonished and unaware, so nothing is more in the
note of peace than that such a perceived state, pushed to a point, makes
our scales of judgment but ridiculously rattle. _Our_ admonition, our
superior awareness, is of many things--and, among these, of how
infinitely, at the worst, they lived, the pale superseded, and how much
it was by their virtue.

Which reflections, in the train of such memories as those just gathered,
may perhaps seem over-strained--though they really to my own eyes cause
the images to multiply. Still others of these break in upon me and
refuse to be slighted; reconstituting as I practically am the history of
my fostered imagination, for whatever it may be worth, I won't pretend
to a disrespect for _any_ contributive particle. I left myself just
above staring at the Fifth Avenue poster, and I can't but linger there
while the vision it evokes insists on swarming. It was the age of the
arrangements of Dickens for the stage, vamped-up promptly on every scene
and which must have been the roughest theatrical tinkers' work, but at
two or three of which we certainly assisted. I associate them with Mr.
Brougham's temple of the art, yet am at the same time beset with the
Captain Cuttle of Dombey and Son in the form of the big Burton, who
never, I earnestly conceive, graced that shrine, so that I wander a
trifle confusedly. Isn't it he whom I remember as a monstrous Micawber,
the coarse parody of a charming creation, with the entire baldness of a
huge Easter egg and collar-points like the sails of Mediterranean
feluccas? Dire of course for all temperance in these connections was the
need to conform to the illustrations of Phiz, himself already an
improvising parodist and happy only so long as not imitated, not
literally reproduced. Strange enough the "æsthetic" of artists who could
desire but literally to reproduce. I give the whole question up,
however, I stray too in the dust, and with a positive sense of having,
in the first place, but languished at home when my betters admired Miss
Cushman--terribly out of the picture and the frame we should to-day
pronounce her, I fear--as the Nancy of Oliver Twist: as far away this
must have been as the lifetime of the prehistoric "Park," to which it
was just within my knowledge that my elders went for opera, to come back
on us sounding those rich old Italian names, Bosio and Badiali, Ronconi
and Steffanone, I am not sure I have them quite right; signs, of a
rueful sound to us, that the line as to our infant participation _was_
somewhere drawn. It had not been drawn, I all the more like to remember,
when, under proper protection, at Castle Garden, I listened to that
rarest of infant phenomena, Adelina Patti, poised in an armchair that
had been pushed to the footlights and announcing her incomparable gift.
She was about of our own age, she was one of us, even though at the same
time the most prodigious of fairies, of glittering fables. That
principle of selection was indeed in abeyance while I sat with my mother
either at Tripler Hall or at Niblo's--I am vague about the occasion, but
the names, as for fine old confused reasons, plead alike to my pen--and
paid a homage quite other than critical, I dare say, to the then
slightly worn Henrietta Sontag, Countess Rossi, who struck us as
supremely elegant in pink silk and white lace flounces and with whom
there had been for certain members of our circle some contact or
intercourse that I have wonderingly lost. I learned at that hour in any
case what "acclamation" might mean, and have again before me the vast
high-piled auditory thundering applause at the beautiful pink lady's
clear bird-notes; a thrilling, a tremendous experience and my sole other
memory of concert-going, at that age, save the impression of a strange
huddled hour in some smaller public place, some very minor hall, under
dim lamps and again in my mother's company, where we were so near the
improvised platform that my nose was brushed by the petticoats of the
distinguished amateur who sang "Casta Diva," a very fine fair woman with
a great heaving of bosom and flirt of crinoline, and that the ringletted
Italian gentleman in black velvet and a romantic voluminous cloak who
represented, or rather who professionally and uncontrollably was, an
Improvisatore, had for me the effect, as I crouched gaping, of quite
bellowing down my throat. That occasion, I am clear, was a concert for a
charity, with the volunteer performance and the social patroness, and it
had squeezed in where it would--at the same time that I somehow connect
the place, in Broadway, on the right going down and not much below
Fourth Street (except that everything seems to me to have been just
below Fourth Street when not just above,) with the scene of my great
public exposure somewhat later, the wonderful exhibition of Signor
Blitz, the peerless conjurer, who, on my attending his entertainment
with W. J. and our frequent comrade of the early time "Hal" Coster,
practised on my innocence to seduce me to the stage and there plunge me
into the shame of my sad failure to account arithmetically for his
bewilderingly subtracted or added or divided pockethandkerchiefs and
playing-cards; a paralysis of wit as to which I once more, and with the
same wan despair, feel my companions' shy telegraphy of relief, their
snickerings and mouthings and raised numerical fingers, reach me from
the benches.

The second definite matter in the Dickens connection is the Smike of
Miss Weston--whose prænomen I frivolously forget (though I fear it was
Lizzie,) but who was afterwards Mrs. E. L. Davenport and then, sequently
to some public strife or chatter, Mrs. Charles Matthews--in a version of
Nicholas Nickleby that gracelessly managed to be all tearful melodrama,
long-lost foundlings, wicked Ralph Nicklebys and scowling Arthur Grides,
with other baffled villains, and scarcely at all Crummleses and
Kenwigses, much less Squeerses; though there must have been something of
Dotheboys Hall for the proper tragedy of Smike and for the broad
Yorkshire effect, a precious theatrical value, of John Brodie. The
ineffaceability was the anguish, to my tender sense, of Nicholas's
starved and tattered and fawning and whining protégé; in face of my
sharp retention of which through all the years who shall deny the
immense authority of the theatre, or that the stage is the mightiest of
modern engines? Such at least was to be the force of the Dickens
imprint, however applied, in the soft clay of our generation; it was to
resist so serenely the wash of the waves of time. To be brought up thus
against the author of it, or to speak at all of the dawn of one's early
consciousness of it and of his presence and power, is to begin to tread
ground at once sacred and boundless, the associations of which, looming
large, warn us off even while they hold. He did too much for us surely
ever to leave us free--free of judgment, free of reaction, even should
we care to be, which heaven forbid: he laid his hand on us in a way to
undermine as in no other case the power of detached appraisement. We
react against other productions of the general kind without "liking"
them the less, but we somehow liked Dickens the more for having
forfeited half the claim to appreciation. That process belongs to the
fact that criticism, roundabout him, is somehow futile and tasteless.
His own taste is easily impugned, but he entered so early into the blood
and bone of our intelligence that it always remained better than the
taste of overhauling him. When I take him up to-day and find myself
holding off, I simply stop: not holding off, that is, but holding on,
and from the very fear to do so; which sounds, I recognise, like
perusal, like renewal, of the scantest. I don't renew, I wouldn't renew
for the world; wouldn't, that is, with one's treasure so hoarded in the
dusty chamber of youth, let in the intellectual air. Happy the house of
life in which such chambers still hold out, even with the draught of the
intellect whistling through the passages. We were practically
contemporary, contemporary with the issues, the fluttering monthly
numbers--that was the point; it made for us a good fortune, constituted
for us in itself romance, on which nothing, to the end, succeeds in
laying its hands.

The whole question dwells for me in a single small reminiscence, though
there are others still: that of my having been sent to bed one evening,
in Fourteenth Street, as a very small boy, at an hour when, in the
library and under the lamp, one of the elder cousins from Albany, the
youngest of an orphaned brood of four, of my grandmother's most
extravagant adoption, had begun to read aloud to my mother the new,
which must have been the first, instalment of David Copperfield. I had
feigned to withdraw, but had only retreated to cover close at hand, the
friendly shade of some screen or drooping table-cloth, folded up behind
which and glued to the carpet, I held my breath and listened. I listened
long and drank deep while the wondrous picture grew, but the tense cord
at last snapped under the strain of the Murdstones and I broke into the
sobs of sympathy that disclosed my subterfuge. I was this time
effectively banished, but the ply then taken was ineffaceable. I
remember indeed just afterwards finding the sequel, in especial the vast
extrusion of the Micawbers, beyond my actual capacity; which took a few
years to grow adequate--years in which the general contagious
consciousness, and our own household response not least, breathed
heavily through Hard Times, Bleak House and Little Dorrit; the seeds of
acquaintance with Chuzzlewit and Dombey and Son, these coming thickly
on, I had found already sown. I was to feel that I had been born, born
to a rich awareness, under the very meridian; there sprouted in those
years no such other crop of ready references as the golden harvest of
Copperfield. Yet if I was to wait to achieve the happier of these
recognitions I had already pored over Oliver Twist--albeit now uncertain
of the relation borne by that experience to the incident just recalled.
When Oliver was new to me, at any rate, he was already old to my
betters; whose view of his particular adventures and exposures must have
been concerned, I think, moreover, in the fact of my public and lively
wonder about them. It was an exhibition deprecated--to infant innocence
I judge; unless indeed my remembrance of enjoying it only on the terms
of fitful snatches in another, though a kindred, house is due mainly to
the existence there of George Cruikshank's splendid form of the work,
of which our own foreground was clear. It perhaps even seemed to me more
Cruikshank's than Dickens's; it was a thing of such vividly terrible
images, and all marked with that peculiarity of Cruikshank that the
offered flowers or goodnesses, the scenes and figures intended to
comfort and cheer, present themselves under his hand as but more subtly
sinister, or more suggestively queer, than the frank badnesses and
horrors. The nice people and the happy moments, in the plates,
frightened me almost as much as the low and the awkward; which didn't
however make the volumes a source of attraction the less toward that
high and square old back-parlour just westward of Sixth Avenue (as we in
the same street were related to it) that formed, romantically, half our
alternative domestic field and offered to our small inquiring steps a
larger range and privilege. If the Dickens of those years was, as I have
just called him, the great actuality of the current imagination, so I at
once meet him in force as a feature even of conditions in which he was
but indirectly involved.

For the other house, the house we most haunted after our own, was that
of our cousin Albert, still another of the blest orphans, though this
time of our mother's kindred; and if it was my habit, as I have hinted,
to attribute to orphans as orphans a circumstantial charm, a setting
necessarily more delightful than our father'd and mother'd one, so
there spread about this appointed comrade, the perfection of the type,
inasmuch as he alone was neither brother'd nor sister'd, an air of
possibilities that were none the less vivid for being quite indefinite.
He was to embody in due course, poor young man, some of these
possibilities--those that had originally been for me the vaguest of all;
but to fix his situation from my present view is not so much to wonder
that it spoke to me of a wild freedom as to see in it the elements of a
rich and rounded picture. The frame was still there but a short time
since, cracked and empty, broken and gaping, like those few others, of
the general overgrown scene, that my late quest had puzzled out; and
this has somehow helped me to read back into it the old figures and the
old long story, told as with excellent art. We knew the figures well
while they lasted and had with them the happiest relation, but without
doing justice to their truth of outline, their felicity of character and
force of expression and function, above all to the compositional harmony
in which they moved. That lives again to my considering eyes, and I
admire as never before the fine artistry of fate. Our cousin's guardian,
the natural and the legal, was his aunt, his only one, who was the
cousin of our mother and our own aunt, virtually _our_ only one, so far
as a felt and adopted closeness of kinship went; and the three,
daughters of two sole and much-united sisters, had been so brought up
together as to have quite all the signs and accents of the same strain
and the same nest. The cousin Helen of our young prospect was thus all
but the sister Helen of our mother's lifetime, as was to happen, and was
scarcely less a stout brave presence and an emphasised character for the
new generation than for the old; noted here as she is, in particular,
for her fine old-time value of clearness and straightness. I see in her
strong simplicity, that of an earlier, quieter world, a New York of
better manners and better morals and homelier beliefs, the very elements
of some portrait by a grave Dutch or other truth-seeking master; she
looks out with some of the strong marks, the anxious honesty, the modest
humour, the folded resting hands, the dark handsome serious attire, the
important composed cap, almost the badge of a guild or an order, that
hang together about the images of past worthies, of whichever sex, who
have had, as one may say, the courage of their character, and qualify
them for places in great collections. I note with appreciation that she
was strenuously, actively good, and have the liveliest impression both
that no one was ever better, and that her goodness somehow testifies for
the whole tone of a society, a remarkable cluster of private decencies.
Her value to my imagination is even most of all perhaps in her mere
local consistency, her fine old New York ignorance and rigour. Her
traditions, scant but stiff, had grown there, close to her--they were
all she needed, and she lived by them candidly and stoutly. That there
have been persons so little doubtful of duty helps to show us how
societies grow. A proportionately small amount of absolute conviction
about it will carry, we thus make out, a vast dead weight of mere
comparative. She was as anxious over hers indeed as if it had ever been
in question--which is a proof perhaps that being void of imagination,
when you are quite entirely void, makes scarcely more for comfort than
having too much, which only makes in a manner for a homeless freedom or
even at the worst for a questioned veracity. With a big installed
conscience there is virtue in a grain of the figurative faculty--it acts
as oil to the stiff machine.

Yet this life of straight and narrow insistences seated so clearly in
our view didn't take up all the room in the other house, the house of
the pictured, the intermittent Oliver, though of the fewer books in
general than ours, and of the finer proportions and less peopled spaces
(there were but three persons to fill them) as well as of the more
turbaned and powdered family portraits, one of these, the most antique,
a "French pastel," which must have been charming, of a young collateral
ancestor who had died on the European tour. A vast marginal range
seemed to me on the contrary to surround the adolescent nephew, who was
some three years, I judge, beyond me in age and had other horizons and
prospects than ours. No question of "Europe," for him, but a patriotic
preparation for acquaintance with the South and West, or what was then
called the West--he was to "see his own country first," winking at us
while he did so; though he was, in spite of differences, so nearly and
naturally neighbour'd and brother'd with us that the extensions of his
range and the charms of his position counted somehow as the limits and
the humilities of ours. He went neither to our schools nor to our
hotels, but hovered out of our view in some other educational air that I
can't now point to, and had in a remote part of the State a vast wild
property of his own, known as the Beaverkill, to which, so far from his
aunt's and his uncle's taking him there, he affably took them, and to
which also he vainly invited W. J. and me, pointing thereby to us,
however, though indirectly enough perhaps, the finest childish case we
were to know for the famous acceptance of the inevitable. It was
apparently not to be thought of that instead of the inevitable we should
accept the invitation; the place was in the wilderness, incalculably
distant, reached by a whole day's rough drive from the railroad, through
every danger of flood and field, with prowling bears thrown in and
probable loss of limb, of which there were sad examples, from swinging
scythes and axes; but we of course measured our privation just by those
facts, and grew up, so far as we did then grow, to believe that
pleasures beyond price had been cruelly denied us. I at any rate myself
grew up sufficiently to wonder if poor Albert's type, as it developed to
the anxious elder view from the first, mightn't rather have undermined
countenance; his pleasant foolish face and odd shy air of being
suspected or convicted on grounds less vague to himself than to us may
well have appeared symptoms of the course, of the "rig," he was
eventually to run. I could think of him but as the _fils de famille_
ideally constituted; not that I could then use for him that designation,
but that I felt he must belong to an important special class, which he
in fact formed in his own person. Everything was right, truly, for these
felicities--to speak of them only as dramatic or pictorial values; since
if we were present all the while at more of a drama than we knew, so at
least, to my vague divination, the scene and the figures were there, not
excluding the chorus, and I must have had the instinct of their being as
right as possible. I see the actors move again through the high, rather
bedimmed rooms--it is always a matter of winter twilight, firelight,
lamplight; each one appointed to his or her part and perfect for the
picture, which gave a sense of fulness without ever being crowded.

That composition had to wait awhile, in the earliest time, to find its
proper centre, having been from the free point of view I thus cultivate
a little encumbered by the presence of the most aged of our relatives,
the oldest person I remember to have familiarly known--if it can be
called familiar to have stood off in fear of such strange proofs of
accomplished time: our Great-aunt Wyckoff, our maternal grandmother's
elder sister, I infer, and an image of living antiquity, as I figure her
to-day, that I was never to see surpassed. I invest her in this vision
with all the idol-quality that may accrue to the venerable--solidly
seated or even throned, hooded and draped and tucked-in, with big
protective protrusive ears to her chair which helped it to the effect of
a shrine, and a large face in which the odd blackness of eyebrow and of
a couple of other touches suggested the conventional marks of a painted
image. She signified her wants as divinities do, for I recover from her
presence neither sound nor stir, remembering of her only that, as
described by her companions, the pious ministrants, she had "said" so
and so when she hadn't spoken at all. Was she really, as she seemed, so
tremendously old, so old that her daughter, our mother's cousin Helen
and ours, would have had to come to her in middle life to account for
it, or did antiquity at that time set in earlier and was surrender of
appearance and dress, matching the intrinsic decay, only more
complacent, more submissive and, as who should say, more abject? I have
my choice of these suppositions, each in its way of so lively an
interest that I scarce know which to prefer, though inclining perhaps a
little to the idea of the backward reach. If Aunt Wyckoff was, as I
first remember her, scarce more than seventy, say, the thought fills me
with one sort of joy, the joy of our modern, our so generally greater
and nobler effect of duration: who _wouldn't_ more subtly strive for
that effect and, intelligently so striving, reach it better, than such
non-questioners of fate?--the moral of whose case is surely that if they
gave up too soon and too softly we wiser witnesses can reverse the
process and fight the whole ground. But I apologise to the heavy shade
in question if she had really drained her conceivable cup, and for that
matter rather like to suppose it, so rich and strange is the pleasure of
finding the past--the Past above all--answered for to one's own touch,
this being our only way to be sure of it. It was the Past that one
touched in her, the American past of a preponderant unthinkable
queerness; and great would seem the fortune of helping on the continuity
at some other far end.




X


It was at all events the good lady's disappearance that more markedly
cleared the decks--cleared them for that long, slow, sustained action
with which I make out that nothing was afterwards to interfere. She had
sat there under her stiff old father's portrait, with which her own, on
the other side of the chimney, mildly balanced; but these presences
acted from that time but with cautious reserves. A brave, finished,
clear-eyed image of such properties as the last-named, in particular,
our already-mentioned Alexander Robertson, a faint and diminished
replica of whose picture (the really fine original, as I remember it,
having been long since perverted from our view) I lately renewed
acquaintance with in a pious institution of his founding, where, after
more than one push northward and some easy accommodations, he lives on
into a world that knows him not and of some of the high improvements of
which he can little enough have dreamed. Of the world he had personally
known there was a feature or two still extant; the legend of his acres
and his local concerns, as well as of his solid presence among them, was
considerably cherished by us, though for ourselves personally the
relics of his worth were a lean feast to sit at. They were by some
invidious turn of fate all to help to constitute the heritage of our
young kinsman, the orphaned and administered _fils de famille_, whose
father, Alexander Wyckoff, son of our great-aunt and one of the two
brothers of cousin Helen, just discernibly flushes for me through the
ominous haze that preceded the worst visitation of cholera New York was
to know. Alexander, whom, early widowed and a victim of that visitation,
I evoke as with something of a premature baldness, of a blackness of
short whisker, of an expanse of light waistcoat and of a harmless pomp
of manner, appeared to have quite predominantly "come in" for the values
in question, which he promptly transmitted to his small motherless son
and which were destined so greatly to increase. There are clues I have
only lost, not making out in the least to-day why the sons of Aunt
Wyckoff should have been so happily distinguished. Our great-uncle of
the name isn't even a dim ghost to me--he had passed away beyond recall
before I began to take notice; but I hold, rightly, I feel, that it was
not to his person these advantages were attached. They could have
descended to our grandmother but in a minor degree--we should otherwise
have been more closely aware of them. It comes to me that so far as we
had at all been aware it had mostly gone off in smoke: I have still in
my ears some rueful allusion to "lands," apparently in the general
country of the Beaverkill, which had come to my mother and her sister as
their share of their grandfather Robertson's amplitude, among the
further-apportioned shares of their four brothers, only to be sacrificed
later on at some scant appraisement. It is in the nature of "lands" at a
distance and in regions imperfectly reclaimed to be spoken of always as
immense, and I at any rate entertained the sense that we should have
been great proprietors, in the far wilderness, if we had only taken more
interest. Our interests were peculiarly urban--though not indeed that
this had helped us much. Something of the mystery of the vanished acres
hung for me about my maternal uncle, John Walsh, the only one who
appeared to have been in respect to the dim possessions much on the
spot, but I too crudely failed of my chance of learning from him what
had become of them.

Not that they had seen _him_, poor gentleman, very much further, or that
I had any strong sense of opportunity; I catch at but two or three
projections of him, and only at one of his standing much at his ease: I
see him before the fire in the Fourteenth Street library, sturdy, with
straight black hair and as if the Beaverkill had rather stamped him, but
clean-shaven, in a "stock" and a black frock-coat--I hear him perhaps
still more than I see him deliver himself on the then great subject of
Jenny Lind, whom he seemed to have emerged from the wilderness to listen
to and as to whom I remember thinking it (strange small critic that I
must have begun to be) a note of the wilderness in him that he spoke of
her as "Miss Lind"; albeit I scarce know, and must even less have known
then, what other form he could have used. The rest of my sense of him is
tinged with the ancient pity--that of our so exercised response in those
years to the general sad case of uncles, aunts and cousins obscurely
afflicted (the uncles in particular) and untimely gathered. Sharp to me
the memory of a call, one dusky wintry Sunday afternoon, in Clinton
Place, at the house of my uncle Robertson Walsh, then the head of my
mother's family, where the hapless younger brother lay dying; whom I was
taken to the top of the house to see and of the sinister twilight
grimness of whose lot, stretched there, amid odours of tobacco and of
drugs, or of some especial strong drug, in one of the chambers of what I
remember as a remote and unfriended arching attic, probably in fact the
best place of prescribed quiet, I was to carry away a fast impression.
All the uncles, of whichever kindred, were to come to seem sooner or
later to be dying, more or less before our eyes, of melancholy matters;
and yet their general story, so far as one could read it, appeared the
story of life. I conceived at any rate that John Walsh, celibate, lonely
and good-naturedly black-browed, had been sacrificed to the far-off
Robertson acres, which on their side had been sacrificed to I never knew
what. The point of my divagation, however, is that the Barmecide banquet
of another tract of the same _provenance_ was always spread for us
opposite the other house, from which point it stretched, on the north
side of the street, to Sixth Avenue; though here we were soon to see it
diminished at the corner by a structure afterwards known to us as our
prosiest New York school. This edifice, devoted to-day to other uses,
but of the same ample insignificance, still left for exploitation at
that time an uncovered town-territory the transmitted tale of which was
that our greatgrandfather, living down near the Battery, had had his
country villa or, more strictly speaking, his farm there, with free
expanses roundabout. Shrunken though the tract a part of it remained--in
particular a space that I remember, though with the last faintness, to
have seen appeal to the public as a tea-garden or open-air café, a haunt
of dance and song and of other forms of rather ineffective gaiety. The
subsequent conversion of the site into the premises of the French
Theatre I was to be able to note more distinctly; resorting there in the
winter of 1874-5, though not without some wan detachment, to a series
of more or less exotic performances, and admiring in especial the high
and hard virtuosity of Madame Ristori, the unfailing instinct for the
wrong emphasis of the then acclaimed Mrs. Rousby (I still hear the
assured "Great woman, great woman!" of a knowing friend met as I went
out,) and the stout fidelity to a losing game, as well as to a truth not
quite measurable among us, of the late, the but lugubriously-comic, the
blighted John Toole.

These are glimmering ghosts, though that drama of the scene hard by at
which I have glanced gives me back its agents with a finer intensity.
For the long action set in, as I have hinted, with the death of Aunt
Wyckoff, and, if rather taking its time at first to develop, maintained
to the end, which was in its full finality but a few years since, the
finest consistency and unity; with cousin Helen, in rich prominence, for
the heroine; with the pale adventurous Albert for the hero or young
protagonist, a little indeed in the sense of a small New York Orestes
ridden by Furies; with a pair of confidants in the form first of the
heroine's highly respectable but quite negligible husband and, second,
of her close friend and quasi-sister our own admirable Aunt; with
Alexander's younger brother, above all, the odd, the eccentric, the
attaching Henry, for the stake, as it were, of the game. So for the
spectator did the figures distribute themselves; the three principal,
on the large stage--it became a field of such spreading interests--well
in front, and the accessory pair, all sympathy and zeal, prompt comment
and rich resonance, hovering in the background, responsive to any call
and on the spot at a sign: this most particularly true indeed of our
anything but detached Aunt, much less a passive recipient than a vessel
constantly brimming, and destined herself to become the outstanding
agent, almost the _dea ex machina_, in the last act of the story. Her
colleague of the earlier periods (though to that title she would scarce
have granted his right) I designate rather as our earnest cousin's
husband than as our kinsman even by courtesy; since he was "Mr." to his
own wife, for whom the dread of liberties taken in general included even
those that might have been allowed to herself: he had not in the least,
like the others in his case, married into the cousinship with us, and
this apparently rather by his defect than by ours. His christian name,
if certainly not for use, was scarce even for ornament--which consorted
with the felt limits roundabout him of aids to mention and with the fact
that no man could on his journey through life well have been less
eagerly designated or apostrophised. If there are persons as to whom the
"Mr." never comes up at all, so there are those as to whom it never
subsides; but some of them all keep it by the greatness and others,
oddly enough, by the smallness of their importance. The subject of my
present reference, as I think of him, nevertheless--by which I mean in
spite of his place in the latter group--greatly helps my documentation;
he must have been of so excellent and consistent a shade of nullity. To
that value, if value it be, there almost always attaches some question
of the degree and the position: with adjuncts, with a relation, the zero
may figure as a numeral--and the neglected zero is mostly, for that
matter, endowed with a consciousness and subject to irritation. For this
dim little gentleman, so perfectly a gentleman, no appeal and no
redress, from the beginning to the end of his career, were made or
entertained or projected; no question of how to treat him, or of how
_he_ might see it or feel it, could ever possibly rise; he was blank
from whatever view, remaining so under application of whatever acid or
exposure to whatever heat; the one identity he could have was to be part
of the consensus.

Such a case is rare--that of being no case at all, that of not having
even the interest of the grievance of not being one: we as a rule catch
glimpses in the down-trodden of such resentments--they have at least
sometimes the importance of feeling the weight of our tread. The
phenomenon was here quite other--that of a natural platitude that had
never risen to the level of sensibility. When you have been wronged you
can be righted, when you have suffered you can be soothed; if you have
that amount of grasp of the "scene," however humble, the drama of your
life to some extent enacts itself, with the logical consequence of your
being proportionately its hero and _having_ to be taken for such. Let me
not dream of attempting to say for what cousin Helen took her spectral
spouse, though I think it the most marked touch in her portrait that she
kept us from ever knowing. She was a person about whom you knew
everything else, but there she was genially inscrutable, and above all
claimed no damages on the score of slights offered him. She knew nothing
whatever of these, yet could herself be much wounded or hurt--which
latter word she sounded in the wondrous old New York manner so
irreducible to notation. She covered the whole case with a mantle which
was yet much more probably that of her real simplicity than of a feigned
unconsciousness; I doubt whether she _knew_ that men could be amiable in
a different manner from that which had to serve her for supposing her
husband amiable; when the mould and the men cast in it were very
different she failed, or at least she feared, to conclude to
amiability--though _some_ women (as different themselves as such
stranger men!) might take it for that. Directly interrogated she might
(such was the innocence of these long-extinct manners) have approved of
male society in stronger doses or more vivid hues--save where
consanguinity, or indeed relationship by marriage, to which she greatly
deferred, had honestly imposed it. The singular thing for the drama to
which I return was that there it was just consanguinity that had made
the burden difficult and strange and of a nature to call on great
decisions and patient plans, even though the most ominous possibilities
were not involved. I reconstruct and reconstruct of course, but the
elements had to my childish vision at least nothing at all portentous;
if any light of the lurid played in for me just a little it was but
under much later information. What my childish vision was really most
possessed of, I think, was the figure of the spectral spouse, the dim
little gentleman, as I have called him, pacing the whole length of the
two big parlours, in prolonged repetition, much as if they had been the
deck of one of those ships anciently haunted by him, as "supercargo" or
whatever, in strange far seas--according to the only legend connected
with him save that of his early presumption in having approached, such
as he was, so fine a young woman, and his remarkable luck in having
approached her successfully; a luck surprisingly renewed for him, since
it was also part of the legend that he had previously married and lost a
bride beyond his deserts.




XI


I am, strictly speaking, at this point, on a visit to Albert, who at
times sociably condescended to my fewer years--I still appreciate the
man-of-the-world ease of it; but my host seems for the minute to have
left me, and I am attached but to the rich perspective in which "Uncle"
(for Albert too he was only all namelessly Uncle) comes and goes; out of
the comparative high brownness of the back room, commanding brave
extensions, as I thought them, a covered piazza over which, in season,
Isabella grapes accessibly clustered and beyond which stretched,
further, a "yard" that was as an ample garden compared to ours at home;
I keep in view his little rounded back, at the base of which his arms
are interlocked behind him, and I know how his bald head, yet with the
hair bristling up almost in short-horn fashion at the sides, is thrust
inquiringly, not to say appealingly, forward; I assist at his emergence,
where the fine old mahogany doors of separation are rolled back on what
used to seem to me silver wheels, into the brighter yet colder half of
the scene, and attend him while he at last looks out awhile into
Fourteenth Street for news of whatever may be remarkably, objectionably
or mercifully taking place there; and then I await his regular return,
preparatory to a renewed advance, far from indifferent as I innocently
am to his discoveries or his comments. It is cousin Helen however who
preferentially takes them up, attaching to them the right importance,
which is for the moment the very greatest that could possibly be
attached to anything in the world; I for my part occupied with those
marks of character in our pacing companion--his long, slightly equine
countenance, his eyebrows ever elevated as in the curiosity of alarm,
and the so limited play from side to side of his extremely protrusive
head, as if somehow through tightness of the "wash" neckcloths that he
habitually wore and that, wound and re-wound in their successive stages,
made his neck very long without making it in the least thick and reached
their climax in a proportionately very small knot tied with the neatest
art. I scarce can have known at the time that this was as complete a
little old-world figure as any that might then have been noted there,
far or near; yet if I didn't somehow "subtly" feel it, why am I now so
convinced that I must have had familiarly before me a masterpiece of the
great Daumier, say, or Henri Monnier, or any other then contemporary
projector of Monsieur Prudhomme, the timorous Philistine in a world of
dangers, with whom I was later on to make acquaintance? I put myself
the question, of scant importance though it may seem; but there is a
reflection perhaps more timely than any answer to it. I catch myself in
the act of seeing poor anonymous "Dear," as cousin Helen confined
herself, her life long, to calling him, in the light of an image
arrested by the French genius, and this in truth opens up vistas. I
scarce know what it _doesn't_ suggest for the fact of sharpness, of
intensity of type; which fact in turn leads my imagination almost any
dance, making me ask myself quite most of all whether a person so marked
by it mustn't really have been a highly finished figure.

That degree of finish was surely rare among us--rare at a time when the
charm of so much of the cousinship and the uncleship, the kinship
generally, had to be found in their so engagingly dispensing with any
finish at all. They happened to be amiable, to be delightful; but--I
think I have already put the question--what would have become of us all
if they hadn't been? a question the shudder of which could never have
been suggested by the presence I am considering. He too was gentle and
bland, as it happened--and I indeed see it all as a world quite
unfavourable to arrogance or insolence or any hard and high assumption;
but the more I think of him (even at the risk of thinking too much) the
more I make out in him a tone and a manner that deprecated crude ease.
Plenty of this was already in the air, but if he hadn't so spoken of an
order in which forms still counted it might scarce have occurred to one
that there had ever been any. It comes over me therefore that he
testified--and perhaps quite beautifully; I remember his voice and his
speech, which were not those of _that_ New York at all, and with the
echo, faint as it is, arrives the wonder of where he could possibly have
picked such things up. They were, as forms, adjusted and settled things;
from what finer civilisation therefore had they come down to him? To
brood on this the least little bit is verily, as I have said, to open up
vistas--out of the depths of one of which fairly glimmers the queerest
of questions. Mayn't we accordingly have been, the rest of us, all
wrong, and the dim little gentleman the only one among us who was right?
May not his truth to type have been a matter that, as mostly typeless
ourselves, we neither perceived nor appreciated?--so that if, as is
conceivable, he felt and measured the situation and simply chose to be
bland and quiet and keep his sense to himself, he was a hero without the
laurel as well as a martyr without the crown. The light of which
possibility is, however, too fierce; I turn it off, I tear myself from
the view--noting further but the one fact in his history that, by my
glimpse of it, quite escapes ambiguity. The youthful Albert, I have
mentioned, was to resist successfully through those years that
solicitation of "Europe" our own response to which, both as a general
and a particular solution, kept breaking out in choral wails; but the
other house none the less nourished projects so earnest that they could
invoke the dignity of comparative silence and patience. The other house
didn't aspire to the tongues, but it aspired to the grand tour, of which
ours was on many grounds incapable. Only after years and when endless
things had happened--Albert having long before, in especial, quite taken
up his stake and ostensibly dropped out of the game--did the great
adventure get itself enacted, with the effect of one of the liveliest
illustrations of the irony of fate. What had most of all flushed through
the dream of it during years was the legend, at last quite antediluvian,
of the dim little gentleman's early Wanderjahre, that experience of
distant lands and seas which would find an application none the less
lively for having had long to wait. It had had to wait in truth half a
century, yet its confidence had apparently not been impaired when New
York, on the happy day, began to recede from view. Europe had surprises,
none the less, and who knows to what extent it may after half a century
have had shocks? The coming true of the old dream produced at any rate a
snap of the tense cord, and the ancient worthy my imagination has, in
the tenderest of intentions, thus played with, disembarked in England
only to indulge in the last of his startled stares, only to look about
him in vague deprecation and give it all up. He just landed and died;
but the grand tour was none the less proceeded with--cousin Helen
herself, aided by resources personal, social and financial that left
nothing to desire, triumphantly performed it, though as with a feeling
of delicacy about it firmly overcome.

But it has taken me quite out of the other house, so that I patch up
again, at a stroke, that early scene of her double guardianship at which
my small wonder assisted. It even then glimmered on me, I think, that if
Albert was, all so romantically, in charge of his aunt--which was a
perfectly nondescript relation--so his uncle Henry, her odd brother, was
her more or less legal ward, not less, despite his being so very much
Albert's senior. In these facts and in the character of each of the
three persons involved resided the drama; which must more or less have
begun, as I have hinted, when simple-minded Henry, at a date I seem to
have seized, definitely emerged from rustication--the Beaverkill had but
for a certain term protected, or promoted, his simplicity--and began, on
his side, to pace the well-worn field between the Fourteenth Street
windows and the piazza of the Isabella grapes. I see him there less
vividly than his fellow-pedestrian only because he was afterwards to
loom so much larger, whereas his companion, even while still present,
was weakly to shrink and fade. At this late day only do I devise for
that companion a possible history; the simple-minded Henry's annals on
the other hand grew in interest as soon as they became interesting at
all. This happened as soon as one took in the ground and some of the
features of his tutelage. The basis of it all was that, harmless as he
appeared, he was not to be trusted; I remember how portentous that truth
soon looked, both in the light of his intense amiability and of sister
Helen's absolute certitude. He wasn't to be trusted--it was the sole
very definite fact about him except the fact that he had so kindly come
down from the far-off Beaverkill to regale us with the perfect
demonstration, dutifully, resignedly setting himself among us to point
the whole moral himself. He appeared, from the moment we really took it
in, to be doing, in the matter, no more than he ought; he exposed
himself to our invidious gaze, on this ground, with a humility, a quiet
courtesy and an instinctive dignity that come back to me as simply
heroic. He had himself accepted, under strenuous suggestion, the
dreadful view, and I see him to-day, in the light of the grand
dénouement, deferred for long years, but fairly dazzling when it came,
as fairly sublime in his decision not to put anyone in the wrong about
him a day sooner than he could possibly help. The whole circle of us
would in that event be so dreadfully "sold," as to our wisdom and
justice, he proving only noble and exquisite. It didn't so immensely
matter to him as that, the establishment of his true character didn't;
so he went on as if for all the years--and they really piled themselves
up: his passing for a dangerous idiot, or at least for a slave of his
passions from the moment he was allowed the wherewithal in the least to
indulge them, was a less evil for him than seeing us rudely corrected.
It was in truth an extraordinary situation and would have offered a
splendid subject, as we used to say, to the painter of character, the
novelist or the dramatist, with the hand to treat it. After I had read
David Copperfield an analogy glimmered--it struck me even in the early
time: cousin Henry was more or less another Mr. Dick, just as cousin
Helen was in her relation to him more or less another Miss Trotwood.
There were disparities indeed: Mr. Dick was the harmless lunatic on that
lady's premises, but she admired him and appealed to him; lunatics, in
her generous view, might be oracles, and there is no evidence, if I
correctly remember, that she kept him low. Our Mr. Dick was suffered to
indulge his passions but on ten cents a day, while his fortune, under
conscientious, under admirable care--cousin Helen being no less the
wise and keen woman of business than the devoted sister--rolled up and
became large; likewise Miss Trotwood's inmate hadn't at all the
perplexed brooding brow, with the troubled fold in it, that represented
poor Henry's only form of criticism of adverse fate. They had alike the
large smooth open countenance of those for whom life has been
simplified, and if Mr. Dick had had a fortune he would have remained all
his days as modestly vague about the figure of it as our relative
consented to remain. The latter's interests were agricultural, while his
predecessor's, as we remember, were mainly historical; each at any rate
had in a general way his Miss Trotwood, not to say his sister Helen.

The good Henry's Miss Trotwood lived and died without an instant's
visitation of doubt as to the due exercise of her authority, as to what
would happen if it faltered; her victim waiting in the handsomest manner
till she had passed away to show us all--all who remained, after so
long, to do him justice--that nothing but what was charming and touching
could possibly happen. This was, in part at least, the dazzling
dénouement I have spoken of: he became, as soon as fortunate
dispositions could take effect, the care of our admirable Aunt, between
whom and his sister and himself close cousinship, from far back, had
practically amounted to sisterhood: by which time the other house had
long been another house altogether, its ancient site relinquished, its
contents planted afresh far northward, with new traditions invoked,
though with that of its great friendliness to all of us, for our
mother's sake, still confirmed. Here with brief brightness, clouded at
the very last, the solution emerged; we became aware, not without
embarrassment, that poor Henry at large and supplied with funds was
exactly as harmless and blameless as poor Henry stinted and captive; as
to which if anything had been wanting to our confusion or to his own
dignity it would have been his supreme abstinence, his suppression of
the least "Didn't I tell you?" He didn't even pretend to have told us,
when he so abundantly might, and nothing could exceed the grace with
which he appeared to have noticed nothing. He "handled" dollars as
decently, and just as profusely, as he had handled dimes; the only light
shade on the scene--except of course for its being so belated, which did
make it pathetically dim--was the question of how nearly he at all
measured his resources. Not his heart, but his imagination, in the long
years, had been starved; and though he was now all discreetly and wisely
encouraged to feel rich, it was rather sadly visible that, thanks to
almost half a century of over-discipline, he failed quite to rise to his
estate. He did feel rich, just as he felt generous; the misfortune was
only in his weak sense for meanings. That, with the whole situation,
made delicacy of the first importance; as indeed what was perhaps most
striking in the entire connection was the part played by delicacy from
the first. It had all been a drama of the delicate: the consummately
scrupulous and successful administration of his resources for the
benefit of his virtue, so that they could be handed over, in the event,
without the leakage of a fraction, what was that but a triumph of
delicacy? So delicacy conspired, delicacy surrounded him; the case
having been from the early time that, could he only be regarded as
sufficiently responsible, could the sources of his bounty be judged
fairly open to light pressure (there was question of none but the
lightest) that bounty might blessedly flow. This had been Miss
Trotwood's own enlightened view, on behalf of one of the oddest and most
appealing collections of wistful wondering single gentlewomen that a
great calculating benevolence perhaps ever found arrayed before
it--ornaments these all of the second and third cousinship and
interested spectators of the almost inexpressible facts.

I should have liked completely to express them, in spite of the
difficulty--if not indeed just by reason of that; the difficulty of
their consisting so much more of "character" than of "incident" (heaven
save the artless opposition!) though this last element figured bravely
enough too, thanks to some of the forms taken by our young Albert's wild
wilfulness. He was so weak--after the most approved fashion of
distressing young men of means--that his successive exhibitions of it
had a fine high positive effect, such as would have served beautifully,
act after act, for the descent of the curtain. The issue, however
(differing in this from the common theatrical trick) depended less on
who should die than on who should live; the younger of cousin Helen's
pair of wards--putting them even only as vessels of her attempted
earnestness--had violently broken away, but a remedy to this grief, for
reasons too many to tell, dwelt in the possible duration, could it only
not be arrested, of two other lives, one of these her own, the second
the guileless Henry's. The single gentlewomen, to a remarkable number,
whom she regarded and treated as nieces, though they were only daughters
of cousins, were such objects of her tender solicitude that, she and
Henry and Albert being alike childless, the delightful thing to think of
was, on certain contingencies, the nieces' prospective wealth. There
were contingencies of course--and they exactly produced the pity and
terror. Her estate would go at her death to her nearest of kin,
represented by her brother and nephew; it would be only of her
savings--fortunately, with her kind eye on the gentlewomen, zealous and
long continued--that she might dispose by will; and it was but a
troubled comfort that, should he be living at the time of her death, the
susceptible Henry would profit no less than the wanton Albert. Henry was
at any cost to be kept in life that he _might_ profit; the woeful
question, the question of delicacy, for a woman devoutly conscientious,
was how could anyone else, how, above all, could fifteen other persons,
be made to profit by his profiting? She had been as earnest a steward of
her brother's fortune as if directness of pressure on him, in a sense
favourable to her interests--that is to her sympathies, which were her
only interests--had been a matter of course with her; whereas in fact
she would have held it a crime, given his simplicity, to attempt in the
least to guide his hand. If he didn't outlive his nephew--and he was
older, though, as would appear, so much more virtuous--his inherited
property, she being dead, would accrue to that unedifying person.
_There_ was the pity; and as for the question of the disposition of
Henry's savings without the initiative of Henry's intelligence, in that,
alas, was the terror. Henry's savings--there had been no terror for her,
naturally, in beautifully husbanding his resources _for_ him--dangled,
naturally, with no small vividness, before the wistful gentlewomen, to
whom, if he had but _had_ the initiative, he might have made the most
princely presents. Such was the oddity, not to say the rather tragic
drollery, of the situation: that Henry's idea of a present was ten
cents' worth of popcorn, or some similar homely trifle; and that when
one had created for him a world of these proportions there was no honest
way of inspiring him to write cheques for hundreds; all congruous though
these would be with the generosity of his nature as shown by the
exuberance of his popcorn. The ideal solution would be his flashing to
intelligence just long enough to apprehend the case and, of his own
magnanimous movement, sign away everything; but that was a fairy-tale
stroke, and the fairies here somehow stood off.

Thus between the wealth of her earnestness and the poverty of her
courage--her dread, that is, of exposing herself to a legal process for
undue influence--our good lady was not at peace; or, to be exact, was
only at such peace as came to her by the free bestowal of her own
accumulations during her lifetime and after her death. She predeceased
her brother and had the pang of feeling that if half her residuum would
be deplorably diverted the other half would be, by the same stroke,
imperfectly applied; the artless Henry remained at once so well provided
and so dimly inspired. Here was suspense indeed for a last "curtain" but
one; and my fancy glows, all expertly, for the disclosure of the final
scene, than which nothing could well have been happier, on all the
premises, save for a single flaw: the installation in Forty-fourth
Street of our admirable aunt, often, through the later years, domiciled
there, but now settled to community of life with a touching charge and
representing near him his extinguished, _their_ extinguished, sister.
The too few years that followed were the good man's Indian summer and a
very wonderful time--so charmingly it shone forth, for all concerned,
that he was a person fitted to adorn, as the phrase is, almost any
position. Our admirable aunt, not less devoted and less disinterested
than his former protectress, had yet much more imagination; she had
enough, in a word, for perfect confidence, and under confidence what
remained of poor Henry's life bloomed like a garden freshly watered. Sad
alas the fact that so scant a patch was now left. It sufficed, however,
and he rose, just in time, to every conception; it was, as I have
already noted, as if he had all the while known, as if he had really
been a conscious victim to the superstition of his blackness. His final
companion recognised, as it were, his powers; and it may be imagined
whether when he absolutely himself proposed to benefit the gentlewomen
she passed him, or not, the blessed pen. He had taken a year or two to
publish by his behaviour the perfection of his civility, and so, on that
safe ground, made use of the pen. His competence was afterwards
attacked, and it emerged triumphant, exactly as his perfect charity and
humility and amenity, and his long inward loneliness, of half a century,
did. He had bowed his head and sometimes softly scratched it during that
immense period; he had occasionally, after roaming downstairs with the
troubled fold in his brow and the difficult, the smothered statement on
his lips (his vocabulary was scant and stiff, the vocabulary of pleading
explanation, often found too complicated by the witty,) retired once
more to his room sometimes indeed for hours, to think it all over again;
but had never failed of sobriety or propriety or punctuality or
regularity, never failed of one of the virtues his imputed indifference
to which had been the ground of his discipline. It was very
extraordinary, and of all the stories I know is I think the most
beautiful--so far at least as _he_ was concerned! The flaw I have
mentioned, the one break in the final harmony, was the death of our
admirable aunt too soon, shortly before his own and while, taken with
illness at the same time, he lay there deprived of her attention. He had
that of the gentlewomen, however, two or three of the wisest and
tenderest being deputed by the others; and if his original estate
reverted at law they presently none the less had occasion to bless his
name.




XII


I turn round again to where I last left myself gaping at the old
ricketty bill-board in Fifth Avenue; and am almost as sharply aware as
ever of the main source of its spell, the fact that it most often blazed
with the rich appeal of Mr. Barnum, whose "lecture-room," attached to
the Great American Museum, overflowed into posters of all the theatrical
bravery disavowed by its title. It was my rueful theory of those
days--though tasteful I may call it too as well as rueful--that on all
the holidays on which we weren't dragged to the dentist's we attended as
a matter of course at Barnum's, that is when we were so happy as to be
able to; which, to my own particular consciousness, wasn't every time
the case. The case was too often, to my melancholy view, that W. J.,
quite regularly, on the non-dental Saturdays, repaired to this seat of
joy with the easy Albert--_he_ at home there and master of the scene to
a degree at which, somehow, neither of us could at the best arrive; he
quite moulded, truly, in those years of plasticity, as to the æsthetic
bent and the determination of curiosity, I seem to make out, by the
general Barnum association and revelation. It was not, I hasten to add,
that I too didn't, to the extent of my minor chance, drink at the
spring; for how else should I have come by the whole undimmed sense of
the connection?--the weary waiting, in the dusty halls of humbug, amid
bottled mermaids, "bearded ladies" and chill dioramas, for the
lecture-room, the true centre of the seat of joy, to open: vivid in
especial to me is my almost sick wondering of whether I mightn't be rapt
away before it did open. The impression appears to have been mixed; the
drinking deep and the holding out, holding out in particular against
failure of food and of stage-fares, provision for transport to and fro,
being questions equally intense: the appeal of the lecture-room, in its
essence a heavy extra, so exhausted our resources that even the
sustaining doughnut of the refreshment-counter would mock our desire and
the long homeward crawl, the length of Broadway and further, seem to
defy repetition. Those desperate days, none the less, affect me now as
having flushed with the very complexion of romance; their aches and
inanitions were part of the adventure; the homeward straggle,
interminable as it appeared, flowered at moments into rapt
contemplations--that for instance of the painted portrait, large as
life, of the celebrity of the hour, then "dancing" at the Broadway
Theatre, Lola Montes, Countess of Lansfeldt, of a dazzling and unreal
beauty and in a riding-habit lavishly open at the throat.

It was thus quite in order that I should pore longest, there at my
fondest corner, over the Barnum announcements--my present inability to
be superficial about which has given in fact the measure of my
contemporary care. These announcements must have been in their way
marvels of attractive composition, the placard bristling from top to toe
with its analytic "synopsis of scenery and incidents"; the synoptical
view cast its net of fine meshes and the very word savoured of
incantation. It is odd at the same time that when I question memory as
to the living hours themselves, those of the stuffed and dim little hall
of audience, smelling of peppermint and orange-peel, where the curtain
rose on our gasping but rewarded patience, two performances only stand
out for me, though these in the highest relief. Love, or the Countess
and the Serf, by J. Sheridan Knowles--I see that still as the blazonry
of one of them, just as I see Miss Emily Mestayer, large, red in the
face, coifed in a tangle of small, fine, damp-looking short curls and
clad in a light-blue garment edged with swans-down, shout at the top of
her lungs that a "pur-r-r-se of gold" would be the fair guerdon of the
minion who should start on the spot to do her bidding at some desperate
crisis that I forget. I forget Huon the serf, whom I yet recall
immensely admiring for his nobleness; I forget everyone but Miss
Mestayer, who gave form to my conception of the tragic actress at her
highest. She had a hooked nose, a great play of nostril, a vast
protuberance of bosom and always the "crop" of close moist ringlets; I
say always, for I was to see her often again, during a much later phase,
the mid-most years of that Boston Museum which aimed at so vastly higher
a distinction than the exploded lecture-room had really done, though in
an age that snickered even abnormally low it still lacked the courage to
call itself a theatre. She must have been in comedy, which I believe she
also usefully and fearlessly practised, rather unimaginable; but there
was no one like her in the Boston time for cursing queens and
eagle-beaked mothers; the Shakespeare of the Booths and other such would
have been unproducible without her; she had a rusty, rasping, heaving
and tossing "authority" of which the bitterness is still in my ears. I
am revisited by an outer glimpse of her in that after age when she had
come, comparatively speaking, into her own--the sight of her,
accidentally incurred, one tremendously hot summer night, as she slowly
moved from her lodgings or wherever, in the high Bowdoin Street region,
down to the not distant theatre from which even the temperature had
given her no reprieve; and well remember how, the queer light of my
young impression playing up again in her path, she struck me as the
very image of mere sore histrionic habit and use, a worn and weary, a
battered even though almost sordidly smoothed, _thing_ of the theatre,
very much as an old infinitely-handled and greasy violoncello of the
orchestra might have been. It was but an effect doubtless of the heat
that she scarcely seemed clad at all; slippered, shuffling and, though
somehow hatted and vaguely veiled or streamered, wrapt in a gauzy sketch
of a dressing-gown, she pointed to my extravagant attention the moral of
thankless personal service, of the reverse of the picture, of the cost
of "amusing the public" in a case of amusing it, as who should say,
every hour. And I had thrilled before her as the Countess in
"Love"--such contrasted combinations! But she carried her head very
high, as with the habit of crowns and trains and tirades--had in fact
much the air of some deposed and reduced sovereign living on a scant
allowance; so that, all invisibly and compassionately, I took off my hat
to her.

To which I must add the other of my two Barnumite scenic memories, my
having anciently admired her as the Eliza of Uncle Tom's Cabin, her
swelling bust encased in a neat cotton gown and her flight across the
ice-blocks of the Ohio, if I rightly remember the perilous stream,
intrepidly and gracefully performed. We lived and moved at that time,
with great intensity, in Mrs. Stowe's novel--which, recalling my prompt
and charmed acquaintance with it, I should perhaps substitute for The
Initials, earlier mentioned here, as my first experiment in grown-up
fiction. There was, however, I think, for that triumphant work no
classified condition; it was for no sort of reader as distinct from any
other sort, save indeed for Northern as differing from Southern: it knew
the large felicity of gathering in alike the small and the simple and
the big and the wise, and had above all the extraordinary fortune of
finding itself, for an immense number of people, much less a book than a
state of vision, of feeling and of consciousness, in which they didn't
sit and read and appraise and pass the time, but walked and talked and
laughed and cried and, in a manner of which Mrs. Stowe was the
irresistible cause, generally conducted themselves. Appreciation and
judgment, the whole impression, were thus an effect for which there had
been no process--any process so related having in other cases _had_ to
be at some point or other critical; nothing in the guise of a written
book, therefore, a book printed, published, sold, bought and "noticed,"
probably ever reached its mark, the mark of exciting interest, without
having at least groped for that goal _as_ a book or by the exposure of
some literary side. Letters, here, languished unconscious, and Uncle
Tom, instead of making even one of the cheap short cuts through the
medium in which books breathe, even as fishes in water, went gaily
roundabout it altogether, as if a fish, a wonderful "leaping" fish, had
simply flown through the air. This feat accomplished, the surprising
creature could naturally fly anywhere, and one of the first things it
did was thus to flutter down on every stage, literally without
exception, in America and Europe. If the amount of life represented in
such a work is measurable by the ease with which representation is taken
up and carried further, carried even violently furthest, the fate of
Mrs. Stowe's picture was conclusive: it simply sat down wherever it
lighted and made itself, so to speak, at home; thither multitudes
flocked afresh and there, in each case, it rose to its height again and
went, with all its vivacity and good faith, through all its motions.

These latter were to leave me, however, with a fonder vision still than
that of the comparatively jejune "lecture-room" version; for the first
exhibition of them to spring to the front was the fine free rendering
achieved at a playhouse till then ignored by fashion and culture, the
National Theatre, deep down on the East side, whence echoes had come
faintest to ears polite, but where a sincerity vivid though rude was now
supposed to reward the curious. Our numerous attendance there under this
spell was my first experience of the "theatre party" as we have enjoyed
it in our time--each emotion and impression of which is as fresh to me
as the most recent of the same family. Precious through all indeed
perhaps is the sense, strange only to later sophistication, of my small
encouraged state as a free playgoer--a state doubly wondrous while I
thus evoke the full contingent from Union Square; where, for that
matter, I think, the wild evening must have been planned. I am lost
again in all the goodnature from which small boys, on wild evenings,
could dangle so unchidden--since the state of unchiddenness is what
comes back to me well-nigh clearest. How without that complacency of
conscience could every felt impression so live again? It is true that
for my present sense of the matter snubs and raps would still tingle,
would count double; just wherefore it is exactly, however, that I mirror
myself in these depths of propriety. The social scheme, as we knew it,
was, in its careless charity, worthy of the golden age--though I can't
sufficiently repeat that we knew it both at its easiest and its safest:
the fruits dropped right upon the board to which we flocked together,
the least of us and the greatest, with differences of appetite and of
reach, doubtless, but not with differences of place and of proportionate
share. My appetite and my reach in respect to the more full-bodied Uncle
Tom might have brooked certainly any comparison; I must have partaken
thoroughly of the feast to have left the various aftertastes so separate
and so strong. It was a great thing to have a canon to judge by--it
helped conscious criticism, which was to fit on wings (for use ever
after) to the shoulders of appreciation. In the light of that advantage
I could be _sure_ my second Eliza was less dramatic than my first, and
that my first "Cassy," that of the great and blood-curdling Mrs. Bellamy
of the lecture-room, touched depths which made the lady at the National
prosaic and placid (I could already be "down" on a placid Cassy;) just
as on the other hand the rocking of the ice-floes of the Ohio, with the
desperate Eliza, infant in arms, balancing for a leap from one to the
other, had here less of the audible creak of carpentry, emulated a
trifle more, to my perception, the real water of Mr. Crummles's pump.
They can't, even at that, have emulated it much, and one almost envies
(quite making up one's mind not to denounce) the simple faith of an age
beguiled by arts so rude.

However, the point exactly was that we attended this spectacle just in
order _not_ to be beguiled, just in order to enjoy with ironic
detachment and, at the very most, to be amused ourselves at our
sensibility should it prove to have been trapped and caught. To have
become thus aware of our collective attitude constituted for one small
spectator at least a great initiation; he got his first glimpse of that
possibility of a "free play of mind" over a subject which was to throw
him with force at a later stage of culture, when subjects had
considerably multiplied, into the critical arms of Matthew Arnold. So he
is himself at least interested in seeing the matter--as a progress in
which the first step was taken, before that crude scenic appeal, by his
wondering, among his companions, where the absurd, the absurd for
_them_, ended and the fun, the real fun, which was the gravity, the
tragedy, the drollery, the beauty, the thing itself, briefly, might be
legitimately and tastefully held to begin. Uncanny though the remark
perhaps, I am not sure I wasn't thus more interested in the pulse of our
party, under my tiny recording thumb, than in the beat of the drama and
the shock of its opposed forces--vivid and touching as the contrast was
then found for instance between the tragi-comical Topsy, the slave-girl
clad in a pinafore of sackcloth and destined to become for Anglo-Saxon
millions the type of the absolute in the artless, and her little
mistress the blonde Eva, a figure rather in the Kenwigs tradition of
pantalettes and pigtails, whom I recall as perching quite suicidally,
with her elbows out and a preliminary shriek, on that bulwark of the
Mississippi steamboat which was to facilitate her all but fatal
immersion in the flood. Why should I have duly noted that no little
game on her part could well less have resembled or simulated an
accident, and yet have been no less moved by her reappearance, rescued
from the river but perfectly dry, in the arms of faithful Tom, who had
plunged in to save her, without either so much as wetting his shoes,
than if I had been engaged with her in a reckless romp? I could count
the white stitches in the loose patchwork, and yet could take it for a
story rich and harmonious; I could know we had all intellectually
condescended and that we had yet had the thrill of an æsthetic
adventure; and this was a brave beginning for a consciousness that was
to be nothing if not mixed and a curiosity that was to be nothing if not
restless.

The principle of this prolonged arrest, which I insist on prolonging a
little further, is doubtless in my instinct to grope for our earliest
æsthetic seeds. Careless at once and generous the hands by which they
were sown, but practically appointed none the less to cause that
peculiarly flurried hare to run--flurried because over ground so little
native to it--when so many others held back. Is it _that_ air of romance
that gilds for me then the Barnum background--taking it as a symbol;
that makes me resist, to this effect of a passionate adverse loyalty,
any impulse to translate into harsh terms any old sordidities and
poverties? The Great American Museum, the down-town scenery and aspects
at large, and even the up-town improvements on them, as then
flourishing?--why, they must have been for the most part of the last
meanness: the Barnum picture above all ignoble and awful, its blatant
face or frame stuck about with innumerable flags that waved, poor
vulgar-sized ensigns, over spurious relics and catchpenny monsters in
effigy, to say nothing of the promise within of the still more monstrous
and abnormal living--from the total impression of which things we
plucked somehow the flower of the ideal. It grew, I must in justice
proceed, much more sweetly and naturally at Niblo's, which represented
in our scheme the ideal evening, while Barnum figured the ideal day; so
that I ask myself, with that sense of our resorting there under the rich
cover of night (which was the supreme charm,) how it comes that this
larger memory hasn't swallowed up all others. For here, absolutely,
_was_ the flower at its finest and grown as nowhere else--grown in the
great garden of the Ravel Family and offered again and again to our deep
inhalation. I see the Ravels, French acrobats, dancers and pantomimists,
as representing, for our culture, pure grace and charm and civility; so
that one doubts whether any candid community was ever so much in debt to
a race of entertainers or had so happy and prolonged, so personal and
grateful a relation with them. They must have been, with their
offshoots of Martinettis and others, of three or four generations,
besides being of a rich theatrical stock generally, and we had our
particular friends and favourites among them; we seemed to follow them
through every phase of their career, to assist at their tottering steps
along the tight-rope as very small children kept in equilibrium by very
big balancing-poles (caretakers here walking under in case of falls;) to
greet them as Madame Axel, of robust maturity and in a Spanish costume,
bounding on the same tense cord more heavily but more assuredly; and
finally to know the climax of the art with them in Raoul or the
Night-Owl and Jocko or the Brazilian Ape--and all this in the course of
our own brief infancy. My impression of them bristles so with memories
that we seem to have rallied to their different productions with much
the same regularity with which we formed fresh educational connections;
and they were so much our property and our pride that they supported us
handsomely through all fluttered entertainment of the occasional Albany
cousins. I remember how when one of these visitors, wound up, in honour
of New York, to the very fever of perception, broke out one evening
while we waited for the curtain to rise, "Oh don't you hear the cries?
They're _beating_ them, I'm sure they are; can't it be stopped?" we
resented the charge as a slur on our very honour; for what our romantic
relative had heatedly imagined to reach us, in a hushed-up manner from
behind, was the sounds attendant on the application of blows to some
acrobatic infant who had "funked" his little job. Impossible such
horrors in the world of pure poetry opened out to us at Niblo's, a
temple of illusion, of tragedy and comedy and pathos that, though its
_abords_ of stony brown Metropolitan Hotel, on the "wrong side," must
have been bleak and vulgar, flung its glamour forth into Broadway. What
more pathetic for instance, so that we publicly wept, than the fate of
wondrous Martinetti Jocko, who, after befriending a hapless French
family wrecked on the coast of Brazil and bringing back to life a small
boy rescued from the waves (I see even now, with every detail, this
inanimate victim supine on the strand) met his death by some cruel
bullet of which I have forgotten the determinant cause, only remembering
the final agony as something we could scarce bear and a strain of our
sensibility to which our parents repeatedly questioned the wisdom of
exposing us.

These performers and these things were in all probability but of a
middling skill and splendour--it was the pre-trapèze age, and we were
caught by mild marvels, even if a friendly good faith in them, something
sweet and sympathetic, was after all a value, whether of their own
humanity, their own special quality, or only of our innocence, never to
be renewed; but I light this taper to the initiators, so to call them,
whom I remembered, when we had left them behind, as if they had given us
a silver key to carry off and so to refit, after long years, to sweet
names never thought of from then till now. Signor Léon Javelli, in whom
the French and the Italian charm appear to have met, who was he, and
what did he brilliantly do, and why of a sudden do I thus recall and
admire him? I am afraid he but danced the tight-rope, the most domestic
of our friends' resources, as it brought them out, by the far stretch of
the rope, into the bosom of the house and against our very hearts, where
they leapt and bounded and wavered and recovered closely face to face
with us; but I dare say he bounded, brave Signor Léon, to the greatest
height of all: let this vague agility, in any case, connect him with
that revelation of the ballet, the sentimental-pastoral, of other years,
which, in The Four Lovers for example, a pantomimic lesson as in words
of one syllable, but all quick and gay and droll, would have affected us
as classic, I am sure, had we then had at our disposal that term of
appreciation. When we read in English story-books about the pantomimes
in London, which somehow cropped up in them so often, those were the
only things that didn't make us yearn; so much we felt we were masters
of the type, and so almost sufficiently was that a stop-gap for London
constantly deferred. We hadn't the transformation-scene, it was true,
though what this really seemed to come to was clown and harlequin taking
liberties with policemen--these last evidently a sharp note in a
picturesqueness that we lacked, our own slouchy "officers" saying
nothing to us of that sort; but we had at Niblo's harlequin and
columbine, albeit of less pure a tradition, and we knew moreover all
about clowns, for we went to circuses too, and so repeatedly that when I
add them to our list of recreations, the good old orthodox circuses
under tents set up in vacant lots, with which New York appears at that
time to have bristled, time and place would seem to have shrunken for
most other pursuits, and not least for that of serious learning. And the
case is aggravated as I remember Franconi's, which we more or less
haunted and which, aiming at the grander style and the monumental
effect, blazed with fresh paint and rang with Roman chariot-races up
there among the deserts of Twenty-ninth Street or wherever; considerably
south, perhaps, but only a little east, of the vaster desolations that
gave scope to the Crystal Palace, second of its name since,
following--not _passibus æquis_, alas--the London structure of 1851,
this enterprise forestalled by a year or two the Paris Palais de
l'Industrie of 1855. Such as it was I feel again its majesty on those
occasions on which I dragged--if I must here once more speak for myself
only--after Albany cousins through its courts of edification: I remember
being very tired and cold and hungry there, in a little light drab and
very glossy or shiny "talma" breasted with rather troublesome
buttonhole-embroideries; though concomitantly conscious that I was
somehow in Europe, since everything about me had been "brought over,"
which ought to have been consoling, and seems in fact to have been so in
some degree, inasmuch as both my own pain and the sense of the cousinly,
the Albany, headaches quite fade in that recovered presence of big
European Art embodied in Thorwaldsen's enormous Christ and the
Disciples, a shining marble company ranged in a semicircle of dark
maroon walls. If this was Europe then Europe was beautiful indeed, and
we rose to it on the wings of wonder; never were we afterwards to see
great showy sculpture, in whatever profuse exhibition or of whatever
period or school, without some renewal of that charmed Thorwaldsen hour,
some taste again of the almost sugary or confectionery sweetness with
which the great white images had affected us under their supper-table
gaslight. The Crystal Palace was vast and various and dense, which was
what Europe was going to be; it was a deep-down jungle of impressions
that were somehow challenges, even as we might, helplessly defied, find
foreign words and practices; over which formidably towered Kiss's
mounted Amazon attacked by a leopard or whatever, a work judged at that
day sublime and the glory of the place; so that I felt the journey back
in the autumn dusk and the Sixth Avenue cars (established just in time)
a relapse into soothing flatness, a return to the Fourteenth Street
horizon from a far journey and a hundred looming questions that would
still, tremendous thought, come up for all the personal answers of which
one cultivated the seed.




XIII


Let me hurry, however, to catch again that thread I left dangling from
my glance at our small vague spasms of school--my personal sense of them
being as vague and small, I mean, in contrast with the fuller and
stronger cup meted out all round to the Albany cousins, much more
privileged, I felt, in every stroke of fortune; or at least much more
interesting, though it might be wicked to call them more happy, through
those numberless bereavements that had so enriched their existence. I
mentioned above in particular the enviable consciousness of our little
red-headed kinsman Gus Barker, who, as by a sharp prevision, snatched
what gaiety he might from a life to be cut short, in a cavalry dash, by
one of the Confederate bullets of 1863: he blew out at us, on New York
Sundays, as I have said, sharp puffs of the atmosphere of the
Institution Charlier--strong to us, that is, the atmosphere of whose
institutions was weak; but it was above all during a gregarious visit
paid him in a livelier field still that I knew myself merely mother'd
and brother'd. It had been his fate to be but scantly the latter and
never at all the former--our aunt Janet had not survived his birth; but
on this day of our collective pilgrimage to Sing-Sing, where he was at a
"military" school and clad in a fashion that represented to me the very
panoply of war, he shone with a rare radiance of privation. Ingenuous
and responsive, of a social disposition, a candour of gaiety, that
matched his physical activity--the most beautifully made athletic little
person, and in the highest degree appealing and engaging--he not only
did us the honours of his dazzling academy (dazzling at least to me) but
had all the air of showing us over the great State prison which even
then flourished near at hand and to which he accompanied us; a party of
a composition that comes back to me as wonderful, the New York and
Albany cousinships appearing to have converged and met, for the happy
occasion, with the generations and sexes melting together and moving in
a loose harmonious band. The party must have been less numerous than by
the romantic tradition or confused notation of my youth, and what I
mainly remember of it beyond my sense of our being at once an attendant
train to my aged and gentle and in general most unadventurous
grandmother, and a chorus of curiosity and amusement roundabout the
vivid Gussy, is our collective impression that State prisons were on the
whole delightful places, vast, bright and breezy, with a gay, free
circulation in corridors and on stairs, a pleasant prevalence of hot
soup and fresh crusty rolls, in tins, of which visitors admiringly
partook, and for the latter, in chance corners and on sunny landings,
much interesting light brush of gentlemen remarkable but for gentlemanly
crimes--that is defalcations and malversations to striking and
impressive amounts.

I recall our coming on such a figure at the foot of a staircase and his
having been announced to us by our conductor or friend in charge as
likely to be there; and what a charm I found in his cool loose uniform
of shining white (as I was afterwards to figure it,) as well as in his
generally refined and distinguished appearance and in the fact that he
was engaged, while exposed to our attention, in the commendable act of
paring his nails with a smart penknife and that he didn't allow us to
interrupt him. One of my companions, I forget which, had advised me that
in these contacts with illustrious misfortune I was to be careful not to
stare; and present to me at this moment is the wonder of whether he
would think it staring to note that _he_ quite stared, and also that his
hands were fine and fair and one of them adorned with a signet ring. I
was to have later in life a glimpse of two or three dismal
penitentiaries, places affecting me as sordid, as dark and dreadful; but
if the revelation of Sing-Sing had involved the idea of a timely warning
to the young mind my small sensibility at least was not reached by the
lesson. I envied the bold-eyed celebrity in the array of a planter at
his ease--we might have been _his_ slaves--quite as much as I envied
Gussy; in connection with which I may remark here that though in that
early time I seem to have been constantly eager to exchange my lot for
that of somebody else, on the assumed certainty of gaining by the
bargain, I fail to remember feeling jealous of such happier persons--in
the measure open to children of spirit. I had rather a positive lack of
the passion, and thereby, I suppose, a lack of spirit; since if jealousy
bears, as I think, on what one sees one's companions able to do--as
against one's own falling short--envy, as I knew it at least, was simply
of what they _were_, or in other words of a certain sort of richer
consciousness supposed, doubtless often too freely supposed, in them.
They were so _other_--that was what I felt; and to _be_ other, other
almost anyhow, seemed as good as the probable taste of the bright
compound wistfully watched in the confectioner's window; unattainable,
impossible, of course, but as to which just this impossibility and just
that privation kept those active proceedings in which jealousy seeks
relief quite out of the question. A platitude of acceptance of the poor
actual, the absence of all vision of how in any degree to change it,
combined with a complacency, an acuity of perception of alternatives,
though a view of them as only through the confectioner's hard
glass--that is what I recover as the nearest approach to an apology, in
the soil of my nature, for the springing seed of emulation. I never
dreamed of competing--a business having in it at the best, for my
temper, if not for my total failure of temper, a displeasing ferocity.
If competing was bad snatching was therefore still worse, and jealousy
was a sort of spiritual snatching. With which, nevertheless, all the
while, one might have been "like" So-and-So, who had such horizons. A
helpless little love of horizons I certainly cherished, and could
sometimes even care for my own. These always shrank, however, under
almost any suggestion of a further range or finer shade in the purple
rim offered to other eyes--and that is what I take for the restlessness
of envy. It wasn't that I wished to change with everyone, with anyone at
a venture, but that I saw "gifts" everywhere but as mine and that I
scarce know whether to call the effect of this miserable or monstrous.
It was the effect at least of self-abandonment--I mean to visions.

There must have been on that occasion of the Sing-Sing day--which it
deeply interests me to piece together--some state of connection for some
of us with the hospitalities of Rhinebeck, the place of abode of the
eldest of the Albany uncles--that is of the three most in our view; for
there were two others, the eldest of all a half-uncle only, who formed a
class quite by himself, and the very youngest, who, with lively
interests of his own, had still less attention for us than either of his
three brothers. The house at Rhinebeck and all its accessories (which
struck our young sense as innumerable,) in especial the great bluff of
the Hudson on which it stood, yields me images scarcely dimmed, though
as the effect but of snatches of acquaintance; there at all events the
gently-groaning--ever so gently and dryly--Albany grandmother, with the
Albany cousins as to whom I here discriminate, her two adopted
daughters, maturest and mildest of the general tribe, must have paused
for a stay; a feature of which would be perhaps her juncture with the
New York contingent, somewhere sociably achieved, for the befriending of
juvenile Gussy. It shimmers there, the whole circumstance, with I scarce
know what large innocence of charity and ease; the Gussy-pretext, for
reunion, all so thin yet so important an appeal, the simplicity of the
interests and the doings, the assumptions and the concessions, each
to-day so touching, almost so edifying. We were surely all gentle and
generous together, floating in such a clean light social order, sweetly
proof against ennui--unless it be a bad note, as is conceivable, never,
_never_ to feel bored--and thankful for the smallest æsthetic or
romantic mercies. My vision loses itself withal in vaster
connections--above all in my general sense of the then grand newness of
the Hudson River Railroad; so far at least as its completion to Albany
was concerned, a modern blessing that even the youngest of us were in a
position to appraise. The time had been when the steamboat had to
content us--and I feel how amply it must have done so as I recall the
thrill of docking in dim early dawns, the whole hour of the Albany
waterside, the night of huge strange paddling and pattering and
shrieking and creaking once ended, and contrast with it all certain long
sessions in the train at an age and in conditions when neither train nor
traveller had suffered chastening; sessions of a high animation, as I
recast them, but at the same time of mortal intensities of lassitude.
The elements here indeed are much confused and mixed--I must have known
that discipline of the hectic interest and the extravagant strain in
relation to Rhinebeck only; an _étape_, doubtless, on the way to New
York, for the Albany kinship, but the limit to our smaller patiences of
any northward land-journey. And yet not the young fatigue, I repeat, but
the state of easy wonder, is what most comes back: the stops too
repeated, but perversely engaging; the heat and the glare too great, but
the river, by the window, making reaches and glimpses, so that the
great swing of picture and force of light and colour were themselves a
constant adventure; the uncles, above all, too pre-eminent, too
recurrent, to the creation of a positive soreness of sympathy, of
curiosity, and yet constituting by their presence half the enlargement
of the time. For the presence of uncles, incoherent Albany uncles, is
somehow what most gives these hours their stamp for memory. I scarce
know why, nor do I much, I confess, distinguish occasions--but I see
what I see: the long, the rattling car of the old open native form and
the old harsh native exposure; the sense of arrival forever postponed,
qualified however also by that of having in my hands a volume of M.
Arsène Houssaye, Philosophes et Comédiennes, remarkably submitted by one
of my relatives to my judgment. I see them always, the relatives, in
slow circulation; restless and nervous and casual their note, not less
than strikingly genial, but with vaguenesses, lapses, eclipses, that
deprived their society of a tactless weight. They cheered us on, in
their way; born optimists, clearly, if not logically determined ones,
they were always reassuring and sustaining, though with a bright brevity
that must have taken immensities, I think, for granted. They wore their
hats slightly toward the nose, they strolled, they hung about, they
reported of progress and of the company, they dropped suggestions, new
magazines, packets of the edible deprecated for the immature; they
figured in fine to a small nephew as the principal men of their time
and, so far as the two younger and more familiar were concerned, the
most splendid as to aspect and apparel. It was none the less to the
least shining, though not essentially the least comforting, of this
social trio that, if I rightly remember, I owed my introduction to the
_chronique galante_ of the eighteenth century.

There tags itself at any rate to the impression a flutter as of some
faint, some recaptured, grimace for another of his kindly offices (which
I associate somehow with the deck of a steamboat:) his production for
our vague benefit of a literary classic, the Confessions, as he called
our attention to them, of the celebrated "Rosseau" I catch again the
echo of the mirth excited, to my surprise, by this communication, and
recover as well my responsive advance toward a work that seemed so to
promise; but especially have I it before me that some play of light
criticism mostly attended, on the part of any circle, this speaker's
more ambitious remarks. For all that, and in spite of oddities of
appearance and type, it was Augustus James who spread widest, in default
of towering highest, to my wistful view of the larger life, and who
covered definite and accessible ground. This ground, the house and
precincts of Linwood, at Rhinebeck, harboured our tender years, I
surmise, but at few and brief moments; but it hadn't taken many of these
to make it the image of an hospitality liberal as I supposed great
social situations were liberal; suppositions on this score having in
childhood (or at least they had in mine) as little as possible to do
with dry data. Didn't Linwood bristle with great views and other
glories, with gardens and graperies and black ponies, to say nothing of
gardeners and grooms who were notoriously and quotedly droll; to say
nothing, in particular, of our aunt Elizabeth, who had been Miss Bay of
Albany, who was the mother of the fair and free young waltzing-women in
New York, and who floats back to me through the Rhinebeck picture,
aquiline but easy, with an effect of handsome highbrowed, high-nosed
looseness, of dressing-gowns or streaming shawls (the dowdy, the
delightful shawl of the period;) and of claws of bright benevolent steel
that kept nipping for our charmed advantage: roses and grapes and
peaches and currant-clusters, together with turns of phrase and scraps
of remark that fell as by quite a like flash of shears. These are mere
scrapings of gold-dust, but my mind owes her a vibration that, however
tiny, was to insist all these years on _marking_--on figuring in a whole
complex of picture and drama, the clearest note of which was that of
worry and woe: a crisis prolonged, in deep-roofed outer galleries,
through hot August evenings and amid the dim flare of open windows, to
the hum of domesticated insects. All but inexpressible the part played,
in the young mind naturally even though perversely, even though
inordinately, arranged as a stage for the procession and exhibition of
appearances, by matters all of a usual cast, contacts and impressions
not arriving at the dignity of shocks, but happening to be to the taste,
as one may say, of the little intelligence, happening to be such as the
fond fancy could assimilate. One's record becomes, under memories of
this order--and that is the only trouble--a tale of assimilations small
and fine; out of which refuse, directly interesting to the
subject-victim only, the most branching vegetations may be conceived as
having sprung. Such are the absurdities of the poor dear inward
life--when translated, that is, and perhaps ineffectually translated,
into terms of the outward and trying at all to flourish on the lines of
the outward; a reflection that might stay me here weren't it that I
somehow feel morally affiliated, tied as by knotted fibres, to the
elements involved.

One of these was assuredly that my father had again, characteristically,
suffered me to dangle; he having been called to Linwood by the dire
trouble of his sister, Mrs. Temple, and brought me with him from Staten
Island--I make the matter out as of the summer of '54. We had come up,
he and I, to New York; but our doings there, with the journey following,
are a blank to me; I recover but my sense, on our arrival, of being for
the first time in the presence of tragedy, which the shining scene,
roundabout, made more sinister--sharpened even to the point of my
feeling abashed and irrelevant, wondering why I had come. My aunt, under
her brother's roof, had left her husband, wasted with consumption, near
death at Albany; gravely ill herself--she had taken the disease from him
as it was taken in those days, and was in the event very scantly to
survive him--she had been ordered away in her own interest, for which
she cared no scrap, and my father, the person in all his family most
justly appealed and most anxiously listened to, had been urged to come
and support her in a separation that she passionately rejected. Vivid to
me still, as floating across verandahs into the hot afternoon stillness,
is the wail of her protest and her grief; I remember being scared and
hushed by it and stealing away beyond its reach. I remember not less
what resources of high control the whole case imputed, for my
imagination, to my father; and how, creeping off to the edge of the
eminence above the Hudson, I somehow felt the great bright harmonies of
air and space becoming one with my rather proud assurance and
confidence, that of my own connection, for life, for interest, with
such sources of light. The great impression, however, the one that has
brought me so far, was another matter: only that of the close,
lamp-tempered, outer evening aforesaid, with my parent again, somewhere
deep within, yet not too far to make us hold our breath for it, tenderly
opposing his sister's purpose of flight, and the presence at my side of
my young cousin Marie, youngest daughter of the house, exactly of my own
age, and named in honour of her having been born in Paris, to the
influence of which fact her shining black eyes, her small quickness and
brownness, marking sharply her difference from her sisters, so oddly, so
almost extravagantly testified. It had come home to me by some voice of
the air that she was "spoiled," and it made her in the highest degree
interesting; we ourselves had been so associated, at home, without being
in the least spoiled (I think we even rather missed it:) so that I knew
about these subjects of invidious reflection only by literature--mainly,
no doubt, that of the nursery--in which they formed, quite by
themselves, a romantic class; and, the fond fancy always predominant, I
prized even while a little dreading the chance to see the condition at
work. This chance was given me, it was clear--though I risk in my record
of it a final anticlimax--by a remark from my uncle Augustus to his
daughter: seated duskily in our group, which included two or three dim
dependent forms, he expressed the strong opinion that Marie should go to
bed--expressed it, that is, with the casual cursory humour that was to
strike me as the main expressional resource of outstanding members of
the family and that would perhaps have had under analysis the defect of
making judgment very personal without quite making authority so.
Authority they hadn't, of a truth, these all so human outstanding ones;
they made shift but with light appreciation, sudden suggestion, a
peculiar variety of happy remark in the air. It had been remarked but in
the air, I feel sure, that Marie should seek her couch--a truth by the
dark wing of which I ruefully felt myself brushed; and the words seemed
therefore to fall with a certain ironic weight. What I have retained of
their effect, at any rate, is the vague fact of some objection raised by
my cousin and some sharper point to his sentence supplied by her father;
promptly merged in a visible commotion, a flutter of my young companion
across the gallery as for refuge in the maternal arms, a protest and an
appeal in short which drew from my aunt the simple phrase that was from
that moment so preposterously to "count" for me. "Come now, my dear;
don't make a scene--I _insist_ on your not making a scene!" That was all
the witchcraft the occasion used, but the note was none the less
epoch-making. The expression, so vivid, so portentous, was one I had
never heard--it had never been addressed to us at home; and who should
say now what a world one mightn't at once read into it? It seemed
freighted to sail so far; it told me so much about life. Life at these
intensities clearly became "scenes"; but the great thing, the immense
illumination, was that we could make them or not as we chose. It was a
long time of course before I began to distinguish between those within
our compass more particularly as spoiled and those producible on a
different basis and which should involve detachment, involve presence of
mind; just the qualities in which Marie's possible output was apparently
deficient. It didn't in the least matter accordingly whether or no a
scene _was_ then proceeded to--and I have lost all count of what
immediately happened. The mark had been made for me and the door flung
open; the passage, gathering up _all_ the elements of the troubled time,
had been itself a scene, quite enough of one, and I had become aware
with it of a rich accession of possibilities.




XIV


It must have been after the Sing-Sing episode that Gussy came to us, in
New York, for Sundays and holidays, from scarce further off than round
the corner--his foreign Institution flourishing, I seem to remember, in
West Tenth Street or wherever--and yet as floated by exotic airs and
with the scent of the spice-islands hanging about him. He was being
educated largely with Cubans and Mexicans, in those New York days more
than half the little flock of the foreign Institutions in general; over
whom his easy triumphs, while he wagged his little red head for them,
were abundantly credible; reinforced as my special sense of them was
moreover by the similar situation of his sister, older than he but also
steeped in the exotic medium and also sometimes bringing us queer echoes
of the tongues. I remember being deputed by my mother to go and converse
with her, on some question of her coming to us, at the establishment of
Madame Reichhardt (pronounced, à la française, Réchard,) where I felt
that I had crossed, for the hour, the very threshold of "Europe"; it
being impressed on me by my cousin, who was tall and handsome and happy,
with a laugh of more beautiful sound than any laugh we were to know
again, that French only was speakable on the premises. I sniffed it up
aromatically, the superior language, in passage and parlour--it took the
form of some strong savoury soup, an educational _potage Réchard_ that
must excellently have formed the taste: that was again, I felt as I came
away, a part of the rich experience of being thrown in tender juvenile
form upon the world. This genial girl, like her brother, was in the
grand situation of having no home and of carrying on life, such a
splendid kind of life, by successive visits to relations; though neither
she nor Gussy quite achieved the range of their elder brother, "Bob" of
that ilk, a handsome young man, a just blurred, attractive, illusive
presence, who hovered a bit beyond our real reach and apparently
displayed the undomesticated character at its highest. _He_ seemed
exposed, for his pleasure--if pleasure it was!--and my wonder, to every
assault of experience; his very name took on, from these imputations, a
browner glow; and it was all in the right key that, a few years later,
he should, after "showing some talent for sculpture," have gone the
hapless way of most of the Albany youth, have become a theme for sad
vague headshakes (kind and very pitying in his case) and died
prematurely and pointlessly, or in other words, by my conception,
picturesquely. The headshakes were heavier and the sighs sharper for
another slim shade, one of the younger and I believe quite the most
hapless of those I have called the outstanding ones; he too, several
years older than we again, a tormenting hoverer and vanisher; he too
charmingly sister'd, though sister'd only, and succumbing to monstrous
early trouble after having "shown some talent" for music. The
ghostliness of these æsthetic manifestations, as I allude to them, is
the thinnest conceivable chip of stray marble, the faintest far-off
twang of old chords; I ask myself, for the odd obscurity of it, under
what inspiration music and sculpture may have tinkled and glimmered to
the Albany ear and eye (as we at least knew those organs) and with what
queer and weak delusions our unfortunates may have played. Quite
ineffably quaint and _falot_ this proposition of _that_ sort of resource
for the battle of life as it then and there opened; and above all
beautifully suggestive of our sudden collective disconnectedness (ours
as the whole kinship's) from _the_ American resource of those days,
Albanian or other. That precious light was the light of "business" only;
and we, by a common instinct, artlessly joining hands, went forth into
the wilderness without so much as a twinkling taper.

Our consensus, on all this ground, was amazing--it brooked no exception;
the word had been passed, all round, that we didn't, that we couldn't
and shouldn't, understand these things, questions of arithmetic and of
fond calculation, questions of the counting-house and the market; and we
appear to have held to our agreement as loyally and to have accepted our
doom as serenely as if our faith had been mutually pledged. The rupture
with my grandfather's tradition and attitude was complete; we were never
in a single case, I think, for two generations, guilty of a stroke of
business; the most that could be said of us was that, though about
equally wanting, all round, in any faculty of acquisition, we happened
to pay for the amiable weakness less in some connections than in others.
The point was that we moved so oddly and consistently--as it was our
only form of consistency--over our limited pasture, never straying to
nibble in the strange or the steep places. What was the matter with us
under this spell, and what the moral might have been for our case, are
issues of small moment, after all, in face of the fact of our mainly so
brief duration. It was given to but few of us to be taught by the event,
to be made to wonder with the last intensity what _had_ been the matter.
This it would be interesting to worry out, might I take the time; for
the story wouldn't be told, I conceive, by any mere rueful glance at
other avidities, the preference for ease, the play of the passions, the
appetite for pleasure. These things have often accompanied the business
imagination; just as the love of life and the love of other persons, and
of many of the things of the world, just as quickness of soul and sense,
have again and again not excluded it. However, it comes back, as I have
already hinted, to the manner in which the "things of the world" could
but present themselves; there were not enough of these, and they were
not fine and fair enough, to engage happily so much unapplied, so much
loose and crude attention. We hadn't doubtless at all a complete play of
intelligence--if I may not so far discriminate as to say _they_ hadn't;
or our lack of the instinct of the market needn't have been so much
worth speaking of: other curiosities, other sympathies might have
redressed the balance. I make out our young cousin J. J. as dimly aware
of this while composing the light melodies that preluded to his
extinction, and which that catastrophe so tried to admonish us to think
of as promising; but his image is more present to me still as the great
incitement, during the few previous years, to our constant dream of
"educational" relief, of some finer kind of social issue, through
Europe.

It was to Europe J. J. had been committed; he was over there forging the
small apologetic arms that were so little to avail him, but it was quite
enough for us that he pointed the way to the Pension Sillig, at Vevey,
which shone at us, from afar, as our own more particular solution. It
was true that the Pension Sillig figured mainly as the solution in cases
of recognised wildness; there long flourished among New York parents
whose view of such resources had the proper range a faith in it for that
complaint; and it was as an act of faith that, failing other remedies,
our young wifeless uncle, conscious himself of no gift for control or
for edification, had placed there his difficult son. He returned with
delight from this judicious course and there was an hour when we
invoked, to intensity, a similar one in our own interest and when the
air of home did little but reflect from afar the glitter of blue Swiss
lakes, the tinkle of cattle-bells in Alpine pastures, the rich
_bonhomie_ that M. Sillig, dispensing an education all of milk and honey
and edelweiss and ranz-des-vaches, combined with his celebrated firmness
for tough subjects. Poor J. J. came back, I fear, much the same subject
that he went; but he had verily performed his scant office on earth,
that of having brought our then prospect, our apparent possibility, a
trifle nearer. He seemed to have been wild even beyond M. Sillig's
measure--which was highly disappointing; but if we might on the other
hand be open to the reproach of falling too short of it there were
establishments adapted to every phase of the American predicament; so
that our general direction could but gain in vividness. I think with
compassion, altogether, of the comparative obscurity to which our
eventual success in gathering the fruits, few and scant though they
might be, thus relegates those to whom it was given but to toy so
briefly with the flowers. They make collectively their tragic trio: J.
J. the elder, most loved, most beautiful, most sacrificed of the Albany
uncles; J. J. the younger--they were young together, they were luckless
together, and the combination was as strange as the disaster was
sweeping; and the daughter and sister, amplest of the "natural," easiest
of the idle, who lived on to dress their memory with every thread and
patch of her own perfect temper and then confirm the tradition, after
all, by too early and woeful an end.

If it comes over me under the brush of multiplied memories that we might
well have invoked the educational "relief" I just spoke of, I should
doubtless as promptly add that my own case must have been intrinsically
of the poorest, and indeed make the point once for all that I should be
taken as having seen and felt much of the whole queerness through the
medium of rare inaptitudes. I can only have been inapt, I make out, to
have retained so positively joyless a sense of it all, to be aware of
most of it now but as dim confusion, as bewildered anxiety. There was
interest always, certainly--but it strikes me to-day as interest in
everything that wasn't supposedly or prescriptively of the question at
all, and in nothing that _was_ so respectably involved and accredited.
Without some sharpness of interest I shouldn't now have the memories;
but these stick to me somehow with none of the hard glue of recovered
"spirits," recovered vivacities, assurances, successes. I can't have
had, through it all, I think, a throb of assurance or success; without
which, at the same time, absurdly and indescribably, I lived and
wriggled, floundered and failed, lost the clue of everything but a
general lucid consciousness (lucid, that is, for my tender years;) which
I clutched with a sense of its value. What happened all the while, I
conceive, was that I imagined things--and as if quite on system--wholly
other than as they were, and so carried on in the midst of the actual
ones an existence that somehow floated and saved me even while cutting
me off from any degree of direct performance, in fact from any degree of
direct participation, at all. _There_ presumably was the interest--in
the intensity and plausibility and variety of the irrelevance: an
irrelevance which, for instance, made all pastors and masters, and
especially all fellow-occupants of benches and desks, all elbowing and
kicking presences within touch or view, so many monsters and horrors, so
many wonders and splendours and mysteries, but never, so far as I can
recollect, realities of relation, dispensers either of knowledge or of
fate, playmates, intimates, mere coævals and coequals. They were
something better--better above all than the coequal or coæval; they were
so thoroughly figures and characters, divinities or demons, and endowed
in this light with a vividness that the mere reality of relation, a
commoner directness of contact, would have made, I surmise,
comparatively poor. This superior shade of interest was not, none the
less, so beguiling that I recall without unmitigated horror, or
something very like it, a winter passed with my brother at the
Institution Vergnès; our sorry subjection to which argues to my present
sense an unmitigated surrounding aridity. To a "French school" must have
been earnestly imputed the virtue of keeping us in patience till easier
days should come; infinitely touching our parents' view of that New York
fetish of our young time, an "acquisition of the languages"--an
acquisition reinforcing those opportunities which we enjoyed at home, so
far as they mustered, and at which I have briefly glanced. Charming and
amusing to me indeed certain faint echoes, wavering images, of this
superstition as it played about our path: ladies and gentlemen, dimly
foreign, mere broken syllables of whose names come back to me, attending
there to converse in tongues and then giving way to others through
failures of persistence--whether in pupils or preceptors I know not.
There hovers even Count Adam Gurowski, Polish, patriotic, exiled,
temporarily famous, with the vision of _his_ being invoked for facility
and then relinquished for difficulty; though I scarce guess on which of
his battle-grounds--he was so polyglot that he even had a rich command
of New Yorkese.




XV


It is to the Institution Vergnès that my earliest recovery of the sense
of being in any degree "educated with" W. J. attaches itself; an
establishment which occupied during the early 'fifties a site in the
very middle of Broadway, of the lower, the real Broadway, where it could
throb with the very pulse of the traffic in which we all innocently
rejoiced--believing it, I surmise, the liveliest conceivable: a fact
that is by itself, in the light of the present, an odd rococo note. The
lower Broadway--I allude to the whole Fourth Street and Bond Street
(where now _is_ the Bond Street of that antiquity?)--was then a seat of
education, since we had not done with it, as I shall presently show,
even when we had done with the Institution, a prompt disillusionment;
and I brood thus over a period which strikes me as long and during which
my personal hours of diligence were somehow more than anything else
hours of the pavement and the shopfront, or of such contemplative
exercise as the very considerable distance, for small legs, between
those regions and the westward Fourteenth Street might comprise.
Pedestrian gaping having been in childhood, as I have noted,
prevailingly my line, fate appeared to have kindly provided for it on no
small scale; to the extent even that it must have been really my sole
and single form of athletics. Vague heated competition and agitation in
the then enclosed Union Square would seem to point a little, among us
all, to nobler types of motion; but of any basis for recreation,
anything in the nature of a playground or a breathing-space, the
Institution itself was serenely innocent. This I take again for a note
extraordinarily mediæval. It occupied the first and second floors, if I
rightly remember, of a wide front that, overhanging the endless
thoroughfare, looked out on bouncing, clattering "stages" and painfully
dragged carts and the promiscuous human shuffle--the violence of
repercussions from the New York pavement of those years to be further
taken into account; and I win it back from every side as, in spite of
these aspects of garish publicity, a dark and dreadful, and withal quite
absurd, scene. I see places of that general time, even places of
confinement, in a dusty golden light that special memories of small
misery scarce in the least bedim, and this holds true of our next and
quite neighbouring refuge; the establishment of M. Vergnès alone darkles
and shrinks to me--a sordidly _black_ interior is my main image for it;
attenuated only by its having very soon afterwards, as a suffered
ordeal, altogether lapsed and intermitted. Faintly, in the gloom, I
distinguish M. Vergnès himself--quite "old," very old indeed as I
supposed him, and highly irritated and markedly bristling; though of
nothing in particular that happened to me at his or at anyone's else
hands have I the scantest remembrance. What really most happened no
doubt, was that my brother and I should both come away with a mind
prepared for a perfect assimilation of Alphonse Daudet's chronicle of
"Jack," years and years later on; to make the acquaintance in that work
of the "petits pays chauds" among whom Jack learnt the first lessons of
life was to see the Institution Vergnès at once revive, swarming as it
did with small homesick Cubans and Mexicans; the complete failure of
blondness that marks the memory is doubtless the cumulative effect of so
many of the New York "petits pays chauds," preponderantly brown and
black and conducing to a greasy gloom. Into this gloom I fear I should
see all things recede together but for a certain salient note, the fact
that the whole "staff" appears to have been constantly in a rage; from
which naturally resulted the accent of shrillness (the only accent we
could pick up, though we were supposed to be learning, for the extreme
importance of it, quantities of French) and the sound of high
vociferation. I remember infuriated ushers, of foreign speech and
flushed complexion--the tearing across of hapless "exercises" and
_dictées_ and the hurtle through the air of dodged volumes; only never,
despite this, the extremity of smiting. There can have been at the
Institution no blows instructionally dealt--nor even from our hours of
ease do any such echoes come back to me. Little Cubans and Mexicans, I
make out, were not to be vulgarly whacked--in deference, presumably, to
some latent relic or imputed survival of Castilian pride; which would
impose withal considerations of quite practical prudence. Food for
reflection and comparison might well have been so suggested; interesting
at least the element of contrast between such opposed conceptions of
tone, temper and manner as the passion without whacks, or with whacks
only of inanimate objects, ruling the scene I have described, and the
whacks without passion, the grim, impersonal, strictly penal
applications of the rod, which then generally represented what was still
involved in our English tradition. It was the two theories of
sensibility, of personal dignity, that so diverged; but with such other
divergences now on top of those that the old comparison falls away. We
to-day go unwhacked altogether--though from a pride other than
Castilian: it is difficult to say at least what ideal has thus
triumphed. In the Vergnès air at any rate I seem myself to have sat
unscathed and unterrified--not alarmed even by so much as a call to the
blackboard; only protected by my insignificance, which yet covered such
a sense of our dusky squalor. Queer for us the whole affair, assuredly;
but how much queerer for the poor petits pays chauds who had come so far
for their privilege. _We_ had come, comparatively, but from round the
corner--and that left the "state of education" and the range of
selection all about as quaint enough. What could these things then have
been in the various native climes of the petits pays chauds?

It was by some strong wave of reaction, clearly, that we were floated
next into the quieter haven of Mr. Richard Pulling Jenks--where cleaner
waters, as I feel their coolness still, must have filled a neater
though, it was true, slightly more contracted trough. Yet the range of
selection had been even on this higher plane none too strikingly
exemplified; our jumping had scant compass--we still grubbed with a good
conscience in Broadway and sidled about Fourth Street. But I think of
the higher education as having there, from various causes, none the less
begun to glimmer for us. A diffused brightness, a kind of high
crosslight of conflicting windows, rests for me at all events on the
little realm of Mr. Pulling Jenks and bathes it as with positively sweet
limitations. Limited must it have been, I feel, with our couple of
middling rooms, front and back, our close packing, our large
unaccommodating stove, our grey and gritty oilcloth, and again our
importunate Broadway; from the aggregation of which elements there
distils itself, without my being able to account for it, a certain
perversity of romance. I speak indeed here for myself in particular, and
keen for romance must I have been in such conditions, I admit; since the
sense of it had crept into a recreational desert even as utter as that
of the Institution Vergnès. Up out of Broadway we still scrambled--I can
smell the steep and cold and dusty wooden staircase; straight into
Broadway we dropped--I feel again the generalised glare of liberation;
and I scarce know what tenuity of spirit it argues that I should neither
have enjoyed nor been aware of missing (speaking again for myself only)
a space wider than the schoolroom floor to react and knock about in. I
literally conclude that we must have knocked about in Broadway, and in
Broadway alone, like perfect little men of the world; we must have been
let loose there to stretch our legs and fill our lungs, without
prejudice either to our earlier and later freedoms of going and coming.
I as strictly infer, at the same time, that Broadway must have been then
as one of the alleys of Eden, for any sinister contact or consequence
involved for us; a circumstance that didn't in the least interfere, too,
as I have noted, with its offer of an entrancing interest. The interest
verily could have been a _calculated_ thing on the part of our dear
parents as little as on that of Mr. Jenks himself. Therefore let it be
recorded as still most odd that we should all have assented to such
deficiency of landscape, such exiguity of sport. I take the true
inwardness of the matter to have been in our having such short hours,
long as they may have appeared at the time, that the day left margin at
the worst for private inventions. I think we found landscape, for
ourselves--and wherever I at least found vision I found such sport as I
was capable of--even between the front and back rooms and the
conflicting windows; even by the stove which somehow scorched without
warming, and yet round which Mr. Coe and Mr. Dolmidge, the
drawing-master and the writing-master, arriving of a winter's day, used
notedly, and in the case of Mr. Coe lamentedly, to draw out their
delays. Is the dusty golden light of retrospect in this connection an
effluence from Mr. Dolmidge and Mr. Coe, whose ministrations come back
to me as the sole directly desired or invoked ones I was to know in my
years, such as they were, of pupilage?

I see them in any case as old-world images, figures of an antique stamp;
products, mustn't they have been, of an order in which some social
relativity or matter-of-course adjustment, some transmitted form and
pressure, were still at work? Mr. Dolmidge, inordinately lean,
clean-shaved, as was comparatively uncommon then, and in a
swallow-tailed coat and I think a black satin stock, was surely perfect
in his absolutely functional way, a pure pen-holder of a man, melancholy
and mild, who taught the most complicated flourishes--great scrolls of
them met our view in the form of surging seas and beaked and beady-eyed
eagles, the eagle being so calligraphic a bird--while he might just have
taught resignation. He was not at all funny--no one out of our immediate
family circle, in fact almost no one but W. J. himself, who flowered in
every waste, seems to have struck me as funny in those years; but he was
to remain with me a picture of somebody in Dickens, one of the Phiz if
not the Cruikshank pictures. Mr. Coe was another affair, bristling with
the question of the "hard," but somehow too with the revelation of the
soft, the deeply attaching; a worthy of immense stature and presence,
crowned as with the thick white hair of genius, wearing a great gathered
or puckered cloak, with a vast velvet collar, and resembling, as he
comes back to me, the General Winfield Scott who lived so much in our
eyes then. The oddity may well even at that hour have been present to me
of its taking so towering a person to produce such small
"drawing-cards"; it was as if some mighty bird had laid diminutive eggs.
Mr. Coe, of a truth, laid his all over the place, and though they were
not of more than handy size--very small boys could set them up in state
on very small desks--they had doubtless a great range of number and
effect. They were scattered far abroad and I surmise celebrated; they
represented crooked cottages, feathery trees, browsing and bristling
beasts and other rural objects; all rendered, as I recall them, in
little detached dashes that were like stories told in words of one
syllable, or even more perhaps in short gasps of delight. It must have
been a stammering art, but I admired its fluency, which swims for me
moreover in richer though slightly vague associations. Mr. Coe practised
on a larger scale, in colour, in oils, producing wondrous neat little
boards that make me to this day think of them and more particularly
smell them, when I hear of a "panel" picture: a glamour of greatness
attends them as brought home by W. J. from the master's own place of
instruction in that old University building which partly formed the east
side of Washington Square and figures to memory, or to fond imagination,
as throbbing with more offices and functions, a denser chiaroscuro, than
any reared hugeness of to-day, where character is so lost in quantity.
Is there any present structure that plays such a part in proportion to
its size?--though even as I ask the question I feel how nothing on earth
is proportioned to present sizes. These alone are proportioned--and to
mere sky-space and mere amount, amount of steel and stone; which is
comparatively uninteresting. Perhaps our needs and our elements were
then absurdly, were then provincially few, and that the patches of
character in that small grey granite compendium were all we had in
general to exhibit. Let me add at any rate that some of them were
exhibitional--even to my tender years, I mean; since I respond even yet
to my privilege of presence at some Commencement or Commemoration, such
as might be natural, doubtless, to any "university," where, as under a
high rich roof, before a Chancellor in a gown and amid serried admirers
and impressive applause, there was "speaking," of the finest sort, and
where above all I gathered in as a dazzling example the rare assurance
of young Winthrop Somebody or Somebody Winthrop, who, though still in
jackets, held us spellbound by his rendering of Serjeant Buzfuz's
exposure of Mr. Pickwick. Long was I to marvel at the high sufficiency
of young Winthrop Somebody or Somebody Winthrop--in which romantic
impression it is perhaps after all (though with the consecration of one
or two of the novels of the once-admired Theodore of that name, which so
remarkably insists, thrown in) the sense of the place is embalmed.

I must not forget indeed that I throw in also Mr. Coe--even if with
less assured a hand; by way of a note on those higher flights of power
and promise that I at this time began to see definitely determined in my
brother. As I catch W. J.'s image, from far back, at its most
characteristic, he sits drawing and drawing, always drawing, especially
under the lamplight of the Fourteenth Street back parlour; and not as
with a plodding patience, which I think would less have affected me, but
easily, freely and, as who should say, infallibly: always at the stage
of finishing off, his head dropped from side to side and his tongue
rubbing his lower lip. I recover a period during which to see him at all
was so to see him--the other flights and faculties removed him from my
view. These were a matter of course--he recurred, he passed nearer, but
in his moments of ease, and I clearly quite accepted the ease of his
disappearances. Didn't he always when within my view light them up and
justify them by renewed and enlarged vividness? so that my whole sense
of him as formed for assimilations scarce conceivable made our gaps of
contact too natural for me even to be lessons in humility. Humility had
nothing to do with it--as little even as envy would have had; I was
below humility, just as we were together outside of competition,
mutually "hors concours." _His_ competitions were with others--in which
how wasn't he, how could he not be, successful? while mine were with
nobody, or nobody's with me, which came to the same thing, as heaven
knows I neither braved them nor missed them. That winter, as I recover
it, represents him as sufficiently within view to make his position or
whereabouts in the upper air definite--I must have taken it for granted
before, but could now in a manner measure it; and the freshness of this
sense, something serene in my complacency, had to do, I divine, with the
effect of our moving, with the rest of our company, which was not
numerous but practically, but appreciably "select," on a higher and
fairer plane than ever yet. Predominantly of course we owed this benefit
to Richard Pulling himself; of whom I recall my brother's saying to me,
at a considerably later time, and with an authority that affected me as
absolute, that he had been of all our masters the most truly genial, in
fact the only one to whom the art of exciting an interest or inspiring a
sympathy could be in any degree imputed. I take this to have meant that
he would have adorned a higher sphere--and it may have been, to explain
his so soon swimming out of our ken, that into a higher sphere he
rapidly moved; I can account at least for our falling away from him the
very next year and declining again upon baser things and a lower
civilisation but by some probability of his flight, just thereafter
effected, to a greater distance, to one of the far upper reaches of the
town. Some years must have elapsed and some distinction have crowned
him when, being briefly in New York together, W. J. and I called on him
of a Sunday afternoon, to find--what I hadn't been at all sure of--that
he still quite knew who we were, or handsomely pretended to; handsomely
in spite of his markedly confirmed identity of appearance with the
Punch, husband to Judy, of the funny papers and the street show. Bald,
rotund, of ruddy complexion, with the nose, the chin, the arched eye,
the paunch and the _barbiche_, to say nothing of the ferule nursed in
his arms and with which, in the show, such free play is made, Mr. Jenks
yet seems to me to have preserved a dignity as well as projected an
image, and in fact have done other things besides. He whacked
occasionally--he must have been one of the last of the whackers; but I
don't remember it as ugly or dreadful or droll--don't remember, that is,
either directly feeling or reflectively enjoying it: it fails somehow to
break the spell of our civilisation; my share in which, however, comes
back to me as merely contemplative. It is beyond measure odd, doubtless,
that my main association with my "studies," whether of the infant or the
adolescent order, should be with almost anything but the fact of
learning--of learning, I mean, what I was supposed to learn. I could
only have been busy, at the same time, with other pursuits--which must
have borne some superficial likeness at least to the acquisition of
knowledge of a free irresponsible sort; since I remember few either of
the inward pangs or the outward pains of a merely graceless state. I
recognise at the same time that it was perhaps a sorry business to be so
interested in one didn't know what. Such are, whether at the worst or at
the best, some of the aspects of that season as Mr. Jenks's image
presides; in the light of which I _may_ perhaps again rather wonder at
my imputation to the general picture of so much amenity. Clearly the
good man was a civiliser--whacks and all; and by some art not now to be
detected. He was a complacent classic--which was what my brother's claim
for him, I dare say, mostly represented; though that passed over the
head of my tenth year. It was a good note for him in this particular
that, deploring the facile text-books of Doctor Anthon of Columbia
College, in which there was even more crib than text, and holding fast
to the sterner discipline of Andrews and Stoddard and of that other more
conservative commentator (he too doubtless long since superseded) whose
name I blush to forget. I think in fine of Richard Pulling's small but
sincere academy as a consistent little protest against its big and easy
and quite out-distancing rival, the Columbia College school, apparently
in those days quite the favourite of fortune.




XVI


I must in some degree have felt it a charm there that we were not, under
his rule, inordinately prepared for "business," but were on the contrary
to remember that the taste of Cornelius Nepos in the air, even rather
stale though it may have been, had lacked the black bitterness marking
our next ordeal and that I conceive to have proceeded from some rank
predominance of the theory and practice of book-keeping. It had
consorted with this that we found ourselves, by I know not what
inconsequence, a pair of the "assets" of a firm; Messrs. Forest and
Quackenboss, who carried on business at the northwest corner of
Fourteenth Street and Sixth Avenue, having for the winter of 1854-5
taken our education in hand. As their establishment had the style, so I
was conscious at the time of its having the general stamp and sense, of
a shop--a shop of long standing, of numerous clients, of lively bustle
and traffic. The structure itself was to my recent recognition still
there and more than ever a shop, with improvements and extensions, but
dealing in other wares than those anciently and as I suppose then quite
freshly purveyed; so far at least as freshness was imputable to the
senior member of the firm, who had come down to our generation from a
legendary past and with a striking resemblance of head and general air
to Benjamin Franklin. Mr. Forest, under whose more particular attention
I languished, had lasted on from a plainer age and, having formed, by
the legend, in their youth, the taste of two or three of our New York
uncles--though for what it could have been goodness only knew--was still
of a _trempe_ to whack in the fine old way at their nephews and sons. I
see him aloft, benevolent and hard, mildly massive, in a black dress
coat and trousers and a white neckcloth that should have figured, if it
didn't, a frill, and on the highest rostrum of our experience, whence he
comes back to me as the dryest of all our founts of knowledge, though
quite again as a link with far-off manners and forms and as the most
"historic" figure we had ever had to do with. W. J., as I distinguish,
had in truth scarcely to do with him--W. J. lost again on upper floors,
in higher classes, in real pursuits, and connecting me, in an indirect
and almost deprecated manner, with a strange, curly, glossy, an anointed
and bearded, Mr. Quackenboss, the junior partner, who conducted the
classical department and never whacked--only sent down his subjects,
with every confidence, to his friend. I make out with clearness that Mr.
Forest was awful and arid, and yet that somehow, by the same stroke, we
didn't, under his sway, go in terror, only went exceedingly in want;
even if in want indeed of I scarce (for myself) know what, since it
might well have been enough for me, in so resounding an air, to escape
with nothing worse than a failure of thrill. If I didn't feel that
interest I must clearly not have inspired it, and I marvel afresh, under
these memories, at the few points at which I appear to have touched
constituted reality. That, however, is a different connection
altogether, and I read back into the one I have been noting much of the
chill, or at least the indifference, of a foreseen and foredoomed
detachment: it was during that winter that I began to live by
anticipation in another world and to feel our uneasy connection with New
York loosen beyond recovery. I remember for how many months, when the
rupture took place, we had been to my particular consciousness virtually
in motion; though I regain at the same time the impression of more
experience on the spot than had marked our small previous history: this,
however, a branch of the matter that I must for the moment brush aside.
For it would have been meanwhile odd enough to hold us in arrest a
moment--that quality of our situation that could suffer such elements as
those I have glanced at to take so considerably the place of education
as more usually and conventionally understood, and by that
understanding more earnestly mapped out; a deficiency, in the whole
thing, that I fail at all consistently to deplore, however--struck as I
am with the rare fashion after which, in any small victim of life, the
inward perversity may work.

It works by converting to its uses things vain and unintended, to the
great discomposure of their prepared opposites, which it by the same
stroke so often reduces to naught; with the result indeed that one may
most of all see it--so at least have I quite exclusively seen it, the
little life out for its chance--as proceeding by the inveterate process
of conversion. As I reconsider both my own and my brother's early
start--even his too, made under stronger propulsions--it is quite for me
as if the authors of our being and guardians of our youth had virtually
said to us but one thing, directed our course but by one word, though
constantly repeated: Convert, convert, convert! With which I have not
even the sense of any needed appeal in us for further apprehension of
the particular precious metal our chemistry was to have in view. I taste
again in that pure air no ghost of a hint, for instance, that the
precious metal was the refined gold of "success"--a reward of effort for
which I remember to have heard at home no good word, nor any sort of
word, ever faintly breathed. It was a case of the presumption that we
should hear words enough abundantly elsewhere; so that any dignity the
idea might claim was in the first place not worth insisting on, and in
the second might well be overstated. We were to convert and convert,
success--in the sense that was in the general air--or no success; and
simply everything that should happen to us, every contact, every
impression and every experience we should know, were to form our soluble
stuff; with only ourselves to thank should we remain unaware, by the
time our perceptions were decently developed, of the substance finally
projected and most desirable. That substance might be just consummately
Virtue, as a social grace and value--and as a matter furthermore on
which pretexts for ambiguity of view and of measure were as little as
possible called upon to flourish. This last luxury therefore quite
failed us, and we understood no whit the less what was suggested and
expected because of the highly liberal way in which the pill, if I may
call it so, was gilded: it had been made up--to emphasise my image--in
so bright an air of humanity and gaiety, of charity and humour. What I
speak of is the medium itself, of course, that we were most immediately
steeped in--I am glancing now at no particular turn of our young
attitude in it, and I can scarce sufficiently express how little it
could have conduced to the formation of prigs. Our father's prime
horror was of _them_--he only cared for virtue that was more or less
ashamed of itself; and nothing could have been of a happier whimsicality
than the mixture in him, and in all his walk and conversation, of the
strongest instinct for the human and the liveliest reaction from the
literal. The literal played in our education as small a part as it
perhaps ever played in any, and we wholesomely breathed inconsistency
and ate and drank contradictions. The presence of paradox was so bright
among us--though fluttering ever with as light a wing and as short a
flight as need have been--that we fairly grew used to allow, from an
early time, for the so many and odd declarations we heard launched, to
the extent of happily "discounting" them; the moral of all of which was
that we need never fear not to be good enough if we were only social
enough: a splendid meaning indeed being attached to the latter term.

Thus we had ever the amusement, since I can really call it nothing less,
of hearing morality, or moralism, as it was more invidiously worded,
made hay of in the very interest of character and conduct; these things
suffering much, it seemed, by their association with the
conscience--that is the _conscious_ conscience--the very home of the
literal, the haunt of so many pedantries. Pedantries, on all this
ground, were anathema; and if our dear parent had at all minded his not
being consistent, and had entertained about us generally less
passionate an optimism (not an easy but an arduous state in him
moreover,) he might have found it difficult to apply to the promotion of
our studies so free a suspicion of the inhumanity of Method. Method
certainly never quite raged among us; but it was our fortune
nevertheless that everything had its turn, and that such indifferences
were no more pedantic than certain rigours might perhaps have been; of
all of which odd notes of our situation there would, and possibly will,
be more to say--my present aim is really but to testify to what most
comes up for me to-day in the queer educative air I have been trying to
breathe again. That definite reflection is that if we had not had in us
to some degree the root of the matter no method, however confessedly or
aggressively "pedantic," would much have availed for us; and that since
we apparently did have it, deep down and inert in our small patches of
virgin soil, the fashion after which it struggled forth was an
experience as intense as any other and a record of as great a dignity.
It may be asked me, I recognise, of the root of "what" matter I so
complacently speak, and if I say "Why, of the matter of our having with
considerable intensity _proved_ educable, or, if you like better,
teachable, that is accessible to experience," it may again be retorted:
"That won't do for a decent account of a young consciousness; for think
of all the things that the failure of method, of which you make so
light, didn't put into yours; think of the splendid economy of a
real--or at least of a planned and attempted education, a 'regular
course of instruction'--and then think of the waste involved in the so
inferior substitute of which the pair of you were evidently victims." An
admonition this on which I brood, less, however, than on the still other
sense, rising from the whole retrospect, of my now feeling sure, of my
having mastered the particular history of just that waste--to the point
of its actually affecting me as blooming with interest, to the point
even of its making me ask myself how in the world, if the question is of
the injection of more things into the consciousness (as would seem the
case,) mine could have "done" with more: thanks to its small trick,
perhaps vicious I admit, of having felt itself from an early time almost
uncomfortably stuffed. I see my critic, by whom I mean my representative
of method at any price, take in this plea only to crush it with his
confidence--that without the signal effects of method one must have had
by an inexorable law to resort to shifts and ingenuities, and can
therefore only have been an artful dodger more or less successfully
dodging. I take full account of the respectability of the prejudice
against one or two of the uses to which the intelligence may at a pinch
be put--the criminal use in particular of falsifying its history, of
forging its records even, and of appearing greater than the traceable
grounds warrant. One can but fall back, none the less, on the particular
_un_traceability of grounds--when it comes to that: cases abound so in
which, with the grounds all there, the intelligence itself is not to be
identified. I contend for nothing moreover but the lively interest of
the view, and above all of the measure, of almost any mental history
after the fact. Of less interest, comparatively, is that sight of the
mind _before_--before the demonstration of the fact, that is, and while
still muffled in theories and presumptions (purple and fine linen, and
as such highly becoming though these be) of what shall prove best for
it.

Which doubtless too numerous remarks have been determined by my sense of
the tenuity of some of my clues: I had begun to count our wavering steps
from so very far back, and with a lively disposition, I confess, not to
miss even the vaguest of them. I can scarce indeed overstate the
vagueness that quite _had_ to attend a great number in presence of the
fact that our father, caring for our spiritual decency unspeakably more
than for anything else, anything at all that might be or might become
ours, would have seemed to regard this cultivation of it as profession
and career enough for us, had he but betrayed more interest in our
mastery of _any_ art or craft. It was not certainly that the profession
of virtue would have been anything less than abhorrent to him, but that,
singular though the circumstance, there were times when he might have
struck us as having after all more patience with it than with this, that
or the other more technical thrifty scheme. Of the beauty of his
dissimulated anxiety and tenderness on these and various other suchlike
heads, however, other examples will arise; for I see him now as fairly
afraid to recognise certain anxieties, fairly declining to dabble in the
harshness of practical precautions or impositions. The effect of his
attitude, so little thought out as shrewd or as vulgarly providential,
but in spite of this so socially and affectionally founded, could only
be to make life interesting to us at the worst, in default of making it
extraordinarily "paying." He had a theory that it would somehow or other
always be paying enough--and this much less by any poor conception of
our wants (for he delighted in our wants and so sympathetically and
sketchily and summarily wanted _for_ us) than by a happy and friendly,
though slightly nebulous, conception of our resources. Delighting ever
in the truth while generously contemptuous of the facts, so far as we
might make the difference--the facts having a way of being many and the
truth remaining but one--he held that there would always be enough;
since the truth, the true truth, was never ugly and dreadful, and we
didn't and wouldn't depart from it by any cruelty or stupidity (for he
wouldn't have had us stupid,) and might therefore depend on it for due
abundance even of meat and drink and raiment, even of wisdom and wit and
honour. It is too much to say that our so preponderantly humanised and
socialised adolescence was to make us look out for these things with a
subtle indirectness; but I return to my proposition that there may still
be a charm in seeing such hazards at work through a given, even if not
in a systematised, case. My cases are of course given, so that economy
of observation after the fact, as I have called it, becomes inspiring,
not less than the amusement, or whatever it may be, of the question of
what might happen, of what in point of fact did happen, to several very
towny and domesticated little persons, who were confirmed in their
towniness and fairly enriched in their sensibility, instead of being
chucked into a scramble or exposed on breezy uplands under the she-wolf
of competition and discipline. Perhaps any success that attended the
experiment--which was really, as I have hinted, no plotted thing at all,
but only an accident of accidents--proceeded just from the fact that the
small subjects, a defeated Romulus, a prematurely sacrificed Remus, had
in their very sensibility an asset, as we have come to say, a principle
of life and even of "fun." Perhaps on the other hand the success would
have been greater with less of that particular complication or
facilitation and more of some other which I shall be at a loss to
identify. What I find in my path happens to be the fact of the
sensibility, and from the light it sheds the curious, as also the
common, things that did from occasion to occasion play into it seem each
to borrow a separate and vivifying glow.

As at the Institution Vergnès and at Mr. Pulling Jenks's, however this
might be, so at "Forest's," or in other words at the more numerous
establishment of Messrs. Forest and Quackenboss, where we spent the
winter of 1854, reality, in the form of multitudinous mates, was to have
swarmed about me increasingly: at Forest's the prolonged roll-call in
the morning, as I sit in the vast bright crowded smelly smoky room, in
which rusty black stove-shafts were the nearest hint of architecture,
bristles with names, Hoes and Havemeyers, Stokeses, Phelpses, Colgates
and others, of a subsequently great New York salience. It was sociable
and gay, it was sordidly spectacular, one was then, by an inch or two, a
bigger boy--though with crushing superiorities in that line all round;
and when I wonder why the scene was sterile (which was what I took it
for at the worst) the reason glooms out again in the dreadful blight of
arithmetic, which affected me at the time as filling all the air. The
quantity imposed may not in fact have been positively gross, yet it is
what I most definitely remember--not, I mean, that I have retained the
dimmest notion of the science, but only of the dire image of our being
in one way or another always supposedly addressed to it. I recall
strange neighbours and deskfellows who, not otherwise too objectionable,
were uncanny and monstrous through their possession, cultivation,
imitation of ledgers, daybooks, double-entry, tall pages of figures,
interspaces streaked with oblique ruled lines that weirdly "balanced,"
whatever that might mean, and other like horrors. Nothing in truth is
more distinct to me than the tune to which they were, without exception,
at their ease on such ground--unless it be my general dazzled,
humiliated sense, through those years, of the common, the baffling,
mastery, all round me, of a hundred handy arts and devices. Everyone did
things and had things--everyone knew how, even when it was a question of
the small animals, the dormice and grasshoppers, or the hoards of food
and stationery, that they kept in their desks, just as they kept in
their heads such secrets for how to do sums--those secrets that I must
even then have foreseen I should even so late in life as this have
failed to discover. I may have known things, have by that time learnt a
few, myself, but I didn't know _that_--what I did know; whereas those
who surrounded me were all agog, to my vision, with the benefit of their
knowledge. I see them, in this light, across the years, fairly grin and
grimace with it; and the presumable vulgarity of some of them, certain
scattered shades of baseness still discernible, comes to me as but one
of the appearances of an abounding play of genius. Who was it I ever
thought stupid?--even when knowing, or at least feeling, that sundry
expressions of life or force, which I yet had no name for, represented
somehow art without grace, or (what after a fashion came to the same
thing) presence without type. All of which, I should add, didn't in the
least prevent my moving on the plane of the remarkable; so that if, as I
have noted, the general blank of consciousness, in the conditions of
that winter, rather tended to spread, this could perhaps have but had
for its best reason that I was fairly gorged with wonders. They were too
much of the same kind; the result, that is, of everyone's seeming to
know everything--to the effect, a little, that everything suffered by
it. There was a boy called Simpson my juxtaposition to whom I recall as
uninterruptedly close, and whose origin can only have been, I think,
quite immediately Irish--and Simpson, I feel sure, was a friendly and
helpful character. Yet even he reeked, to my sense, with strange
accomplishment--no single show of which but was accompanied in him by a
smart protrusion of the lower lip, a crude complacency of power, that
almost crushed me to sadness. It is as if I had passed in that sadness
most of those ostensibly animated months; an effect however doubtless in
some degree proceeding, for later appreciation, from the more
intelligible nearness of the time--it had brought me to the end of my
twelfth year; which helps not a little to turn it to prose. How I gave
to that state, in any case, such an air of occupation as to beguile not
only myself but my instructors--which I infer I did from their so
intensely letting me alone--I am quite at a loss to say; I have in truth
mainly the remembrance of _being_ consistently either ignored or
exquisitely considered (I know not which to call it;) even if without
the belief, which would explain it, that I passed for generally
"wanting" any more than for naturally odious. It was strange, at all
events--it could only have been--to be so stupid without being more
brutish and so perceptive without being more keen. Here were a case and
a problem to which no honest master with other and better cases could
have felt justified in giving time; he would have had at least to be
morbidly curious, and I recall from that sphere of rule no instance
whatever of the least refinement of inquiry. I should even probably have
missed one of these more flattering shades of attention had I missed
attention at all; but I think I was never really aware of how little I
got or how much I did without. I read back into the whole connection
indeed the chill, or at least the indifference, of a foreseen and
foredoomed detachment: I have noted how at this desperate juncture the
mild forces making for our conscious relief, pushing the door to Europe
definitely open, began at last to be effective. Nothing seemed to matter
at all but that I should become personally and incredibly acquainted
with Piccadilly and Richmond Park and Ham Common. I regain at the same
time the impression of more experience on the spot than had marked our
small previous history.

Pitiful as it looks to these ampler days the mere little fact that a
small court for recreation was attached to our academy added something
of a grace to life. We descended in relays, for "intermission," into a
paved and walled yard of the scantest size; the only provision for any
such privilege--not counting the street itself, of which, at the worst
of other conditions, we must have had free range--that I recover from
those years. The ground is built over now, but I could still figure, on
a recent occasion, our small breathing-space; together with my then
abject little sense that it richly sufficed--or rather, positively, that
nothing could have been more romantic. For within our limit we freely
conversed, and at nothing did I assist with more interest than at free
conversation. Certain boys hover before me, the biggest, the fairest,
the most worthy of freedom, dominating the scene and scattering upon
fifty subjects the most surprising lights. One of these heroes, whose
stature and complexion are still there for me to admire, did tricks of
legerdemain, with the scant apparatus of a handkerchief, a key, a
pocket-knife--as to some one of which it is as fresh as yesterday that I
ingenuously invited him to show me how to do it, and then, on his
treating me with scorn, renewed without dignity my fond solicitation.
Fresher even than yesterday, fadelessly fresh for me at this hour, is
the cutting remark thereupon of another boy, who certainly wasn't
Simpson and whose identity is lost for me in his mere inspired
authority: "Oh, oh, oh, I should think you'd be too proud--!" I had
neither been too proud nor so much as conceived that one might be, but I
remember well how it flashed on me with this that I had failed thereby
of a high luxury or privilege--which the whole future, however, might
help me to make up for. To what extent it _has_ helped is another
matter, but so fine was the force of the suggestion that I think I have
never in all the years made certain returns upon my spirit without again
feeling the pang from the cool little voice of the Fourteenth Street
yard. Such was the moral exercise it at least allowed us room for. It
also allowed us room, to be just, for an inordinate consumption of hot
waffles retailed by a benevolent black "auntie" who presided, with her
husband's aid as I remember, at a portable stove set up in a passage or
recess opening from the court; to which we flocked and pushed, in a
merciless squeeze, with all our coppers, and the products of which, the
oblong farinaceous compound, faintly yet richly brown, stamped and
smoking, not crisp nor brittle, but softly absorbent of the syrup dabbed
upon it for a finish, revealed to me I for a long time, even for a very
long time supposed, the highest pleasure of sense. We stamped about, we
freely conversed, we ate sticky waffles by the hundred--I recall no
worse acts of violence unless I count as such our intermissional rushes
to Pynsent's of the Avenue, a few doors off, in the particular interest
of a confection that ran the waffle close, as the phrase is, for
popularity, while even surpassing it for stickiness. Pynsent's was
higher up in the row in which Forest's had its front--other and dearer
names have dropped from me, but Pynsent's adheres with all the force of
the strong saccharine principle. This principle, at its highest, we
conceived, was embodied in small amber-coloured mounds of chopped
cocoanut or whatever other substance, if a finer there be; profusely,
lusciously endued and distributed on small tin trays in the manner of
haycocks in a field. We acquired, we appropriated, we transported, we
enjoyed them, they fairly formed perhaps, after all, our highest
enjoyment; but with consequences to our pockets--and I speak of those
other than financial, with an intimacy, a reciprocity of contact at any,
or at every, personal point, that I lose myself in the thought of.




XVII


I lose myself, of a truth, under the whole pressure of the spring of
memory proceeding from recent revisitings and recognitions--the action
of the fact that time until lately had spared hereabouts, and may still
be sparing, in the most exceptional way, by an anomaly or a mercy of the
rarest in New York, a whole cluster of landmarks, leaving me to "spot"
and verify, right and left, the smallest preserved particulars. These
things, at the pressure, flush together again, interweave their pattern
and quite thrust it at me, the absurd little fusion of images, for a
history or a picture of the time--the background of which I see after
all so much less as the harsh Sixth Avenue corner than as many other
matters. Those scant shades claimed us but briefly and superficially,
and it comes back to me that oddly enough, in the light of autumn
afternoons, our associates, the most animated or at any rate the best
"put in" little figures of our landscape, were not our comparatively
obscure schoolmates, who seem mostly to have swum out of our ken between
any day and its morrow. Our other companions, those we practically knew
"at home," ignored our school, having better or worse of their own, but
peopled somehow for us the social scene, which, figuring there for me in
documentary vividness, bristles with Van Burens, Van Winkles, De
Peysters, Costers, Senters, Norcoms, Robinsons (these last composing
round a stone-throwing "Eugene,") Wards, Hunts and _tutti quanti_--to
whose ranks I must add our invariable Albert, before-mentioned, and who
swarm from up and down and east and west, appearing to me surely to have
formed a rich and various society. Our salon, it is true, was mainly the
street, loose and rude and crude in those days at best--though with a
rapid increase of redeeming features, to the extent to which the spread
of micaceous brown stone could redeem: as exhibited especially in the
ample face of the Scotch Presbyterian church promptly rising just
opposite our own peculiar row and which it now marks for me somewhat
grimly a span of life to have seen laboriously rear itself, continuously
flourish and utterly disappear. While in construction it was only less
interesting than the dancing-academy of Mr. Edward Ferrero, slightly
west of it and forming with it, in their embryonic stage, a large and
delightfully dangerous adjunct to our playground, though with the
distinction of coming much to surpass it for interest in the final
phase. While we clambered about on ladders and toyed with the peril of
unfloored abysses, while we trespassed and pried and pervaded,
snatching a scant impression from sorry material enough, clearly, the
sacred edifice enjoyed a credit beyond that of the profane; but when
both were finished and opened we flocked to the sound of the fiddle more
freely, it need scarce be said, than to that of the psalm. "Freely"
indeed, in our particular case, scarce expresses the latter relation;
since our young liberty in respect to church-going was absolute and we
might range at will, through the great city, from one place of worship
and one form of faith to another, or might on occasion ignore them all
equally, which was what we mainly did; whereas we rallied without a
break to the halls of Ferrero, a view of the staringly and, as I
supposed dazzlingly, frescoed walls, the internal economy, the high
amenity, the general æsthetic and social appeal, of which still hangs in
its wealth before me. Dr. McElroy, uplifting tight-closed eyes, strange
long-drawn accents and gaunt scraggy chin, squirming and swaying and
cushion-thumping in _his_ only a shade more chastely adorned temple, is
distinct enough too--just as we enjoyed this bleak intensity the more,
to my personal vision, through the vague legend (and no legend was too
vague for me to cherish) of his being the next pastor in succession to
the one under whom our mother, thereto predirected by our good
greatgrandfather, Alexander Robertson already named, who was nothing if
not Scotch and Presbyterian and authoritative, as his brave old portrait
by the elder Jarves attests, had "sat" before her marriage; the marriage
so lamentedly diverting her indeed from this tradition that, to mark the
rueful rupture, it had invoked, one evening, with the aid of India
muslin and a wondrous gold headband, in the maternal, the Washington
Square "parlours," but the secular nuptial consecration of the then
Mayor of the city--I think Mr. Varick.

We progeny were of course after this mild convulsion not at all in the
fold; yet it strikes me as the happy note of a simple age that we were
practically, of a Sunday at least, wherever we might have chosen to
enter: since, going forth hand in hand into the sunshine (and I connect
myself here with my next younger, not with my elder, brother, whose
orbit was other and larger) we sampled, in modern phrase, as small
unprejudiced inquirers obeying their inspiration, any resort of any
congregation detected by us; doing so, I make out moreover, with a sense
of earnest provision for any contemporary challenge. "What church do you
go to?"--the challenge took in childish circles that searching form; of
the form it took among our elders my impression is more vague. To which
I must add as well that our "fending" in this fashion for ourselves
didn't so prepare us for invidious remark--remark I mean upon our
pewless state, which involved, to my imagination, much the same
discredit that a houseless or a cookless would have done--as to hush in
my breast the appeal to our parents, not for religious instruction (of
which we had plenty, and of the most charming and familiar) but simply
for instruction (a very different thing) as to where we should say we
"went," in our world, under cold scrutiny or derisive comment. It was
colder than any criticism, I recall, to hear our father reply that we
could plead nothing less than the whole privilege of Christendom and
that there was no communion, even that of the Catholics, even that of
the Jews, even that of the Swedenborgians, from which we need find
ourselves excluded. With the freedom we enjoyed our dilemma clearly
amused him: it would have been impossible, he affirmed, to be
theologically more _en règle_. How as mere detached unaccompanied
infants we enjoyed such impunity of range and confidence of welcome is
beyond comprehension save by the light of the old manners and
conditions, the old local bonhomie, the comparatively primal innocence,
the absence of complications; with the several notes of which last
beatitude my reminiscence surely shines. It was the theory of the time
and place that the young, were they but young enough, could take
publicly no harm; to which adds itself moreover, and touchingly enough,
all the difference of the old importances. It wasn't doubtless that the
social, or call it simply the human, position of the child was higher
than to-day--a circumstance not conceivable; it was simply that other
dignities and values and claims, other social and human positions, were
less definite and settled, less prescriptive and absolute. A rich
sophistication is after all a gradual growth, and it would have been
sophisticated to fear for us, before such bright and vacant vistas, the
perils of the way or to see us received anywhere even with the irony of
patronage. We hadn't in fact seats of honour, but that justice was done
us--that is that we were placed to our advantage--I infer from my having
liked so to "go," even though my grounds may have been but the love of
the _exhibition_ in general, thanks to which figures, faces, furniture,
sounds, smells and colours became for me, wherever enjoyed, and enjoyed
most where most collected, a positive little orgy of the senses and riot
of the mind. Let me at the same time make the point that--such may be
the snobbery of extreme youth--I not only failed quite to rise to the
parental reasoning, but made out in it rather a certain sophistry; such
a prevarication for instance as if we had habitually said we kept the
carriage we observably didn't keep, kept it because we sent when we
wanted one to University Place, where Mr. Hathorn had his
livery-stable: a connection, this last, promoted by my father's
frequent need of the aid to circulate (his walks were limited through an
injury received in youth) and promoting in turn and at a touch, to my
consciousness, the stir of small, the smallest remembered things. I
recall the adventure, no infrequent one, of being despatched to Mr.
Hathorn to bespeak a conveyance, and the very air and odour, the genial
warmth, at a fine steaming Irish pitch, of the stables and their
stamping and backing beasts, their resounding boardedness, their chairs
tipped up at such an angle for lifted heels, a pair of which latter seek
the floor again, at my appeal, as those of big bearded Mr. Hathorn
himself: an impression enriched by the drive home in lolling and bumping
possession of the great vehicle and associated further with Sunday
afternoons in spring, with the question of distant Harlem and remoter
Bloomingdale, with the experience at one of these junctures of far-away
Hoboken, if it wasn't Williamsburg, which fits in fancifully somewhere;
when the carriage was reinforced by a ferry and the ferry by something,
something to my present vision very dim and dusty and archaic, something
quite ragged and graceless, in the nature of a public tea-garden and
ices. The finest link here, however, is, for some reason, with the New
York Hotel, and thereby with Albany uncles; thereby also with Mr.
Hathorn in person waiting and waiting expensively on his box before the
house and somehow felt as attuned to Albany uncles even as Mrs. Cannon
had subtly struck me as being.

Intenser than these vague shades meanwhile is my vision of the halls of
Ferrero--where the orgy of the senses and even the riot of the mind, of
which I have just spoken, must quite literally have led me more of a
dance than anywhere. Let this sketch of a lost order note withal that
under so scant a general provision for infant exercise, as distinguished
from infant ease, our hopping and sliding in tune had to be deemed
urgent. It was the sense for this form of relief that clearly was
general, superseding as the ampler Ferrero scene did previous limited
exhibitions; even those, for that matter, coming back to me in the
ancient person of M. Charriau--I guess at the writing of his name--whom
I work in but confusedly as a professional visitor, a subject gaped at
across a gulf of fear, in one of our huddled schools; all the more that
I perfectly evoke him as resembling, with a difference or two, the
portraits of the aged Voltaire, and that he had, fiddle in hand and
_jarret tendu_, incited the young agility of our mother and aunt. Edward
Ferrero was another matter; in the prime of life, good-looking, romantic
and moustachio'd, he was suddenly to figure, on the outbreak of the
Civil War, as a General of volunteers--very much as if he had been one
of Bonaparte's improvised young marshals; in anticipation of which,
however, he wasn't at all fierce or superior, to my remembrance, but
most kind to sprawling youth, in a charming man of the world fashion and
as if _we_ wanted but a touch to become also men of the world.
Remarkably good-looking, as I say, by the measure of that period, and
extraordinarily agile--he could so gracefully leap and bound that his
bounding into the military saddle, such occasion offering, had all the
felicity, and only wanted the pink fleshings, of the circus--he was
still more admired by the mothers, with whom he had to my eyes a most
elegant relation, than by the pupils; among all of whom, at the frequent
and delightful soirées, he caused trays laden with lucent syrups
repeatedly to circulate. The scale of these entertainments, as I figured
it, and the florid frescoes, just damp though they were with newness,
and the free lemonade, and the freedom of remark, equally great, with
the mothers, were the lavish note in him--just as the fact that he never
himself fiddled, but was followed, over the shining parquet, by
attendant fiddlers, represented doubtless a shadow the less on his later
dignity, so far as that dignity was compassed. Dignity marked in full
measure even at the time the presence of his sister Madame Dubreuil, a
handsome authoritative person who instructed us equally, in fact
preponderantly, and who, though comparatively not sympathetic, so
engaged, physiognomically, my wondering interest, that I hear to this
hour her shrill Franco-American accent: "Don't look at _me_, little
boy--look at my feet." I see them now, these somewhat fat members,
beneath the uplifted skirt, encased in "bronzed" slippers, without heels
but attached, by graceful cross-bands over her white stockings, to her
solid ankles--an emphatic sign of the time; not less than I recover my
surprised sense of their supporting her without loss of balance,
substantial as she was, in the "first position"; her command of which,
her ankles clapped close together and her body very erect, was so
perfect that even with her toes, right and left, fairly turning the
corner backward, she never fell prone on her face.

It consorted somehow with this wealth of resource in her that she
appeared at the soirées, or at least at the great fancy-dress soirée in
which the historic truth of my experience, free lemonade and all, is
doubtless really shut up, as the "genius of California," a dazzling
vision of white satin and golden flounces--her brother meanwhile
maintaining that more distinctively European colour which I feel to have
been for my young presumption the convincing essence of the scene in the
character of a mousquetaire de Louis Quinze, highly consonant with his
type. There hovered in the background a flushed, full-chested and
tawnily short-bearded M. Dubreuil, who, as a singer of the heavy order,
at the Opera, carried us off into larger things still--the Opera having
at last about then, after dwelling for years, down town, in shifty tents
and tabernacles, set up its own spacious pavilion and reared its head as
the Academy of Music: all at the end, or what served for the end, of our
very street, where, though it wasn't exactly near and Union Square
bristled between, I could yet occasionally gape at the great bills
beside the portal, in which M. Dubreuil always so serviceably came in at
the bottom of the cast. A subordinate artist, a "grand utility" at the
best, I believe, and presently to become, on that scene, slightly ragged
I fear even in its freshness, permanent stage-manager or, as we say
nowadays, producer, he had yet eminently, to my imagination, the richer,
the "European" value; especially for instance when our air thrilled, in
the sense that our attentive parents re-echoed, with the visit of the
great Grisi and the great Mario, and I seemed, though the art of
advertisement was then comparatively so young and so chaste, to see our
personal acquaintance, as he could almost be called, thickly sandwiched
between them. Such was one's strange sense for the connections of things
that they drew out the halls of Ferrero till these too seemed fairly to
resound with Norma and Lucrezia Borgia, as if opening straight upon the
stage, and Europe, by the stroke, had come to us in such force that we
had but to enjoy it on the spot. That could never have been more the
case than on the occasion of my assuming, for the famous fancy-ball--not
at the operatic Academy, but at the dancing-school, which came so nearly
to the same thing--the dress of a débardeur, whatever that might be,
which carried in its puckered folds of dark green relieved with scarlet
and silver such an exotic fragrance and appealed to me by such a legend.
The legend had come round to us, it was true, by way of Albany, whence
we learned at the moment of our need, that one of the adventures, one of
the least lamentable, of our cousin Johnny had been his figuring as a
débardeur at some Parisian revel; the elegant evidence of which, neatly
packed, though with but vague instructions for use, was helpfully sent
on to us. The instructions for use were in fact so vague that I was
afterward to become a bit ruefully conscious of having sadly
dishonoured, or at least abbreviated, my model. I fell, that is I stood,
short of my proper form by no less than half a leg; the essence of the
débardeur being, it appeared, that he emerged at the knees, in white
silk stockings and with neat calves, from the beribboned breeches which
I artlessly suffered to flap at my ankles. The discovery, after the
fact, was disconcerting--yet had been best made withal, too late; for
it would have seemed, I conceive, a less monstrous act to attempt to
lengthen my legs than to shorten Johnny's _culotte_. The trouble had
been that we hadn't really known what a débardeur _was_, and I am not
sure indeed that I know to this day. It had been more fatal still that
even fond Albany couldn't tell us.




XVIII


I have nevertheless the memory of a restless relish of all that time--by
which I mean of those final months of New York, even with so scant a
record of other positive successes to console me. I had but one success,
always--that of endlessly supposing, wondering, admiring: I was sunk in
that luxury, which had never yet been so great, and it might well make
up for anything. It made up perfectly, and more particularly as the
stopgap as which I have already defined it, for the scantness of the
period immediately round us; since how could I have wanted richer when
the limits of reality, as I advanced upon them, seemed ever to recede
and recede? It is true that but the other day, on the scene revisited, I
was to be struck rather as by their weird immobility: there on the north
side, still untenanted after sixty years, a tremendous span in the life
of New York, was the vacant lot, undiminished, in which a friendly goat
or two used to browse, whom we fed perversely with scraps of paper, just
as perversely appreciated indeed, through the relaxed wooden palings.
There hovers for me an impression of the glass roofs of a florist, a
suffered squatter for a while; but florists and goats have alike
disappeared and the barrenness of the place is as sordid as only
untended gaps in great cities can seem. One of its boundaries, however,
still breathes associations--the home of the Wards, the more eastward of
a pair of houses then and still isolated has remained the same through
all vicissitudes, only now quite shabbily mellow and, like everything
else, much smaller than one had remembered it; yet this too without
prejudice to the large, the lustrous part played in our prospect by that
interesting family. I saddle their mild memory a bit "subjectively"
perhaps with the burden of that character--making out that they were
interesting really in spite of themselves and as unwittingly as M.
Jourdain expressed himself in prose; owing their wild savour as they did
to that New England stamp which we took to be strong upon them and no
other exhibition of which we had yet enjoyed. It made them different,
made them, in their homely grace, rather aridly romantic: I pored in
those days over the freshness of the Franconia Stories of the brothers
Abbott, then immediately sequent to the sweet Rollo series and even more
admired; and there hung about the Wards, to my sense, that atmosphere of
apples and nuts and cheese, of pies and jack-knives and "squrruls," of
domestic Bible-reading and attendance at "evening lecture," of the fear
of parental discipline and the cultivated art of dodging it, combined
with great personal toughness and hardihood, an almost envied liability
to warts on hard brown hands, a familiarity with garments domestically
wrought, a brave rusticity in short that yet hadn't prevented the
annexation of whole tracts of town life unexplored by ourselves and
achieved by the brothers since their relatively recent migration from
Connecticut--which State in general, with the city of Hartford in
particular, hung as a hazy, fruity, rivery background, the very essence
of Indian summer, in the rear of their discourse. Three in number,
Johnny and Charley and Freddy, with castigating elders, even to the
second and third generation back, dimly discerned through closed
window-panes, they didn't at all haunt the halls of Ferrero--it was a
part of their homely grace and their social tone, if not of their want
of the latter, that this couldn't in the least be in question for them;
on the other hand they frequented, Charley and Freddy at least, the Free
School, which was round in Thirteenth Street--Johnny, the eldest, having
entered the Free Academy, an institution that loomed large to us and
that I see as towered or castellated or otherwise impressively
embellished in vague vignettes, in stray representations, perhaps only
of the grey schoolbook order, which are yet associated for me with those
fond images of lovely ladies, "hand-painted," decorating at either end
the interior of the old omnibusses. We must have been in relation with
no other feeders at the public trough of learning--I can't account
otherwise for the glamour as of envied privilege and strange experience
that surrounded the Wards; they mixed, to the great sharpening of the
edge of their wit, in the wild life _of_ the people, beside which the
life at Mr. Pulling Jenks's and even at the Institution Vergnès was
colourless and commonplace. Somehow they were of the people, and still
were full of family forms--which seemed, one dimly made out through the
false perspective of all the cousinships, the stronger and clearer note
of New England; the note that had already determined a shy yearning
under perusal of the Rollo and Franconia chronicles. The special mark of
these friends was perhaps however that of being socially young while
they were annually old; little Freddy in particular, very short, very
inured and very popular, though less curiously wrinkled about eyes and
mouth than Charley, confessed to monstrous birthdays even while
crouching or hopping, even while racing or roaring, as a high
superiority in the games of the street prescribed. It was to strike me
later on, when reading or hearing of young Americans of those parts who
had turned "hard" or reckless by reaction from excessive discipline,
theologic and economic, and had gone to sea or to California or to the
"bad," that Freddy and Charley were typical of the race, even if their
fortunes had taken, as I hoped, a happier form. That, I said to myself
for the interest of it, _that_, the stuff of the Wards, their homely
grace, was all New England--so far at least as New England wasn't
Emerson and Margaret Fuller and Mr. Channing and the "best Boston"
families. Such, in small very plastic minds, is the intensity, if not
the value, of early impressions.

And yet how can such visions not have paled in the southern glow of the
Norcoms, who had lately arrived _en masse_ from Louisville and had
improvised a fine old Kentucky home in the last house of our row--the
one to be occupied so differently, after their strange and precipitate
flight, as I dimly make out, by the Ladies of the Sacred Heart; those
who presently, if I mistake not, moved out to Bloomingdale, if they were
not already in part established there. Next us westward were the Ogdens,
three slim and fair sisters, who soared far above us in age and general
amenity; then came the Van Winkles, two sisters, I think, and a
brother--he much the most serious and judicious, as well as the most
educated, of our friends; and so at last the Norcoms, during their brief
but concentrated, most vivid and momentous, reign, a matter, as I recall
it, of a couple of breathless winters. We were provided by their
presence with as happy a foil as we could have wished to the plainness
and dryness of the Wards; their homely grace was all their own and was
also embodied in three brothers, Eugene, Reginald, Albert, whose ages
would have corresponded, I surmise, with those of Johnny, Charley and
Freddy if these latter hadn't, in their way, as I have hinted, defied
any close notation. Elder sons--there were to my recollection no
daughters--moved too as with their heads in the clouds; notably
"Stiffy," eldest of all, whom we supposed gorgeous, who affected us as
sublime and unapproachable and to whom we thus applied the term in use
among us before we had acquired for reference to such types the notion
of the _nuance_, the dandy, the dude, the masher. (Divided I was, I
recall, between the dread and the glory of being so greeted, "Well,
Stiffy--!" as a penalty of the least attempt at personal adornment.) The
higher intensity for our sense of the Norcoms came from the large, the
lavish, ease of their hospitality; whereas our intercourse with the
Wards was mainly in the street or at most the "yard"--and it was a
wonder how intimacy _could_ to that degree consort with publicity. A
glazed southern gallery, known to its occupants as the "poo'ch" and to
the rake of which their innermost penetralia seemed ever to stand open,
encompasses my other memories. Everything took place on the poo'ch,
including the free, quite the profuse, consumption of hot cakes and
molasses, including even the domestic manufacture of sausages, testified
to by a strange machine that was worked like a handorgan and by the
casual halves, when not the wholes, of stark stiff hogs fresh from
Kentucky stores. We must have been for a time constantly engaged with
this delightful group, who never ceased to welcome us or to feed us, and
yet of the presence of whose members under other roofs than their own,
by a return of hospitality received, I retain no image. They didn't
count and didn't grudge--the sausage-mill kept turning and the molasses
flowing for all who came; that was the expression of their southern
grace, especially embodied in Albert, my exact contemporary and chosen
friend (Reggie had but crushed my fingers under the hinge of a closing
door, the mark of which act of inadvertence I was to carry through
life,) who had profuse and tightly-crinkled hair, and the moral of whose
queer little triangular brown teeth, casting verily a shade on my
attachment to him, was pointed for me, not by himself, as the error of a
Kentucky diet.

The great Kentucky error, however, had been the introduction into a free
State of two pieces of precious property which our friends were to fail
to preserve, the pair of affectionate black retainers whose presence
contributed most to their exotic note. We revelled in the fact that Davy
and Aunt Sylvia (pronounced An'silvy,) a light-brown lad with
extraordinarily shining eyes and his straight, grave, deeper-coloured
mother, not radiant as to anything but her vivid turban, had been born
and kept in slavery of the most approved pattern and such as this
intensity of their condition made them a joy, a joy to the curious mind,
to consort with. Davy mingled in our sports and talk, he enriched, he
adorned them with a personal, a pictorial lustre that none of us could
emulate, and servitude in the absolute thus did more for him socially
than we had ever seen done, above stairs or below, for victims of its
lighter forms. What was not our dismay therefore when we suddenly
learnt--it must have blown right up and down the street--that mother and
son had fled, in the dead of night, from bondage? had taken advantage of
their visit to the North simply to leave the house and not return,
covering their tracks, successfully disappearing. They had never been
for us so beautifully slaves as in this achievement of their freedom;
for they did brilliantly achieve it--they escaped, on northern soil,
beyond recall or recovery. I think we had already then, on the spot, the
sense of some degree of presence at the making of history; the question
of what persons of colour and of their condition might or mightn't do
was intensely in the air; this was exactly the season of the freshness
of Mrs. Stowe's great novel. It must have come out at the moment of our
fondest acquaintance with our neighbours, though I have no recollection
of hearing them remark upon it--any remark they made would have been
sure to be so strong. I suspect they hadn't read it, as they certainly
wouldn't have allowed it in the house; any more indeed than they had
read or were likely ever to read any other work of fiction; I doubt
whether the house contained a printed volume, unless its head had had in
hand a law-book or so: I to some extent recover Mr. Norcom as a lawyer
who had come north on important, difficult business, on contentious,
precarious grounds--a large bald political-looking man, very loose and
ungirt, just as his wife was a desiccated, depressed lady who mystified
me by always wearing her nightcap, a feebly-frilled but tightly-tied and
unmistakable one, and the compass of whose maternal figure beneath a
large long collarless cape or mantle defined imperfectly for me of
course its connection with the further increase of Albert's little
brothers and sisters, there being already, by my impression, two or
three of these in the background. Had Davy and An'silvy at least read
Uncle Tom?--that question might well come up for us, with the certainty
at any rate that they ignored him less than their owners were doing.
These latter good people, who had been so fond of their humble
dependents and supposed this affection returned, were shocked at such
ingratitude, though I remember taking a vague little inward Northern
comfort in their inability, in their discreet decision, not to raise the
hue and cry. Wasn't one even just dimly aware of the heavy hush that, in
the glazed gallery, among the sausages and the johnny-cakes, had
followed the first gasp of resentment? I think the honest Norcoms were
in any case astonished, let alone being much incommoded; just as _we_
were, for that matter, when the genial family itself, installed so at
its ease, failed us with an effect of abruptness, simply ceased, in
their multitude, to be there. I don't remember their going, nor any
pangs of parting; I remember only knowing with wonderment that they had
gone, that obscurity had somehow engulfed them; and how afterwards, in
the light of later things, memory and fancy attended them, figured their
history as the public complication grew and the great intersectional
plot thickened; felt even, absurdly and disproportionately, that they
had helped one to "know Southerners." The slim, the sallow, the
straight-haired and dark-eyed Eugene in particular haunted my
imagination; he had not been my comrade of election--he was too much my
senior; but I cherished the thought of the fine fearless young
fire-eater he would have become and, when the War had broken out, I know
not what dark but pitying vision of him stretched stark after a battle.

All of which sounds certainly like a meagre range--which heaven knows it
was; but with a plea for the several attics, already glanced at, and the
positive æsthetic reach that came to us through those dim resorts, quite
worth making. They were scattered and they constituted on the part of
such of our friends as had license to lead us up to them a ground of
authority and glory proportioned exactly to the size of the field. This
extent was at cousin Helen's, with a large house and few inmates, vast
and free, so that no hospitality, under the eaves, might have matched
that offered us by the young Albert--if only that heir of all the ages
had had rather more imagination. He had, I think, as little as was
possible--which would have counted in fact for an unmitigated blank had
not W. J., among us, on that spot and elsewhere, supplied this motive
force in any quantity required. He imagined--that was the point--the
comprehensive comedies we were to prepare and to act; comprehensive by
the fact that each one of us, even to the God-fearing but
surreptitiously law-breaking Wards, was in fairness to be enabled to
figure. Not one of us but was somehow to be provided with a part, though
I recall my brother as the constant comic star. The attics were thus in
a word our respective temples of the drama--temples in which the stage,
the green-room and the wardrobe, however, strike me as having consumed
most of our margin. I remember, that is, up and down the street--and the
association is mainly with its far westward reaches--so much more
preparation than performance, so much more conversation and costume than
active rehearsal, and, on the part of some of us, especially doubtless
on my own, so much more eager denudation, both of body and mind, than of
achieved or inspired assumption. We shivered unclad and impatient both
as to our persons and to our aims, waiting alike for ideas and for
breeches; we were supposed to make our dresses no less than to create
our characters, and our material was in each direction apt to run short.
I remember how far ahead of us my brother seemed to keep, announcing a
"motive," producing a figure, throwing off into space conceptions that I
could stare at across the interval but couldn't appropriate; so that my
vision of him in these connections is not so much of his coming toward
me, or toward any of us, as of his moving rapidly away in fantastic garb
and with his back turned, as if to perform to some other and more
assured public. There were indeed other publics, publics downstairs, who
glimmer before me seated at the open folding-doors of ancient parlours,
but all from the point of view of an absolute supernumerary, more or
less squashed into the wing but never coming on. Who were the copious
Hunts?--whose ample house, on the north side, toward Seventh Avenue,
still stands, next or near that of the De Peysters, so that I perhaps
confound some of the attributes of each, though clear as to the blond
Beekman, or "Beek," of the latter race, not less than to the robust
George and the stout, the very stout, Henry of the former, whom I see
bounding before a gathered audience for the execution of a _pas seul_,
clad in a garment of "Turkey red" fashioned by his own hands and giving
way at the seams, to a complete absence of _dessous_, under the strain
of too fine a figure: this too though I make out in those connections,
that is in the twilight of Hunt and De Peyster garrets, our command of a
comparative welter of draperies; so that I am reduced to the surmise
that Henry indeed had contours.

I recover, further, some sense of the high places of the Van Winkles,
but think of them as pervaded for us by the upper air of the
proprieties, the proprieties that were so numerous, it would appear,
when once one had had a glimpse of them, rather than by the crude fruits
of young improvisation. Wonderful must it clearly have been still to fed
amid laxities and vaguenesses such a difference of _milieux_ and, as
they used to say, of atmospheres. This was a word of those
days--atmospheres were a thing to recognise and cultivate, for people
really wanted them, gasped for them; which was why they took them, on
the whole, on easy terms, never exposing them, under an apparent flush,
to the last analysis. Did we at any rate really vibrate to one social
tone after another, or are these adventures for me now but fond
imaginations? No, we vibrated--or I'll be hanged, as I may say, if _I_
didn't; little as I could tell it or may have known it, little as anyone
else may have known. There were shades, after all, in our democratic
order; in fact as I brood back to it I recognise oppositions the
sharpest, contrasts the most intense. It wasn't given to us all to have
a social tone, but the Costers surely had one and kept it in constant
use; whereas the Wards, next door to them, were possessed of no approach
to any, and indeed had the case been other, had they had such a
consciousness, would never have employed it, would have put it away on a
high shelf, as they put the last-baked pie, out of Freddy's and
Charley's reach--heaven knows what _they_ two would have done with it.
The Van Winkles on the other hand were distinctly so provided, but with
the special note that their provision was one, so to express it, with
their educational, their informational, call it even their professional:
Mr. Van Winkle, if I mistake not, was an eminent lawyer, and the note of
our own house was the absence of any profession, to the quickening of
our general as distinguished from our special sensibility. There was no
Turkey red among those particular neighbours at all events, and if there
had been it wouldn't have gaped at the seams. I didn't then know it, but
I sipped at a fount of culture; in the sense, that is, that, our
connection with the house being through Edgar, he knew about
things--inordinately, as it struck me. So, for that matter, did little
public Freddy Ward; but the things one of them knew about differed
wholly from the objects of knowledge of the other: all of which was
splendid for giving one exactly a sense of things. It intimated more and
more how many such there would be altogether. And part of the interest
was that while Freddy gathered his among the wild wastes Edgar walked in
a regular maze of culture. I didn't then know about culture, but Edgar
must promptly have known. This impression was promoted by his moving in
a distant, a higher sphere of study, amid scenes vague to me; I dimly
descry him as appearing at Jenks's and vanishing again, as if even that
hadn't been good enough--though I may be here at fault, and indeed can
scarce say on what arduous heights I supposed him, as a day-scholar, to
dwell. I took the unknown always easily for the magnificent and was sure
only of the limits of what I saw. It wasn't that the boys swarming for
us at school were not often, to my vision, unlimited, but that those
peopling our hours of ease, as I have already noted, were almost
inveterately so--they seemed to describe always, out of view, so much
larger circles. I linger thus on Edgar by reason of its having somehow
seemed to us that he described--was it at Doctor Anthon's?--the largest
of all. If there was a bigger place than Doctor Anthon's it was there he
would have been. I break down, as to the detail of the matter, in any
push toward vaster suppositions. But let me cease to stir this
imponderable dust.




XIX


I try at least to recover here, however, some closer notation of W. J.'s
aspects--yet only with the odd effect of my either quite losing him or
but apprehending him again at seated play with his pencil under the
lamp. When I see him he is intently, though summarily, rapidly drawing,
his head critically balanced and his eyebrows working, and when I don't
see him it is because I have resignedly relinquished him. I can't have
been often for him a deprecated, still less an actively rebuffed suitor,
because, as I say again, such aggressions were so little in order for
me; but I remember that on my once offering him my company in
conditions, those of some planned excursion, in which it wasn't desired,
his putting the question of our difference at rest, with the minimum of
explanation, by the responsible remark: "_I_ play with boys who curse
and swear!" I had sadly to recognise that I didn't, that I couldn't
pretend to have come to that yet--and truly, as I look back, either the
unadvisedness and inexpertness of my young contemporaries on all that
ground must have been complete (an interesting note on our general
manners after all,) or my personal failure to grasp must have been.
Besides which I wonder scarce less now than I wondered then in just what
company my brother's privilege was exercised; though if he had but
richly wished to be discouraging he quite succeeded. It wasn't that I
mightn't have been drawn to the boys in question, but that I simply
wasn't qualified. All boys, I rather found, were difficult to play
with--unless it was that they rather found _me_; but who would have been
so difficult as these? They account but little, moreover, I make out,
for W. J.'s eclipses; so that I take refuge easily enough in the memory
of my own pursuits, absorbing enough at times to have excluded other
views. I also plied the pencil, or to be more exact the pen--even if
neither implement critically, rapidly or summarily. I was so often
engaged at that period, it strikes me, in literary--or, to be more
precise in dramatic, accompanied by pictorial composition--that I must
again and again have delightfully lost myself. I had not on any occasion
personally succeeded, amid our theatric strife, in reaching the
footlights; but how could I have doubted, nevertheless, with our large
theatrical experience, of the nature, and of my understanding, of the
dramatic form? I sacrificed to it with devotion--by the aid of certain
quarto sheets of ruled paper bought in Sixth Avenue for the purpose (my
father's store, though I held him a great fancier of the article in
general, supplied but the unruled;) grateful in particular for the happy
provision by which each fourth page of the folded sheet was left blank.
When the drama itself had covered three pages the last one, over which I
most laboured, served for the illustration of what I had verbally
presented. Every scene had thus its explanatory picture, and as each
act--though I am not positively certain I arrived at acts--would have
had its vivid climax. Addicted in that degree to fictive evocation, I
yet recall, on my part, no practice whatever of narrative prose or any
sort of verse. I cherished the "scene"--as I had so vibrated to the idea
of it that evening at Linwood; I thought, I lisped, at any rate I
composed, in scenes; though how much, or how far, the scenes "came" is
another affair. Entrances, exits, the indication of "business," the
animation of dialogue, the multiplication of designated characters, were
things delightful in themselves--while I panted toward the canvas on
which I should fling my figures; which it took me longer to fill than it
had taken me to write what went with it, but which had on the other hand
something of the interest of the dramatist's casting of his _personæ_,
and must have helped me to believe in the validity of my subject.

From where on these occasions that subject can have dropped for me I am
at a loss to say, and indeed have a strong impression that I didn't at
any moment quite know what I was writing about: I am sure I couldn't
otherwise have written so much. With scenes, when I think, what
certitude did I want more?--scenes being the root of the matter,
especially when they bristled with proper names and noted movements;
especially, above all, when they flowered at every pretext into the very
optic and perspective of the stage, where the boards diverged correctly,
from a central point of vision, even as the lashes from an eyelid,
straight down to the footlights. Let this reminiscence remind us of how
rarely in those days the real stage was carpeted. The difficulty of
composition was naught; the one difficulty was in so placing my figures
on the fourth page that these radiations could be marked without making
lines through them. The odd part of all of which was that whereas my
cultivation of the picture was maintained my practice of the play, my
addiction to scenes, presently quite dropped. I was capable of learning,
though with inordinate slowness, to express ideas in scenes, and was not
capable, with whatever patience, of making proper pictures; yet I
aspired to this form of design to the prejudice of any other, and long
after those primitive hours was still wasting time in attempts at it. I
cared so much for nothing else, and that vaguely redressed, as to a
point, my general failure of acuteness. I nursed the conviction, or at
least I tried to, that if my clutch of the pencil or of the watercolour
brush should once become intense enough it would make up for other
weaknesses of grasp--much as that would certainly give it to do. This
was a very false scent, which had however the excuse that my brother's
example really couldn't but act upon me--the scent was apparently so
true for _him_; from the moment my small "interest in art," that is my
bent for gaping at illustrations and exhibitions, was absorbing and
genuine. There were elements in the case that made it natural: the
picture, the representative design, directly and strongly appealed to
me, and was to appeal all my days, and I was only slow to recognise the
_kind_, in this order, that appealed most. My face was turned from the
first to the idea of representation--that of the gain of charm,
interest, mystery, dignity, distinction, gain of importance in fine, on
the part of the represented thing (over the thing of accident, of mere
actuality, still unappropriated;) but in the house of representation
there were many chambers, each with its own lock, and long was to be the
business of sorting and trying the keys. When I at last found deep in my
pocket the one I could more or less work, it was to feel, with
reassurance, that the picture was still after all in essence one's aim.
So there had been in a manner continuity, been not so much waste as one
had sometimes ruefully figured; so many wastes are sweetened for memory
as by the taste of the economy they have led to or imposed and from the
vantage of which they could scarce look better if they had been current
and blatant profit. Wasn't the very bareness of the field itself
moreover a challenge, in a degree, to design?--not, I mean, that there
seemed to one's infant eyes too few things to paint: as to that there
were always plenty--but for the very reason that there were more than
anyone noticed, and that a hunger was thus engendered which one cast
about to gratify. The gratification nearest home was the imitative, the
emulative--that is on my part: W. J., I see, needed no reasons, no
consciousness other than that of being easily able. So he drew because
he could, while I did so in the main only because he did; though I think
we cast about, as I say, alike, making the most of every image within
view. I doubt if he made more than I even then did, though earlier able
to account for what he made. Afterwards, on other ground and in richer
air, I admit, the challenge was in the fulness and not in the bareness
of aspects, with their natural result of hunger appeased; exhibitions,
illustrations abounded in Paris and London--the reflected image hung
everywhere about; so that if there we daubed afresh and with more
confidence it was not because no-one but because everyone did. In fact
when I call our appetite appeased I speak less of our browsing vision,
which was tethered and insatiable, than of our sense of the quite normal
character of our own proceedings. In Europe we knew there was Art, just
as there were soldiers and lodgings and concierges and little boys in
the streets who stared at us, especially at our hats and boots, as at
things of derision--just as, to put it negatively, there were
practically no hot rolls and no iced water. Perhaps too, I should add,
we didn't enjoy the works of Mr. Benjamin Haydon, then clustered at the
Pantheon in Oxford Street, which in due course became our favourite
haunt, so infinitely more, after all, than we had enjoyed those arrayed
at the Düsseldorf collection in Broadway; whence the huge canvas of the
Martyrdom of John Huss comes back to me in fact as a revelation of
representational brightness and charm that pitched once for all in these
matters my young sense of what should be.

Ineffable, unsurpassable those hours of initiation which the Broadway of
the 'fifties had been, when all was said, so adequate to supply. If one
wanted pictures there _were_ pictures, as large, I seem to remember, as
the side of a house, and of a bravery of colour and lustre of surface
that I was never afterwards to see surpassed. We were shown without
doubt, under our genial law here too, everything there was, and as I
cast up the items I wonder, I confess, what ampler fare we could have
dealt with. The Düsseldorf school commanded the market, and I think of
its exhibition as firmly seated, going on from year to year--New York,
judging now to such another tune, must have been a brave patron of that
manufacture; I believe that scandal even was on occasion not evaded,
rather was boldly invoked, though of what particular sacrifices to the
pure plastic or undraped shocks to bourgeois prejudice the comfortable
German genius of that period may have been capable history has kept no
record. New accessions, at any rate, vividly new ones, in which the
freshness and brightness of the paint, particularly lustrous in our
copious light, enhanced from time to time the show, which I have the
sense of our thus repeatedly and earnestly visiting and which comes back
to me with some vagueness as installed in a disaffected church, where
gothic excrescences and an ecclesiastical roof of a mild order helped
the importance. No impression here, however, was half so momentous as
that of the epoch-making masterpiece of Mr. Leutze, which showed us
Washington crossing the Delaware in a wondrous flare of projected
gaslight and with the effect of a revelation to my young sight of the
capacity of accessories to "stand out." I live again in the thrill of
that evening--which was the greater of course for my feeling it, in my
parents' company, when I should otherwise have been in bed. We went
down, after dinner, in the Fourteenth Street stage, quite as if going to
the theatre; the scene of exhibition was near the Stuyvesant Institute
(a circumstance stirring up somehow a swarm of associations, echoes
probably of lectures discussed at home, yet at which my attendance had
doubtless conveniently lapsed,) but Mr. Leutze's drama left behind any
paler proscenium. We gaped responsive to every item, lost in the marvel
of the wintry light, of the sharpness of the ice-blocks, of the sickness
of the sick soldier, of the protrusion of the minor objects, that of the
strands of the rope and the nails of the boots, that, I say, on the part
of everything, of its determined purpose of standing out; but that,
above all, of the profiled national hero's purpose, as might be said, of
standing _up_, as much as possible, even indeed of doing it almost on
one leg, in such difficulties, and successfully balancing. So memorable
was that evening to remain for me that nothing could be more strange, in
connection with it, than the illustration by the admired work, on its in
after years again coming before me, of the cold cruelty with which time
may turn and devour its children. The picture, more or less entombed in
its relegation, was lividly dead--and that was bad enough. But half the
substance of one's youth seemed buried with it. There were other
pictorial evenings, I may add, not all of which had the thrill. Deep the
disappointment, on my own part, I remember, at Bryan's Gallery of
Christian Art, to which also, as for great emotions, we had taken the
omnibus after dinner. It cast a chill, this collection of worm-eaten
diptychs and triptychs, of angular saints and seraphs, of black Madonnas
and obscure Bambinos, of such marked and approved "primitives" as had
never yet been shipped to our shores. Mr. Bryan's shipment was presently
to fall, I believe, under grave suspicion, was to undergo in fact fatal
exposure; but it appealed at the moment in apparent good faith, and I
have not forgotten how, conscious that it was fresh from Europe--"fresh"
was beautiful in the connection!--I felt that my yearning should all
have gone out to it. With that inconsequence to handle I doubt whether I
proclaimed that it bored me--any more than I have ever noted till now
that it made me begin badly with Christian art. I like to think that the
collection consisted without abatement of frauds and "fakes" and that if
these had been honest things my perception wouldn't so have slumbered;
yet the principle of interest had been somehow compromised, and I think
I have never since stood before a real Primitive, a primitive of the
primitives, without having first to shake off the grey mantle of that
night. The main disconcertment had been its ugly twist to the name of
Italy, already sweet to me for all its dimness--even could dimness have
prevailed in my felt measure of the pictorial testimony of home,
testimony that dropped for us from the ample canvas of Mr. Cole, "the
American Turner" which covered half a side of our front parlour, and in
which, though not an object represented in it began to stand out after
the manner of Mr. Leutze, I could always lose myself as soon as look. It
depicted Florence from one of the neighbouring hills--I have often since
wondered which, the picture being long ago lost to our sight; Florence
with her domes and towers and old walls, the old walls Mr. Cole had
engaged for, but which I was ruefully to miss on coming to know and love
the place in after years. Then it was I felt how long before my
attachment had started on its course--that closer vision was no
beginning, it only took up the tale; just as it comes to me again
to-day, at the end of time, that the contemplative monk seated on a
terrace in the foreground, a constant friend of my childhood, must have
been of the convent of San Miniato, which gives me the site from which
the painter wrought. We had Italy again in the corresponding room
behind--a great abundance of Italy I was free to think while I revolved
between another large landscape over the sofa and the classic marble
bust on a pedestal between the two back windows, the figure, a part of
the figure, of a lady with her head crowned with vine-leaves and her
hair disposed with a laxity that was emulated by the front of her dress,
as my next younger brother exposed himself to my derision by calling the
bit of brocade (simulated by the chisel) that, depending from a single
shoulder-strap, so imperfectly covered her. This image was known and
admired among us as the Bacchante; she had come to us straight from an
American studio in Rome, and I see my horizon flush again with the first
faint dawn of conscious appreciation, or in other words of the critical
spirit, while two or three of the more restrictive friends of the house
find our marble lady very "cold" for a Bacchante. Cold indeed she must
have been--quite as of the tombstone temperament; but that objection
would drop if she might only be called a Nymph, since nymphs were mild
and moderate, and since discussion of a work of art mainly hung in those
days on that issue of the producible _name_. I fondly recall, by the
same token, that playing on a certain occasion over the landscape above
the sofa, restrictive criticism, uttered in my indulged hearing,
introduced me to what had probably been my very first chance, on such
ground, for active participation. The picture, from the hand of a
French painter, M. Lefèvre, and of but slightly scanter extent than the
work of Mr. Cole, represented in frank rich colours and as a so-called
"view in Tuscany" a rural scene of some exuberance, a broken and
precipitous place, amid mountains and forests, where two or three
bare-legged peasants or woodmen were engaged, with much emphasis of
posture, in felling a badly gashed but spreading oak by means of a tense
rope attached to an upper limb and at which they pulled together.
"Tuscany?--are you sure it's Tuscany?" said the voice of restrictive
criticism, that of the friend of the house who in the golden age of the
precursors, though we were still pretty much precursors, had lived
longest in Italy. And then on my father's challenge of this demur: "Oh
in Tuscany, you know, the colours are much softer--there would be a
certain haze in the atmosphere." "Why, of course," I can hear myself now
blushingly but triumphantly intermingle--"the softness and the haze of
our Florence there: isn't Florence in Tuscany?" It had to be parentally
admitted that Florence was--besides which our friend had been there and
knew; so that thereafter, within our walls, a certain _malaise_ reigned,
for if the Florence was "like it" then the Lefèvre couldn't be, and if
the Lefèvre was like it then the Florence couldn't: a lapse from old
convenience--as from the moment we couldn't name the Lefèvre where were
we? All of which it might have been open to me to feel I had uncannily
promoted.




XX


My own sense of the great matter, meanwhile--that is of our
possibilities, still more than of our actualities, of Italy in general
and of Florence in particular--was a perfectly recoverable little
awareness, as I find, of certain mild soft irregular breathings thence
on the part of an absent pair in whom our parents were closely
interested and whose communications, whose Roman, Sorrentine, Florentine
letters, letters in especial from the Baths of Lucca, kept open, in our
air, more than any other sweet irritation, that "question of Europe"
which was to have after all, in the immediate years, so limited, so
shortened, a solution. Mary Temple the elder had, early in our
Fourteenth Street period, married Edmund Tweedy, a haunter of that
neighbourhood and of our house in it from the first, but never more than
during a winter spent with us there by that quasi-relative, who, by an
extension of interest and admiration--she was in those years quite
exceedingly handsome--ranked for us with the Albany aunts, adding so a
twist, as it were, to our tie with the Temple cousins, her own close
kin. This couple must have been, putting real relatives aside, my
parents' best friends in Europe, twitching thereby hardest the fine firm
thread attached at one end to our general desire and at the other to
their supposed felicity. The real relatives, those planted out in the
same countries, are a chapter by themselves, whose effect on us, whose
place in our vision, I should like to trace: that of the Kings, for
instance, of my mother's kin, that of the Masons, of my father's--the
Kings who cultivated, for years, the highest instructional, social and
moral possibilities at Geneva, the Masons, above all, less strenuous but
more sympathetic, who reported themselves to us hauntingly, during a
considerable period, as enjoying every conceivable _agrément_ at Tours
and at the then undeveloped Trouville, even the winter Trouville, on the
lowest possible terms. Fain would I, as for the "mere pleasure" of it,
under the temptation to delineate, gather into my loose net the
singularly sharp and rounded image of our cousin Charlotte of the former
name, who figured for us, on the field of Europe, wherever we looked,
and all the rest of time, as a character of characters and a marvel of
placid consistency; through my vague remembrance of her return from
China after the arrest of a commercial career there by her husband's
death in the Red Sea--which somehow sounded like a dreadful form of
death, and my scarce less faint recovery of some Christmas treat of our
childhood under her roof in Gramercy Park, amid dim chinoiseries and, in
that twilight of time, dimmer offspring, Vernon, Anne, Arthur, marked to
us always, in the distincter years, as of all our young relatives the
most intensely educated and most pointedly proper--an occasion followed
by her permanent and invidious withdrawal from her own country. I would
keep her in my eye through the Genevese age and on to the crisis of the
Civil War, in which Vernon, unforgiven by her stiff conservatism for his
Northern loyalty, laid down before Petersburg a young life of
understanding and pain, uncommemorated as to the gallantry of its
end--he had insistently returned to the front, after a recovery from
first wounds, as under his mother's malediction--on the stone beneath
which he lies in the old burial ground at Newport, the cradle of his
father's family. I should further pursue my subject through other
periods and places, other constantly "quiet" but vivid exhibitions, to
the very end of the story--which for myself was the impression, first,
of a little lonely, soft-voiced, gentle, relentless lady, in a dull
Surrey garden of a summer afternoon, more than half blind and all
dependent on the _dame de compagnie_ who read aloud to her that Saturday
Review which had ever been the prop and mirror of her opinions and to
which she remained faithful, her children estranged and outworn, dead
and ignored; and the vision, second and for a climax, of an old-world
rez-de-chaussée at Versailles, goal of my final pilgrimage, almost in
presence of the end (end of her very personal career, I mean, but not of
her perfectly firm spirit or of her charmingly smooth address).

I confess myself embarrassed by my very ease of re-capture of my young
consciousness; so that I perforce try to encourage lapses and keep my
abundance down. The place for the lapse consents with difficulty,
however, to be _any_ particular point of the past at which I catch
myself (easily caught as I am) looking about me; it has certainly
nothing in common with that coign of vantage enjoyed by me one June
afternoon of 1855 in the form of the minor share of the box of a
carriage that conveyed us for the first time since our babyhood, W. J.'s
and mine, through so much of a vast portentous London. I was an item in
the overflow of a vehicle completely occupied, and I thrilled with the
spectacle my seat beside the coachman so amply commanded--without
knowing at this moment why, amid other claims, I had been marked for
such an eminence. I so far justify my privilege at least as still to
feel that prime impression, of extreme intensity, underlie, deep down,
the whole mass of later observation. There are London aspects which, so
far as they still touch me, after all the years, touch me as just
sensible reminders of this hour of early apprehension, so penetrated for
me as to have kept its ineffaceable stamp. For at last we had come to
Europe--we had disembarked at Liverpool, but a couple of days before,
from that steamer Atlantic, of the Collins line, then active but so soon
to be utterly undone, of which I had kept a romantic note ever since a
certain evening of a winter or two before. I had on that occasion
assisted with my parents at a varied theatrical exhibition--the theatre
is distinct to me as Brougham's--one of the features of which was the at
that time flourishing farce of Betsy Baker, a picture of some
predicament, supposed droll, of its hero Mr. Mouser, whose wife, if I am
correct, carries on a laundry and controls as she may a train of young
assistants. A feature of the piece comes back to me as the pursuit of
Mr. Mouser round and round the premises by the troop of laundresses,
shouting his name in chorus, capture by them being abject, though
whether through fear of their endearments or of their harsher violence I
fail to remember. It was enough that the public nerve had at the moment
been tried by the non-arrival of the Atlantic, several days overdue, to
the pitch at last of extreme anxiety; so that, when after the fall of
the curtain on the farce the distracted Mr. Mouser, still breathless,
reappeared at the footlights, where I can see him now abate by his
plight no jot of the dignity of his announcement, "Ladies and
gentlemen, I rejoice to be able to tell you that the good ship Atlantic
is safe!" the house broke into such plaudits, so huge and prolonged a
roar of relief, as I had never heard the like of and which gave me my
first measure of a great immediate public emotion--even as the incident
itself to-day reminds me of the family-party smallness of the old New
York, those happy limits that could make us all care, and care to fond
vociferation, for the same thing at once. It was a moment of the golden
age--representing too but a snatch of elation, since the wretched Arctic
had gone down in mortal woe and her other companion, the Pacific,
leaving England a few months later and under the interested eyes of our
family group, then temporarily settled in London, was never heard of
more. Let all of which show again what traps are laid about me for
unguarded acute reminiscence.

I meet another of these, though I positively try to avoid it, in the
sense of a day spent on the great fusty curtained bed, a mediæval
four-poster such as I had never seen, of the hotel at the London and
North-Western station, where it appeared, to our great inconvenience,
that I had during the previous months somewhere perversely absorbed
(probably on Staten Island upwards of a year before) the dull seed of
malaria, which now suddenly broke out in chills and fever. This
condition, of the intermittent order, hampered our movements but left
alternate days on which we could travel, and as present to me as ever is
the apprehended interest of my important and determinant state and of
our complicated prospect while I lay, much at my ease--for I recall in
particular certain short sweet times when I could be left alone--with
the thick and heavy suggestions of the London room about me, the very
smell of which was ancient, strange and impressive, a new revelation
altogether, and the window open to the English June and the far off hum
of a thousand possibilities. I consciously took them in, these last, and
must then, I think, have first tasted the very greatest pleasure perhaps
I was ever to know--that of almost holding my breath in presence of
certain aspects to the end of so taking in. It was as if in those hours
that precious fine art had been disclosed to me--scantly as the poor
place and the small occasion might have seemed of an order to promote
it. We seize our property by an avid instinct wherever we find it, and I
must have kept seizing mine at the absurdest little rate, and all by
this deeply dissimulative process of taking in, through the whole
succession of those summer days. The next application of it that stands
out for me, or the next that I make room for here, since I note after
all so much less than I remember, is the intensity of a fond
apprehension of Paris, a few days later, from the balcony of an hotel
that hung, through the soft summer night, over the Rue de la Paix. I
hung with the balcony, and doubtless with my brothers and my sister,
though I recover what I felt as so much relation and response to the
larger, the largest appeal only, that of the whole perfect Parisianism I
seemed to myself always to have possessed mentally--even if I had but
just turned twelve!--and that now filled out its frame or case for me
from every lighted window, up and down, as if each of these had been,
for strength of sense, a word in some immortal quotation, the very
breath of civilised lips. How I had anciently gathered such stores of
preconception is more than I shall undertake an account of--though I
believe I should be able to scrape one together; certain it is at any
rate that half the beauty of the whole exposed second floor of a
_modiste_ just opposite, for instance, with the fittings and figurings,
as well as the intent immobilities, of busy young women descried through
frank, and, as it were, benignant apertures, and of such bright fine
strain that they but asked to work far into the night, came from the
effect on the part of these things of so exactly crowning and comforting
I couldn't have said what momentous young dream. I might have been
_right_ to myself--as against some danger of being wrong, and if I had
uttered my main comment on it all this must certainly have been "I told
you so, I told you so!" What I had told myself was of course that the
impression would be of the richest and at the same time of the most
insinuating, and this after all didn't sail very close; but I had had
before me from far back a picture (which might have been hung in the
very sky,) and here was every touch in it repeated with a charm. Had I
ever till then known what a charm _was_?--a large, a local, a social
charm, leaving out that of a few individuals. It was at all events, this
mystery, one's property--that of one's mind; and so, once for all, I
helped myself to it from my balcony and tucked it away. It counted all
immensely for practice in taking in.

I profited by that, no doubt, still a few days later, at an hour that
has never ceased to recur to me all my life as crucial, as supremely
determinant. The travelling-carriage had stopped at a village on the way
from Lyons to Geneva, between which places there was then no railway; a
village now nameless to me and which was not yet Nantua, in the Jura,
where we were to spend the night. I was stretched at my ease on a couch
formed by a plank laid from seat to seat and covered by a small mattress
and other draperies; an indulgence founded on my visitation of fever,
which, though not now checking our progress, assured me, in our little
band, these invidious luxuries. It may have been that as my body was
pampered so I was moved equally to pamper my spirit, for my
appropriative instinct had neglected no item of our case from the
first--by which I mean from the moment of our getting under way, that
morning, with much elaboration, in the court of the old Hôtel de
l'Univers at Lyons, where we had arrived two days before and awaited my
good pleasure during forty-eight hours that overflowed for us perhaps
somewhat less than any pair of days yet, but as regards which it was
afterwards my complacent theory that my contemplative rest at the
ancient inn, with all the voices and graces of the past, of the court,
of the French scheme of manners in general and of ancient inns, as such,
in particular, had prepared me not a little, when I should in due course
hear of it, for what was meant by the _vie de province_--that expression
which was to become later on so _toned_, as old fine colour and old fine
opinion are toned. It was the romance of travel, and it was the
_suggested_ romance, flushed with suppositions and echoes, with
implications and memories, memories of one's "reading," save the mark!
all the more that our proper bestowal required two carriages, in which
we were to "post," ineffable thought, and which bristled with every kind
of contradiction of common experience. The postilion, in a costume
rather recalling, from the halls of Ferrero, that of my débardeur,
bobbed up and down, the Italian courier, Jean Nadali, black-whiskered
and acquired in London, sat in the rumble along with Annette Godefroi of
Metz, fresh-coloured, broad-faced and fair-braided, a "bonne Lorraine"
if ever there was, acquired in New York: I enjoy the echo of their very
names, neither unprecedented nor irreproducible, yet which melt together
for me, to intensification, with all the rest; with the recovered
moment, above all, of our pause at the inn-door in the cool sunshine--we
had mounted and mounted--during which, in my absurdly cushioned state, I
took in, as I have hinted, by a long slow swig that testified to some
power of elbow, a larger draught of the wine of perception than any I
had ever before owed to a single throb of that faculty. The village
street, which was not as village streets hitherto known to me, opened
out, beyond an interval, into a high place on which perched an object
also a fresh revelation and that I recognised with a deep joy--though a
joy that was doubtless partly the sense of fantastic ease, of abated
illness and of cold chicken--as at once a castle and a ruin. The only
castle within my ken had been, by my impression, the machicolated villa
above us the previous summer at New Brighton, and as I had seen no
structure rise beyond that majesty so I had seen none abased to the
dignity of ruin. Loose boards were no expression of this latter phase,
and I was already somehow aware of a deeper note in the crumbled castle
than any note of the solid one--little experience as I had had either of
solidity. At a point in the interval, at any rate, below the slope on
which this memento stood, was a woman in a black bodice, a white shirt
and a red petticoat, engaged in some sort of field labour, the effect of
whose intervention just then is almost beyond my notation. I knew her
for a peasant in sabots--the first peasant I had ever beheld, or beheld
at least to such advantage. She had in the whole aspect an enormous
value, emphasising with her petticoat's tonic strength the truth that
sank in as I lay--the truth of one's embracing there, in all the
presented character of the scene, an amount of character I had felt no
scene present, not even the one I had raked from the Hôtel Westminster;
the sort of thing that, even as mere fulness and mere weight, would sit
most warmly in the mind. Supremely, in that ecstatic vision, was
"Europe," sublime synthesis, expressed and guaranteed to me--as if by a
mystic gage, which spread all through the summer air, that I should now,
only now, never lose it, hold the whole consistency of it: up to that
time it might have been but mockingly whisked before me. Europe mightn't
have been flattered, it was true, at my finding her thus most signified
and summarised in a sordid old woman scraping a mean living and an
uninhabitable tower abandoned to the owls; that was but the momentary
measure of a small sick boy, however, and the virtue of the impression
was proportioned to my capacity. It made a bridge over to more things
than I then knew.




XXI


How shall I render certain other impressions coming back to me from that
summer, which were doubtless involved in my having still for a time, on
the alternate days when my complaint was active, to lie up on various
couches and, for my main comfort, consider the situation? I considered
it best, I think, gathering in the fruits of a quickened sensibility to
it, in certain umbrageous apartments in which my parents had settled
themselves near Geneva; an old house, in ample grounds and among great
spreading trees that pleasantly brushed our windows in the summer heats
and airs, known, if I am not mistaken, as the Campagne Gerebsoff--which
its mistress, an invalid Russian lady, had partly placed at our
disposition while she reclined in her own quarter of the garden, on a
chaise longue and under a mushroom hat with a green veil, and I, in the
course of the mild excursions appointed as my limit, considered her from
afar in the light of the legends supplied to me, as to her identity,
history, general practices and proceedings, by my younger brother Wilky,
who, according to his nature, or I may say to his genius, had made
without loss of time great advances of acquaintance with her and
quickened thereby my sense of his superior talent for life. Wilky's age
followed closely on mine, and from that time on we conversed and
consorted, though with lapses and disparities; I being on the whole,
during the succession of those years, in the grateful, the really
fortunate position of having one exposure, rather the northward, as it
were, to the view of W. J., and the other, perhaps the more immediately
sunned surface, to the genial glow of my junior. Of this I shall have
more to say, but to meet in memory meanwhile even this early flicker of
him is to know again something of the sense that I attached all along
our boyhood to his successful sociability, his instinct for intercourse,
his genius (as I have used the word) for making friends. It was the only
genius he had, declaring itself from his tenderest years, never knowing
the shadow of defeat, and giving me, above all, from as far back and by
the very radiation of the fact, endlessly much to think of. For I had in
a manner, thanks to the radiation, much of the benefit; his geniality
was absolutely such that the friends he made were made almost less for
himself, so to speak, than for other friends--of whom indeed we, his own
adjuncts, were easily first--so far at least as he discriminated. At
night all cats are grey, and in this brother's easy view all his
acquaintance were his family. The trail of his sociability was over us
all alike--though it here concerns me but to the effect, as I recover
it, of its weight on my comparatively so indirect faculty for what is
called taking life. I must have already at the Campagne Gerebsoff begun
to see him take it with all his directness--begun in fact to be a trifle
tormentedly aware that, though there might be many ways of so doing, we
are condemned practically to a choice, not made free of them all;
reduced to the use of but one, at the best, which it is to our interest
to make the most of, since we may indeed sometimes make much. There was
a small sad charm, I should doubtless add, in this operation of the
contrast of the case before me with my own case; it was positively as if
Wilky's were supplying me on occasion with the most immediate matter for
my own. That was particularly marked after he had, with our elder
brother, been placed at school, the Pensionnat Roediger, at Châtelaine,
then much esteemed and where I was supposedly to join them on my
complete recovery: I recall sociable, irrepressibly sociable _sorties_
thence on the part of the pair as promptly breaking out, not less than I
recall sociable afternoon visits to the establishment on the part of the
rest of us: it was my brothers' first boarding school, but as we had in
the New York conditions kept punctually rejoining our family, so in
these pleasant Genevese ones our family returned the attention. Of this
also more anon; my particular point is just the wealth of Wilky's
contribution to my rich current consciousness--the consciousness fairly
_made_ rich by my taking in, as aforesaid, at reflective hours, hours
when I was in a manner alone with it, our roomy and shadowy, our almost
haunted interior.

Admirable the scale and solidity, in general, of the ancient villas
planted about Geneva, and our house affected me as so massive and so
spacious that even our own half of it seemed vast. I had never before
lived so long in anything so old and, as I somehow felt, so deep; depth,
depth upon depth, was what came out for me at certain times of my
waiting above, in my immense room of thick embrasures and rather prompt
obscurity, while the summer afternoon waned and my companions, often
below at dinner, lingered and left me just perhaps a bit overwhelmed.
That was the sense of it--the _character_, in the whole place, pressed
upon me with a force I hadn't met and that was beyond my analysis--which
is but another way of saying how directly notified I felt that such
material conditions as I _had_ known could have had no depth at all. My
depth was a vague measure, no doubt, but it made space, in the twilight,
for an occasional small sound of voice or step from the garden or the
rooms of which the great homely, the opaque green shutters opened there
softly to echo in--mixed with reverberations finer and more momentous,
personal, experimental, if they might be called so; which I much
encouraged (they borrowed such tone from our new surrounding medium) and
half of which were reducible to Wilky's personalities and Wilky's
experience: these latter, irrepressibly communicated, being ever,
enviably, though a trifle bewilderingly and even formidably, _of_
personalities. There was the difference and the opposition, as I really
believe I was already aware--that one way of taking life was to go in
for everything and everyone, which kept you abundantly occupied, and the
other way was to be as occupied, quite as occupied, just with the sense
and the image of it all, and on only a fifth of the actual immersion: a
circumstance extremely strange. Life was taken almost equally both
ways--that, I mean, seemed the strangeness; mere brute quantity and
number being so much less in one case than the other. These latter were
what I should have _liked_ to go in for, had I but had the intrinsic
faculties; that more than ever came home to me on those occasions when,
as I could move further and stay out longer, I accompanied my parents on
afternoon visits to Châtelaine and the Campagne Roediger, a scene that
has remained with me as nobly placid and pastoral. The great trees stood
about, casting afternoon shadows; the old thick-walled green-shuttered
villa and its dépendances had the air of the happiest home; the big
bearded bonhomie of M. Roediger among his little polyglot charges--no
petits pays chauds these--appeared to justify, and more, the fond New
York theory of Swiss education, the kind _à la portée_ of young New
Yorkers, as a beautifully genialised, humanised, civilised, even
romanticised thing, in which, amid lawny mountain slopes, "the
languages" flowed into so many beaming recipients on a stream of milk
and honey, and "the relation," above all, the relation from master to
pupil and back again, was of an amenity that wouldn't have been of this
world save for the providential arrangement of a perfect pedagogic
Switzerland. "Did you notice the relation--how charming it was?" our
parents were apt to say to each other after these visits, in reference
to some observed show of confidence between instructor and instructed;
while, as for myself, I was lost in the wonder of _all_ the
relations--my younger brother seemed to live, and to his own ingenuous
relish as well, in such a happy hum of them. The languages had reason to
prosper--they were so copiously represented; the English jostled the
American, the Russian the German, and there even trickled through a
little funny French.

A great Geneva school of those days was the Institution Haccius, to
which generations of our young countrymen had been dedicated and our own
faces first turned--under correction, however, by the perceived truth
that if the languages were in question the American reigned there almost
unchallenged. The establishment chosen for our experiment must have
appealed by some intimate and insinuating side, and as less patronised
by the rich and the sophisticated--for even in those days some Americans
were rich and several sophisticated; little indeed as it was all to
matter in the event, so short a course had the experiment just then to
run. What it mainly brings back to me is the fine old candour and
queerness of the New York state of mind, begotten really not a little, I
think, under our own roof, by the mere charmed perusal of Rodolphe
Toeppfer's Voyages en Zigzag, the two goodly octavo volumes of which
delightful work, an adorable book, taken with its illustrations, had
come out early in the 'fifties and had engaged our fondest study. It is
the copious chronicle, by a schoolmaster o£ endless humour and
sympathy--of what degree and form of "authority" it never occurred to
one even to ask--of his holiday excursions with his pupils, mainly on
foot and with staff and knapsack, through the incomparable Switzerland
of the time before the railways and the "rush," before the monster
hotels, the desecrated summits, the vulgarised valleys, the circular
tours, the perforating tubes, the funiculars, the hordes, the horrors.
To turn back to Toeppfer's pages to-day is to get the sense of a lost
paradise, and the effect for me even yet of having pored over them in my
childhood is to steep in sweetness and quaintness some of the
pictures--his own illustrations are of the pleasantest and drollest, and
the association makes that faded Swiss master of landscape Calame, of
the so-called calamités, a quite sufficient Ruysdael. It must have been
conceived for us that we would lead in these conditions--always in
pursuit of an education--a life not too dissimilar to that of the
storied exiles in the forest of Arden; though one would fain not press,
after all, upon ideals of culture so little organised, so little
conscious, up to that moment, of our ferocities of comparison and
competition, of imposed preparation. This particular loose ideal reached
out from the desert--or what might under discouragement pass for such;
it invoked the light, but a simplicity of view which was somehow one
with the beauty of other convictions accompanied its effort; and though
a glance at the social "psychology" of some of its cheerful estimates,
its relative importances, assumed and acted upon, might here seem
indicated, there are depths of the ancient serenity that nothing would
induce me to sound.

I need linger the less, moreover, since we in fact, oddly enough,
lingered so little; so very little, for reasons doubtless well known to
ourselves at the time but which I at present fail to recapture, that
what next stands vividly out for me is our renewed passage through Paris
on the way to London for the winter; a turn of our situation invested at
the time with nothing whatever of the wonderful, yet which would again
half prompt me to soundings were I not to recognise in it that mark of
the fitful, that accent of the improvised, that general quality of
earnest and reasoned, yet at the same time almost passionate, impatience
which was to devote us for some time to variety, almost to incoherency,
of interest. We had fared across the sea under the glamour of the Swiss
school in the abstract, but the Swiss school in the concrete soon turned
stale on our hands; a fact over which I remember myself as no further
critical than to feel, not without zest, that, since one was all eyes
and the world decidedly, at such a pace, all images, it ministered to
the panoramic. It ministered, to begin with, through our very early
start for Lyons again in the October dawn--without Nadali or the
carriages this time, but on the basis of the malle-poste, vast, yellow
and rumbling, which we availed wholly to fill and of which the high
haughtiness was such that it could stop, even for an instant, only at
appointed and much dissevered places--to the effect, I recall, of its
vainly attempted arrest by our cousin Charlotte King, beforementioned,
whom I see now suddenly emerge, fresh, confident and pretty, from some
rural retreat by the road, a scene of simple villeggiatura, "rien que
pour saluer ces dames," as she pleaded to the conductor; whom she
practically, if not permittedly, overmastered, leaving with me still the
wonder of her happy fusion of opposites. The coach had not, in the
event, paused, but so neither had she, and as it ignored flush and
flurry quite as it defied delay, she was equally a match for it in these
particulars, blandly achieving her visit to us while it rumbled on,
making a perfect success and a perfect grace of her idea. She dropped as
elegantly out as she had gymnastically floated in, and "ces dames" must
much have wished they could emulate her art. Save for this my view of
that migration has faded, though to shine out again to the sense of our
early morning arrival in Paris a couple of days later, and our hunt
there, vain at first, for an hotel that would put us numerously up; vain
till we had sat awhile, in the Rue du Helder, I think, before that of an
Albany uncle, luckily on the scene and finally invoked, who after some
delay descended to us with a very foreign air, I fancied, and no
possibility, to his regret, of placing us under his own roof; as if
indeed, I remember reflecting, we could, such as we were, have been
desired to share his foreign interests--such as _they_ were. He espoused
our cause, however, with gay goodnature--while I wondered, in my
admiration for him and curiosity about him, how he really liked us, and
(a bit doubtfully) whether I should have liked us had I been in his
place; and after some further adventure installed us at the Hôtel de la
Ville de Paris in the Rue de la Ville-l'Evèque, a resort now long since
extinct, though it lingered on for some years, and which I think of as
rather huddled and disappointingly private, to the abatement of
spectacle, and standing obliquely beyond a wall, a high gateway and a
more or less cobbled court.




XXII


Little else of that Parisian passage remains with me--it was probably of
the briefest; I recover only a visit with my father to the Palais de
l'Industrie, where the first of the great French Exhibitions, on the
model, much reduced, of the English Crystal Palace of 1851, was still
open, a fact explaining the crowded inns; and from that visit win back
but the department of the English pictures and our stopping long before
The Order of Release of a young English painter, J. E. Millais, who had
just leaped into fame, and my impression of the rare treatment of whose
baby's bare legs, pendent from its mother's arms, is still as vivid to
me as if from yesterday. The vivid yields again to the vague--I scarce
know why so utterly--till consciousness, waking up in London, renews
itself, late one evening and very richly, at the Gloucester Hotel (or
Coffee-House, as I think it was then still called,) which occupied that
corner of Piccadilly and Berkeley Street where more modern
establishments have since succeeded it, but where a fatigued and
famished American family found on that occasion a fine old British
virtue in cold roast beef and bread and cheese and ale; their expert
acclamation of which echoes even now in my memory. It keeps company
there with other matters equally British and, as we say now, early
Victorian; the thick gloom of the inn rooms, the faintness of the
glimmering tapers, the blest inexhaustibility of the fine joint,
surpassed only by that of the grave waiter's reserve--plain, immutably
plain fare all, but prompting in our elders an emphasis of relief and
relish, the "There's nothing like it after all!" tone, which re-excited
expectation, which in fact seemed this time to re-announce a basis for
faith and joy.

That basis presently shrank to the scale of a small house hard by the
hotel, at the entrance of Berkeley Square--expeditiously lighted on, it
would thus appear, which again has been expensively superseded, but to
the ancient little facts of which I fondly revert, since I owe them what
I feel to have been, in the far past, the prime faint revelation, the
small broken expression, of the London I was afterwards to know. The
place wears on the spot, to this day, no very different face; the house
that has risen on the site of ours is still immediately neighboured at
the left by the bookseller, the circulating-librarian and news-agent,
who modestly flourished in our time under the same name; the great
establishment of Mr. Gunter, just further along, is as soberly and
solidly seated; the mews behind the whole row, from the foot of Hay Hill
at the right, wanders away to Bruton Street with the irregular grace
that spoke to my young fancy; Hay Hill itself is somehow less sharply
precipitous, besides being no longer paved, as I seem to recall its
having been, with big boulders, and I was on the point of saying that
its antique charm in some degree abides. Nothing, however, could be
further from the truth; its antique charm quite succumbed, years ago, to
that erection of lumpish "mansions" which followed the demolition of the
old-world town-residence, as the house-agents say, standing, on the
south side, between court and I suppose garden, where Dover Street gives
way to Grafton; a house of many histories, of vague importances and cold
reserves and deep suggestions, I used to think after scaling the steep
quite on purpose to wonder about it. A whole chapter of life was
condensed, for our young sensibility, I make out, into the couple of
months--they can scarce have been more--spent by us in these quarters,
which must have proved too narrow and too towny; but it can have had no
passage so lively as the occurrences at once sequent to my father's
having too candidly made known in some public print, probably The Times,
that an American gentleman, at such an address, desired to arrange with
a competent young man for the tuition at home of his three sons. The
effect of his rash failure to invite application by letter only was the
assault of an army of visitors who filled us with consternation; they
hung about the door, cumbered the hall, choked the staircase and sat
grimly individual in odd corners. How they were dealt with, given my
father's precipitate and general charity, I can but feebly imagine; our
own concern, in the event, was with a sole selected presence, that of
Scotch Mr. Robert Thompson, who gave us his care from breakfast to
luncheon each morning that winter, who afterwards carried on a school at
Edinburgh, and whom, in years long subsequent, I happened to help R. L.
Stevenson to recognise gaily as _his_ early pedagogue. He was so deeply
solicitous, yet withal so mild and kind and shy, with no harsher
injunction to us ever than "Come now, be getting on!" that one could but
think well of a world in which so gentle a spirit might flourish; while
it is doubtless to the credit of his temper that remembrance is a blank
in respect to his closer ministrations. I recall vividly his fresh
complexion, his very round clear eyes, his tendency to trip over his own
legs or feet while thoughtfully circling about us, and his constant
dress-coat, worn with trousers of a lighter hue, which was perhaps the
prescribed uniform of a daily tutor then; but I ask myself in vain what
I can have "studied" with him, there remaining with me afterwards, to
testify--this putting any scrap of stored learning aside--no single
textbook save the Lambs' Tales from Shakespeare, which was given me as
(of all things in the world) a reward. A reward for what I am again at a
loss to say--not certainly for having "got on" to anything like the tune
plaintively, for the most part, piped to me. It is a very odd and yet to
myself very rich and full reminiscence, though I remember how, looking
back at it from after days, W. J. denounced it to me, and with it the
following year and more spent in Paris, as a poor and arid and
lamentable time, in which, missing such larger chances and connections
as we might have reached out to, we had done nothing, he and I, but walk
about together, in a state of the direst propriety, little "high" black
hats and inveterate gloves, the childish costume of the place and
period, to stare at grey street-scenery (that of early Victorian London
had tones of a neutrality!) dawdle at shop-windows and buy water-colours
and brushes with which to bedaub eternal drawing-blocks. We might, I
dare say, have felt higher impulses and carried out larger plans--though
indeed present to me for this, on my brother's so expressing himself, is
my then quick recognition of the deeper stirrings and braver needs he at
least must have known, and my perfect if rueful sense of having myself
had no such quarrel with our conditions: embalmed for me did they even
to that shorter retrospect appear in a sort of fatalism of patience,
spiritless in a manner, no doubt, yet with an inwardly active,
productive and ingenious side.

It was just the fact of our having so walked and dawdled and dodged that
made the charm of memory; in addition to which what could one have asked
more than to be steeped in a medium so dense that whole elements of it,
forms of amusement, interest and wonder, soaked through to some
appreciative faculty and made one fail at the most of nothing but one's
lessons? My brother was right in so far as that my question--the one I
have just reproduced--could have been asked only by a person
incorrigible in throwing himself back upon substitutes for lost causes,
substitutes that might _temporarily_ have appeared queer and small; a
person so haunted, even from an early age, with visions of life, that
aridities, for him, were half a terror and half an impossibility, and
that the said substitutes, the economies and ingenuities that protested,
in their dumb vague way, against weakness of situation or of direct and
applied faculty, were in themselves really a revel of spirit and
thought. It _had_ indeed again an effect of almost pathetic incoherence
that our brave quest of "the languages," suffering so prompt and for the
time at least so accepted and now so inscrutably irrecoverable a check,
should have contented itself with settling us by that Christmas in a
house, more propitious to our development, in St. John's Wood, where we
enjoyed a considerable garden and wistful view, though by that windowed
privilege alone, of a large green expanse in which ladies and gentlemen
practised archery. Just _that_--and not the art even, but the mere
spectacle--might have been one of the substitutes in question; if not
for the languages at least for one or another of the romantic
connections we seemed a little to have missed: it was such a whiff of
the old world of Robin Hood as we could never have looked up from the
mere thumbed "story," in Fourteenth Street at any rate, to any soft
confidence of. More than I can begin to say, that is by a greater number
of queer small channels, did the world about us, thus continuous with
the old world of Robin Hood, steal into my sense--a constant state of
subjection to which fact is no bad instance of those refinements of
surrender that I just named as my fond practice. I seem to see to-day
that the London of the 'fifties was even to the weak perception of
childhood a much less generalised, a much more eccentrically and
variously characterised place, than the present great accommodated and
accommodating city; it had fewer resources but it had many more
features, scarce one of which failed to help the whole to bristle with
what a little gaping American could take for an intensity of difference
from _his_ supposed order. It was extraordinarily the picture and the
scene of Dickens, now so changed and superseded; it offered to my
presumptuous vision still more the reflection of Thackeray--and where is
the _detail_ of the reflection of Thackeray now?--so that as I trod the
vast length of Baker Street, the Thackerayan vista of other days, I
throbbed with the pride of a vastly enlarged acquaintance.

I dare say our perambulations of Baker Street in our little "top" hats
and other neatnesses must have been what W. J. meant by our poverty of
life--whereas it was probably one of the very things most expressive to
myself of the charm and the colour of history and (from the point of
view of the picturesque) of society. We were often in Baker Street by
reason of those stretched-out walks, at the remembered frequency and
long-drawn push of which I am to-day amazed; recalling at the same time,
however, that save for Robert Thompson's pitching ball with us in the
garden they took for us the place of all other agilities. I can't but
feel them to have been marked in their way by a rare curiosity and
energy. Good Mr. Thompson had followed us in our move, occupying
quarters, not far off, above a baker's shop on a Terrace--a group of
objects still untouched by time--where we occasionally by way of change
attended for our lessons and where not the least of our inspirations was
the confidence, again and again justified, that our mid-morning "break"
would determine the appearance of a self-conscious stale cake, straight
from below, received by us all each time as if it had been a sudden
happy thought, and ushered in by a little girl who might have been a
Dickens foundling or "orfling." Our being reduced to mumble cake in a
suburban lodging by way of reaction from the strain of study would have
been perhaps a pathetic picture, but we had field-days too, when we
accompanied our excellent friend to the Tower, the Thames Tunnel, St.
Paul's and the Abbey, to say nothing of the Zoological Gardens, almost
close at hand and with which we took in that age of lingering forms no
liberty of abbreviation; to say nothing either of Madame Tussaud's, then
in our interminable but so amiable Baker Street, the only shade on the
amiability of which was just that gruesome association with the portal
of the Bazaar--since Madame Tussaud had, of all her treasures, most
vividly revealed to me the Mrs. Manning and the Burke and Hare of the
Chamber of Horrors which lurked just within it; whom, for days after
making their acquaintance (and prolonging it no further than our
conscientious friend thought advisable) I half expected, when alone, to
meet quite dreadfully on the staircase or on opening a door. All this
experience was valuable, but it was not the languages--save in so far
indeed as it was the English, which we hadn't in advance so much aimed
at, yet which more or less, and very interestingly, came; it at any rate
perhaps broke our fall a little that French, of a sort, continued to be
with us in the remarkably erect person of Mademoiselle Cusin, the Swiss
governess who had accompanied us from Geneva, whose quite sharply
extrusive but on the whole exhilarating presence I associate with this
winter, and who led in that longish procession of more or less similar
domesticated presences which was to keep the torch, that is the accent,
among us, fairly alight. The variety and frequency of the arrivals and
departures of these ladies--whose ghostly names, again, so far as I
recall them, I like piously to preserve, Augustine Danse, Amélie Fortin,
Marie Guyard, Marie Bonningue, Félicie Bonningue, Clarisse
Bader--mystifies me in much the same degree as our own academic
vicissitudes in New York; I can no more imagine why, sociable and
charitable, we so often changed governesses than I had contemporaneously
grasped the principle of our succession of schools: the whole group of
phenomena reflected, I gather, as a rule, much more the extreme
promptitude of the parental optimism than any disproportionate habit of
impatience. The optimism begot precipitation, and the precipitation had
too often to confess itself. What is instructive, what is historic, is
the probability that young persons offering themselves at that time as
guides and communicators--the requirements of our small sister were for
long modest enough--quite conceivably lacked preparedness, and were so
thrown back on the extempore, which in turn lacked abundance. One of
these figures, that of Mademoiselle Danse, the most Parisian, and
prodigiously so, was afterwards to stand out for us quite luridly--a
cloud of revelations succeeding her withdrawal; a cloud which, thick as
it was, never obscured our impression of her genius and her charm. The
daughter of a political proscript who had but just escaped, by the
legend, being seized in his bed on the terrible night of the
Deux-Décembre, and who wrote her micawberish letters from Gallipolis,
Ohio, she subsequently figured to my imagination (in the light, that is,
of the divined revelations, too dreadful for our young ears,) as the
most brilliant and most genial of irregular characters, exhibiting the
Parisian "mentality" at its highest, or perhaps rather its deepest, and
more remarkable for nothing than for the consummate little art and grace
with which she had for a whole year draped herself in the mantle of our
innocent air. It was exciting, it was really valuable, to have to that
extent rubbed shoulders with an "adventuress"; it showed one that for
the adventuress there might on occasion be much to be said.

Those, however, were later things--extensions of view hampered for the
present, as I have noted, by our mere London street-scenery, which had
much to build out for us. I see again that we but endlessly walked and
endlessly daubed, and that our walks, with an obsession of their own,
constantly abetted our daubing. We knew no other boys at all, and we
even saw no others, I seem to remember, save the essentially rude ones,
rude with a kind of mediæval rudeness for which our clear New York
experience had given us no precedent, and of which the great and
constant sign was the artless, invidious wonder produced in them, on our
public appearances, by the alien stamp in us that, for our comfort, we
vainly sought to dissimulate. We conformed in each particular, so far as
we could, to the prevailing fashion and standard, of a narrow range in
those days, but in our very plumage--putting our _ramage_ aside--our
wood-note wild must have seemed to sound, so sharply we challenged, when
abroad, the attention of our native contemporaries, and even sometimes
of their elders, pulled up at sight of us in the from-head-to-foot
stare, a curiosity void of sympathy and that attached itself for some
reason especially to our feet, which were not abnormally large. The
London people had for themselves, at the same time, an exuberance of
type; we found it in particular a world of costume, often of very odd
costume--the most intimate notes of which were the postmen in their
frock-coats of military red and their black beaver hats; the milkwomen,
in hats that often emulated these, in little shawls and strange short,
full frocks, revealing enormous boots, with their pails swung from their
shoulders on wooden yokes; the inveterate footmen hooked behind the
coaches of the rich, frequently in pairs and carrying staves, together
with the mounted and belted grooms without the attendance of whom
riders, of whichever sex--and riders then were much more
numerous--almost never went forth. The range of character, on the other
hand, reached rather dreadfully down; there were embodied and
exemplified "horrors" in the streets beside which any present exhibition
is pale, and I well remember the almost terrified sense of their
salience produced in me a couple of years later, on the occasion of a
flying return from the Continent with my father, by a long, an
interminable drive westward from the London Bridge railway-station. It
was a soft June evening, with a lingering light and swarming crowds, as
they then seemed to me, of figures reminding me of George Cruikshank's
Artful Dodger and his Bill Sikes and his Nancy, only with the bigger
brutality of life, which pressed upon the cab, the early-Victorian
fourwheeler, as we jogged over the Bridge, and cropped up in more and
more gas-lit patches for all our course, culminating, somewhere far to
the west, in the vivid picture, framed by the cab-window, of a woman
reeling backward as a man felled her to the ground with a blow in the
face. The London view at large had in fact more than a Cruikshank, there
still survived in it quite a Hogarth, side--which I had of course then
no name for, but which I was so sharply to recognise on coming back
years later that it fixed for me the veracity of the great pictorial
chronicler. Hogarth's mark is even yet not wholly overlaid; though time
has _per contra_ dealt with that stale servility of address which most
expressed to our young minds the rich burden of a Past, the consequence
of too much history. I liked for my own part a lot of history, but felt
in face of certain queer old obsequiosities and appeals, whinings and
sidlings and hand-rubbings and curtsey-droppings, the general play of
apology and humility, behind which the great dim social complexity
seemed to mass itself, that one didn't quite want so inordinate a
quantity. Of that particular light and shade, however, the big broom of
change has swept the scene bare; more history still has been after all
what it wanted. Quite another order, in the whole connection, strikes
me as reigning to-day--though not without the reminder from it that the
relations in which manner, as a generalised thing, in which "tone," is
_positively_ pleasant, is really assured and sound, clear and
interesting, are numerous and definite only when it has had in its past
some strange phases and much misadventure.




XXIII


We were still being but vaguely "formed," yet it was a vagueness
preferred apparently by our parents to the only definiteness in any
degree open to us, that of the English school away from home (the London
private school near home they would absolutely none of;) which they saw
as a fearful and wonderful, though seemingly effective, preparation of
the young for English life and an English career, but related to that
situation only, so little related in fact to any other as to make it, in
a differing case, an educational cul-de-sac, the worst of economies.
They had doubtless heard claimed for it just that no other method for
boys _was_ so splendidly general, but they had, I judge, their own sense
of the matter--which would have been that it all depended on what was
meant by this. The truth was, above all, that to them the formative
forces most closely bearing on us were not in the least vague, but very
definite by _their_ measure and intention; there were "advantages,"
generally much belauded, that appealed to them scantly, and other
matters, conceptions of character and opportunity, ideals, values,
importances, enjoying no great common credit but for which it was their
belief that they, under whatever difficulties, more or less provided. In
respect of which I further remind myself of the blest fewness, as yet,
of our years; and I come back to my own sense, benighted though it may
have been, of a highly-coloured and remarkably active life. I recognise
our immediate, our practical ferment even in our decent perambulations,
our discussions, W. J.'s and mine, of whether we had in a given case
best apply for a renewal of our "artists' materials" to Messrs. Rowney
or to Messrs. Windsor and Newton, and in our pious resort, on these
determinations, to Rathbone Place, more beset by our steps, probably,
than any other single corner of the town, and the short but charged
vista of which lives for me again in the tempered light of those old
winter afternoons. Of scarce less moment than these were our frequent
visits, in the same general connection, to the old Pantheon of Oxford
Street, now fallen from its high estate, but during that age a place of
fine rococo traditions, a bazaar, an exhibition, an opportunity, at the
end of long walks, for the consumption of buns and ginger-beer, and
above all a monument to the genius of that wonderful painter B. R.
Haydon. We must at one time quite have haunted the Pantheon, where we
doubtless could better than elsewhere sink to contemplative, to
ruminative rest: Haydon's huge canvases covered the walls--I wonder
what has become now of The Banishment of Aristides, attended to the city
gate by his wife and babe, every attitude and figure in which,
especially that of the foreshortened boy picking up stones to shy at the
all-too-just, stares out at me still. We found in these works remarkable
interest and beauty, the reason of which was partly, no doubt, that we
hung, to fascination, at home, over the three volumes of the hapless
artist's Autobiography, then a new book, which our father, indulgent to
our preoccupation, had provided us with; but I blush to risk the further
surmise that the grand manner, the heroic and the classic, in Haydon,
came home to us more warmly and humanly than in the masters commended as
"old," who, at the National Gallery, seemed to meet us so little
half-way, to hold out the hand of fellowship or suggest something that
_we_ could do, or could at least want to. The beauty of Haydon was just
that he was new, shiningly new, and if he hinted that we might perhaps
in some happy future emulate his big bravery there was nothing so
impossible about it. If we adored daubing we preferred it _fresh_, and
the genius of the Pantheon was fresh, whereas, strange to say, Rubens
and Titian were not. Even the charm of the Pantheon yielded, however, to
that of the English collection, the Vernon bequest to the nation, then
arrayed at Marlborough House and to which the great plumed and draped
and dusty funeral car of the Duke of Wellington formed an attractive
adjunct. The ground-floor chambers there, none of them at that time
royally inhabited, come back to me as altogether bleak and bare and as
owing their only dignity to Maclise, Mulready and Landseer, to David
Wilkie and Charles Leslie. _They_ were, by some deep-seated English
mystery, the real unattainable, just as they were none the less the
directly inspiring and the endlessly delightful. I could never have
enough of Maclise's Play-scene in Hamlet, which I supposed the finest
composition in the world (though Ophelia did look a little as if cut in
silhouette out of white paper and pasted on;) while as I gazed, and
gazed again, at Leslie's Sancho Panza and his Duchess I pushed through
the great hall of romance to the central or private apartments.
Trafalgar Square had its straight message for us only in the May-time
exhibition, the Royal Academy of those days having, without a home of
its own, to borrow space from the National Gallery--space partly
occupied, in the summer of 1856, by the first fresh fruits of the
Pre-Raphaelite efflorescence, among which I distinguish Millais's Vale
of Rest, his Autumn Leaves and, if I am not mistaken, his prodigious
Blind Girl. The very word Pre-Raphaelite wore for us that intensity of
meaning, not less than of mystery, that thrills us in its perfection but
for one season, the prime hour of first initiations, and I may perhaps
somewhat mix the order of our great little passages of perception.
Momentous to us again was to be the Academy show of 1858, where there
were, from the same wide source, still other challenges to wonder,
Holman Hunt's Scapegoat most of all, which I remember finding so charged
with the awful that I was glad I saw it in company--_it_ in company and
I the same: I believed, or tried to believe, I should have feared to
face it all alone in a room. By that time moreover--I mean by 1858--we
had been more fully indoctrinated, or such was the case at least with
W. J., for whom, in Paris, during the winter of 1857, instruction at the
atelier of M. Léon Coigniet, of a limited order and adapted to his
years, had been candidly provided--that M. Léon Coigniet whose Marius
meditating among the Ruins of Carthage impressed us the more, at the
Luxembourg (even more haunted by us in due course than the Pantheon had
been,) in consequence of this family connection.

Let me not, however, nip the present thread of our æsthetic evolution
without a glance at that comparatively spare but deeply appreciated
experience of the London theatric privilege which, so far as occasion
favoured us, also pressed the easy spring. The New York familiarities
had to drop; going to the play presented itself in London as a serious,
ponderous business: a procession of two throbbing and heaving cabs over
vast foggy tracts of the town, after much arrangement in advance and
with a renewal of far peregrination, through twisting passages and
catacombs, even after crossing the magic threshold. We sat in strange
places, with still stranger ones behind or beside; we felt walls and
partitions, in our rear, getting so hot that we wondered if the house
was to burst into flame; I recall in especial our being arrayed, to the
number of nine persons, all of our contingent, in a sort of rustic
balcony or verandah which, simulating the outer gallery of a Swiss
cottage framed in creepers, formed a feature of Mr. Albert Smith's
once-famous representation of the Tour of Mont Blanc. Big, bearded,
rattling, chattering, mimicking Albert Smith again charms my senses,
though subject to the reflection that his type and presence,
superficially so important, so ample, were somehow at odds with such
ingratiations, with the reckless levity of his performance--a
performance one of the great effects of which was, as I remember it, the
very brief stop and re-departure of the train at Épernay, with the
ringing of bells, the bawling of guards, the cries of travellers, the
slamming of doors and the tremendous pop as of a colossal
champagne-cork, made all simultaneous and vivid by Mr. Smith's mere
personal resources and graces. But it is the publicity of our situation
as a happy family that I best remember, and how, to our embarrassment,
we seemed put forward in our illustrative châlet as part of the
boisterous show and of what had been paid for by the house. Two other
great evenings stand out for me as not less collectively enjoyed, one of
these at the Princess's, then under the management of Charles Kean, the
unprecedented (as he was held) Shakespearean revivalist, the other at
the Olympic, where Alfred Wigan, the extraordinary and too short-lived
Robson and the shrewd and handsome Mrs. Stirling were the high
attraction. Our enjoyment of Charles Kean's presentation of Henry the
Eighth figures to me as a momentous date in our lives: we did nothing
for weeks afterwards but try to reproduce in water-colours Queen
Katharine's dream-vision of the beckoning, consoling angels, a radiant
group let down from the skies by machinery then thought marvellous--when
indeed we were not parading across our schoolroom stage as the
portentous Cardinal and impressively alternating his last speech to
Cromwell with Buckingham's, that is with Mr. Ryder's, address on the way
to the scaffold. The spectacle had seemed to us prodigious--as it was
doubtless at its time the last word of costly scenic science; though as
I look back from the high ground of an age that has mastered tone and
fusion I seem to see it as comparatively garish and violent, after the
manner of the complacently approved stained-glass church-windows of the
same period. I was to have my impression of Charles Kean renewed later
on--ten years later, in America--without a rag of scenic reinforcement;
when I was struck with the fact that no actor so little graced by nature
probably ever went so far toward repairing it by a kind of cold rage of
endeavour. Were he and his wife really not _coercively_ interesting on
that Boston night of Macbeth in particular, hadn't their art a
distinction that triumphed over battered age and sorry harshness, or was
I but too easily beguiled by the old association? I have enjoyed and
forgotten numberless rich hours of spectatorship, but somehow still find
hooked to the wall of memory the picture of this hushed couple in the
castle court, with the knocking at the gate, with Macbeth's stare of
pitiful horror at his unused daggers and with the grand manner, up to
the height of the argument, of Mrs. Kean's coldly portentous snatch of
them. What I especially owe that lady is my sense of what she had in
common, as a queer hooped and hook-nosed figure, of large circumference
and archaic attire, strange tasteless toggery, with those performers of
the past who are preserved for us on the small canvases of Hogarth and
Zoffany; she helped one back at that time of her life to a vision of
the Mrs. Cibbers and the Mrs. Pritchards--so affecting may often be such
recovered links.

I see the evening at the Olympic as really itself partaking of that
antiquity, even though Still Waters Run Deep, then in its flourishing
freshness and as to which I remember my fine old friend Fanny Kemble's
mentioning to me in the distant after-time that she had directed Tom
Taylor to Charles de Bernard's novel of Un Gendre for the subject of it,
passed at the moment for a highly modern "social study." It is perhaps
in particular through the memory of our dismal approach to the theatre,
the squalid slum of Wych Street, then incredibly brutal and barbarous as
an avenue to joy, an avenue even sometimes for the muffled coach of
Royalty, that the episode affects me as antedating some of the
conditions of the mid-Victorian age; the general credit of which, I
should add, was highly re-established for us by the consummately quiet
and natural art, as we expertly pronounced it, of Alfred Wigan's John
Mildmay and the breadth and sincerity of the representative of the rash
mother-in-law whom he so imperturbably puts in her place. This was an
exhibition supposed in its day to leave its spectators little to envy in
the highest finish reached by the French theatre. At a remarkable
height, in a different direction, moved the strange and vivid little
genius of Robson, a master of fantastic intensity, unforgettable for
us, we felt that night, in Planché's extravaganza of The Discreet
Princess, a Christmas production preluding to the immemorial
harlequinade. I still see Robson slide across the stage, in one sidelong
wriggle, as the small black sinister Prince Richcraft of the fairy-tale,
everything he did at once very dreadful and very droll, thoroughly true
and yet none the less _macabre_, the great point of it all its parody of
Charles Kean in The Corsican Brothers; a vision filled out a couple of
years further on by his Daddy Hardacre in a two-acts version of a
Parisian piece thriftily and coarsely extracted from Balzac's Eugénie
Grandet. This occasion must have given the real and the finer measure of
his highly original talent; so present to me, despite the interval, is
the distinctiveness of his little concentrated rustic miser whose
daughter helps herself from his money-box so that her cousin and lover
shall save a desperate father, her paternal uncle, from bankruptcy; and
the prodigious effect of Robson's appalled descent, from an upper floor,
his literal headlong tumble and rattle of dismay down a steep staircase
occupying the centre of the stage, on his discovery of the rifling of
his chest. Long was I to have in my ears the repeated shriek of his
alarm, followed by a panting babble of wonder and rage as his impetus
hurled him, a prostrate scrap of despair (he was a tiny figure, yet "so
held the stage" that in his company you could see nobody else) half way
across the room. I associate a little uncertainly with the same night
the sight of Charles Matthews in Sheridan's Critic and in a comedy
botched from the French, like everything else in those days that was not
either Sheridan or Shakespeare, called Married for Money; an example
above all, this association, of the heaped measure of the old
bills--vast and various enumerations as they were, of the size of but
slightly reduced placards and with a strange and delightful greasy feel
and redolence of printer's ink, intensely theatrical ink somehow, in
their big black lettering. Charles Matthews must have been then in his
mid-career, and him too, wasted and aged, infinitely "marked," I was to
see again, ever so long after, in America; an impression reminding me,
as I recover it, of how one took his talent so thoroughly for granted
that he seemed somehow to get but half the credit of it: this at least
in all save parts of mere farce and "patter," which were on a footing,
and no very interesting one, of their own. The other effect, that of a
naturalness so easy and immediate, so friendly and intimate, that one's
relation with the artist lost itself in one's relation with the
character, the artist thereby somehow positively suffering while the
character gained, or at least while the spectator did--this comes back
to me quite as a part even of my earlier experience and as attesting on
behalf of the actor a remarkable genius; since there are no more
charming artistic cases than those of the frank result, when it is frank
_enough_, and the dissimulated process, when the dissimulation has been
deep. To drop, or appear to drop, machinery and yet keep, or at least
gain, intensity, the interesting intensity separated by a gulf from a
mere unbought coincidence of aspect or organ, is really to do something.
In spite of which, at the same time, what I perhaps most retain, by the
light of the present, of the sense of that big and rather dusky night of
Drury Lane is not so much the felt degree of anyone's talent as the fact
that personality and artistry, _with_ their intensity, could work their
spell in such a material desert, in conditions intrinsically so
charmless, so bleak and bare. The conditions gave nothing of what we
regard to-day as most indispensable--since our present fine conception
is but to reduce and fill in the material desert, to people and carpet
and curtain it. We may be right, so far as that goes, but our
predecessors were, with their eye on the essence, not wrong; thanks to
which they wear the crown of our now thinking of them--if we do think of
them--as in their way giants and heroes. What their successors were to
become is another question; very much better dressed, beyond all doubt.




XXIV


Good Robert Thompson was followed by _fin_ M. Lerambert--who was surely
good too, in his different way; good at least for feigning an interest
he could scarce have rejoicingly felt and that he yet somehow managed to
give a due impression of: that artifice being, as we must dimly have
divined at the time (in fact I make bold to say that I personally did
divine it,) exactly a sign of his _finesse_. Of no such uncanny engine
had Mr. Thompson, luckily, known a need--luckily since to what arsenal
could he possibly have resorted for it? None capable of supplying it
could ever have met his sight, and we ourselves should at a pinch have
had to help him toward it. He was easily interested, or at least took an
easy view, on such ground as we offered him, of what it was to be so;
whereas his successor attached to the condition a different value--one
recognising no secondary substitute. Perhaps this was why our connection
with M. Lerambert can have lasted but four or five months--time even for
his sharp subterfuge to have ceased entirely to serve him; though indeed
even as I say this I vaguely recall that our separation was attended
with friction, that it took him unaware and that he had been prepared
(or so represented himself) for further sacrifices. It could have been
no great one, assuredly, to deal with so intensely living a young mind
as my elder brother's, it could have been but a happy impression
constantly renewed; but we two juniors, Wilky and I, were a
drag--Wilky's powers most displayed at that time in his preference for
ingenuous talk over any other pursuit whatever, and my own aptitude
showing for nil, according to our poor gentleman's report of me when a
couple of months had sped, save as to rendering La Fontaine's fables
into English with a certain corresponding felicity of idiom. I remember
perfectly the parental communication to me of this fell judgment, I
remember as well the interest with which its so quite definite character
inspired me--that character had such beauty and distinctness; yet, and
ever so strangely, I recover no sense of having been crushed, and this
even though destitute, utterly, of any ground of appeal. The fact leaves
me at a loss, since I also remember my not having myself thought
particularly well, in the connection allowed, of my "rendering" faculty.
"Oh," I seem inwardly to have said, "if it were to be, if it only could
be, _really_ a question of rendering--!" and so, without confusion,
though in vague, very vague, mystification to have left it: as if so
many things, intrinsic and extrinsic, would have to change and operate,
so many would have to happen, so much water have to flow under the
bridge, before I could give primary application to such a thought, much
more finish such a sentence.

All of which is but a way of saying that we had since the beginning of
the summer settled ourselves in Paris, and that M. Lerambert--by what
agency invoked, by what revelation vouchsafed, I quite forget--was at
this time attending us in a so-called pavilion, of middling size, that,
between the Rond-Point and the Rue du Colisée, hung, at no great height,
over the Avenue des Champs-Elysées; hung, that is, from the vantage of
its own considerable terrace, surmounted as the parapet of the latter
was with iron railings rising sufficiently to protect the place for
familiar use and covert contemplation (we ever so fondly used it,) and
yet not to the point of fencing out life. A blest little old-world
refuge it must have seemed to us, with its protuberantly-paved and
peculiarly resonant small court and idle _communs_ beside it, accessible
by a high grille where the jangle of the bell and the clatter of
response across the stones might have figured a comprehensive echo of
all old Paris. Old Paris then even there considerably lingered; I
recapture much of its presence, for that matter, within our odd relic
of a house, the property of an American southerner from whom our
parents had briefly hired it and who appeared to divide his time, poor
unadmonished gentleman of the eve of the Revolution, between Louisiana
and France. What association could have breathed more from the queer
graces and the queer incommodities alike, from the diffused glassy
polish of floor and perilous staircase, from the redundancy of mirror
and clock and ormolu vase, from the irrepressibility of the white and
gold panel, from that merciless elegance of tense red damask, above all,
which made the gilt-framed backs of sofa and chair as sumptuous, no
doubt, but as sumptuously stiff, as the brocaded walls? It was amid
these refinements that we presently resumed our studies--even explicitly
far from arduous at first, as the Champs-Elysées were perforce that year
our summer habitation and some deference was due to the place and the
season, lessons of any sort being at best an infraction of the latter.
M. Lerambert, who was spare and tightly black-coated, spectacled, pale
and prominently intellectual, who lived in the Rue Jacob with his mother
and sister, exactly as he should have done to accentuate prophetically
his resemblance, save for the spectacles, to some hero of Victor
Cherbuliez, and who, in fine, was conscious, not unimpressively, of his
authorship of a volume of meditative verse sympathetically mentioned by
the Sainte-Beuve of the Causeries in a review of the young poets of the
hour ("M. Lerambert too has loved, M. Lerambert too has suffered, M.
Lerambert too has sung!" or words to that effect:) this subtle
personality, really a high form of sensibility I surmise, and as
qualified for other and intenser relations as any Cherbuliez figure of
them all, was naturally not to be counted on to lead us gapingly forth
as good Mr. Thompson had done; so that my reminiscence of warm
somniferous mornings by the windows that opened to the clattery, plashy
court is quite, so far as my record goes, relievingly unbroken.

The afternoons, however, glimmer back to me shamelessly different, for
our circle had promptly been joined by the all-knowing and all-imposing
Mademoiselle Danse aforesaid, her of the so flexible _taille_ and the so
salient smiling eyes, than which even those of Miss Rebecca Sharp, that
other epic governess, were not more pleasingly green; who provided with
high efficiency for our immediate looser needs--mine and Wilky's and
those of our small brother Bob (l'ingénieux petit Robertson as she was
to dub him,) and of our still smaller sister at least--our first fine
_flâneries_ of curiosity. Her brave Vaudoise predecessor had been
bequeathed by us in London to a higher sphere than service with mere
earnest nomads could represent; but had left us clinging and weeping
and was for a long time afterwards to write to us, faithfully, in the
most beautiful copper-plate hand, out of the midst of her "rise"; with
details that brought home to us as we had never known it brought the
material and institutional difference between the nomadic and the
solidly, the spreadingly seated. A couple of years later, on an occasion
of our being again for a while in London, she hastened to call on us,
and, on departing, amiably invited me to walk back with her, for a
gossip--it was a bustling day of June--across a long stretch of the
town; when I left her at a glittering portal with the impression of my
having in our transit seen much of Society (the old London "season"
filled the measure, had length and breadth and thickness, to an extent
now foregone,) and, more particularly, achieved a small psychologic
study, noted the action of the massive English machinery directed to its
end, which had been in this case effectually to tame the presumptuous
and "work over" the crude. I remember on that occasion retracing my
steps from Eaton Square to Devonshire Street with a lively sense of
observation exercised by the way, a perfect gleaning of golden straws.
Our guide and philosopher of the summer days in Paris was no such
character as that; she had arrived among us full-fledged and consummate,
fortunately for the case altogether--as our mere candid humanity would
otherwise have had scant practical pressure to bring. Thackeray's novel
contains a plate from his own expressive hand representing Miss Sharp
lost in a cynical day-dream while her neglected pupils are locked in a
scrimmage on the floor; but the marvel of _our_ exemplar of the Becky
type was exactly that though her larger, her more interested and
sophisticated views had a range that she not only permitted us to guess
but agreeably invited us to follow almost to their furthest limits, we
never for a moment ceased to be aware of her solicitude. We might, we
must, so tremendously have bored her, but no ironic artist could have
caught her at any juncture in the posture of disgust: really, I imagine,
because her own ironies would have been too fine for him and too
numerous and too mixed. And this remarkable creature vouchsafed us all
information for the free enjoyment--on the terms proper to our tender
years--of her beautiful city.

It was not by the common measure then so beautiful as now; the second
Empire, too lately installed, was still more or less feeling its way,
with the great free hand soon to be allowed to Baron Haussmann marked as
yet but in the light preliminary flourish. Its connections with the
past, however, still hung thickly on; its majesties and symmetries,
comparatively vague and general, were subject to the happy accident, the
charming lapse and the odd extrusion, a bonhomie of chance composition
and colour now quite purged away. The whole region of the
Champs-Elysées, where we must after all at first have principally
prowled, was another world from the actual huge centre of repeated
radiations; the splendid Avenue, as we of course already thought it,
carried the eye from the Tuileries to the Arch, but pleasant old places
abutted on it by the way, gardens and terraces and hôtels of another
time, pavilions still braver than ours, cabarets and cafés of homely,
almost of rural type, with a relative and doubtless rather dusty
ruralism, spreading away to the River and the Wood. What was the Jardin
d'Hiver, a place of entertainment standing quite over against us and
that looped itself at night with little coloured oil-lamps, a mere
twinkling grin upon the face of pleasure? Dim my impression of having
been admitted--or rather, I suppose, conducted, though under
conductorship now vague to me--to view it by colourless day, when it
must have worn the stamp of an auction-room quite void of the "lots."
More distinct on the other hand the image of the bustling barrière at
the top of the Avenue, on the hither side of the Arch, where the old
loose-girt _banlieue_ began at once and the two matched lodges of the
octroi, highly, that is expressly even if humbly, architectural, guarded
the entrance, on either side, with such a suggestion of the generations
and dynasties and armies, the revolutions and restorations they had
seen come and go. But the Avenue of the Empress, now, so much more
thinly, but of the Wood itself, had already been traced, as the Empress
herself, young, more than young, attestedly and agreeably _new_, and
fair and shining, was, up and down the vista, constantly on exhibition;
with the thrill of that surpassed for us, however, by the incomparable
passage, as we judged it, of the baby Prince Imperial borne forth for
his airing or his progress to Saint-Cloud in the splendid coach that
gave a glimpse of appointed and costumed nursing breasts and laps, and
beside which the _cent-gardes_, all light-blue and silver and intensely
erect quick jolt, rattled with pistols raised and cocked. Was a public
holiday ever more splendid than that of the Prince's baptism at Notre
Dame, the fête of Saint-Napoléon, or was any ever more immortalised, as
we say, than this one was to be by the wonderfully ample and vivid
picture of it in the Eugène Rougon of Emile Zola, who must have taken it
in, on the spot, as a boy of about our own number of years, though of so
much more implanted and predestined an evocatory gift? The sense of that
interminable hot day, a day of hanging about and waiting and shuffling
in dust, in crowds, in fatigue, amid booths and pedlars and performers
and false alarms and expectations and renewed reactions and rushes, all
transfigured at the last, withal, by the biggest and brightest
illumination up to that time offered even the Parisians, the blinding
glare of the new Empire effectually symbolised--the vision of the whole,
I say, comes back to me quite in the form of a chapter from the
Rougon-Macquart, with its effect of something long and dense and heavy,
without shades or undertones, but immensely kept-up and done. I dare say
that for those months our contemplations, our daily exercise in general,
strayed little beyond the Champs-Elysées, though I recall confusedly as
well certain excursions to Passy and Auteuil, where we foregathered with
small resident compatriots the easy gutturalism of whose French, an
unpremeditated art, was a revelation, an initiation, and whence we
roamed, for purposes of picnic, into parts of the Bois de Boulogne that,
oddly enough, figured to us the virgin forest better than anything at
our own American door had done.

It was the social aspect of our situation that most appealed to me, none
the less--for I detect myself, as I woo it all back, disengaging a
social aspect again, and more than ever, from the phenomena disclosed to
my reflective gape or to otherwise associated strolls; perceptive
passages not wholly independent even of the occupancy of two-sous chairs
within the charmed circle of Guignol and of Gringalet. I suppose I
should have blushed to confess it, but Polichinelle and his puppets, in
the afternoons, under an umbrage sparse till evening fell, had still
their spell to cast--as part and parcel, that is, of the general
intensity of animation and variety of feature. The "amusement," the
æsthetic and human appeal, of Paris had in those days less the air of a
great shining conspiracy to please, the machinery in movement confessed
less to its huge purpose; but manners and types and traditions, the
detail of the scene, its pointed particulars, went their way with a
straighter effect, as well as often with a homelier grace--character,
temper and tone had lost comparatively little of their emphasis. These
scattered accents were matter for our eyes and ears--not a little even
already for our respective imaginations; though it is only as the season
waned and we set up our fireside afresh and for the winter that I
connect my small revolution with a wider field and with the company of
W. J. Again for that summer he was to be in eclipse to me; Guignol and
Gringalet failed to claim his attention, and Mademoiselle Danse, I make
out, deprecated his theory of exact knowledge, besides thinking him
perhaps a little of an _ours_--which came to the same thing. We
adjourned that autumn to quarters not far off, a wide-faced apartment in
the street then bravely known as the Rue d'Angoulême-St.-Honoré and now,
after other mutations, as the Rue La Boëtie; which we were again to
exchange a year later for an abode in the Rue Montaigne, this last
after a summer's absence at Boulogne-sur-Mer; the earlier migration
setting up for me the frame of a considerably animated picture. Animated
at best it was with the spirit and the modest facts of our family life,
among which I number the cold finality of M. Lerambert, reflected in
still other testimonies--that is till the date of our definite but
respectful rupture with him, followed as the spring came on by our
ineluctable phase at the Institution Fezandié in the Rue Balzac; of
which latter there will be even more to say than I shall take freedom
for. With the Rue d'Angoulême came extensions--even the mere immediate
view of opposite intimacies and industries, the subdivided aspects and
neat ingenuities of the applied Parisian genius counting as such: our
many-windowed _premier_, above an entresol of no great height, hung over
the narrow and, during the winter months, not a little dusky channel,
with endless movement and interest in the vivid exhibition it supplied.
What faced us was a series of subjects, with the baker, at the corner,
for the first--the impeccable dispenser of the so softly-crusty
crescent-rolls that we woke up each morning to hunger for afresh, with
our weak café-au-lait, as for the one form of "European" breakfast-bread
fit to be named even with the feeblest of our American forms. Then came
the small crêmerie, white picked out with blue, which, by some secret
of its own keeping, afforded, within the compass of a few feet square,
prolonged savoury meals to working men, white-frocked or blue-frocked,
to uniformed cabmen, stout or spare, but all more or less audibly
_bavards_ and discernibly critical; and next the compact embrasure of
the écaillère or oyster-lady, she and her paraphernalia fitted into
their interstice much as the mollusc itself into its shell; neighboured
in turn by the marchand-de-bois, peeping from as narrow a cage, his neat
faggots and chopped logs stacked beside him and above him in his
sentry-box quite as the niches of saints, in early Italian pictures, are
framed with tightly-packed fruits and flowers. Space and remembrance
fail me for the rest of the series, the attaching note of which comes
back as the note of diffused sociability and domestic, in fact more or
less æsthetic, ingenuity, with the street a perpetual parlour or
household centre for the flitting, pausing, conversing little bourgeoise
or ouvrière to sport, on every pretext and in every errand, her fluted
cap, her composed head, her neat ankles and her ready wit. Which is to
say indeed but that life and manners were more pointedly and
harmoniously expressed, under our noses there, than we had perhaps found
them anywhere save in the most salient passages of "stories"; though I
must in spite of it not write as if these trifles were all our fare.




XXV


That autumn renewed, I make out, our long and beguiled walks, my own
with W. J. in especial; at the same time that I have somehow the sense
of the whole more broken appeal on the part of Paris, the scanter
confidence and ease it inspired in us, the perhaps more numerous and
composite, but obscurer and more baffled intimations. Not indeed--for
all my brother's later vision of an accepted flatness in it--that there
was not some joy and some grasp; why else were we forever (as I seem to
conceive we were) measuring the great space that separated us from the
gallery of the Luxembourg, every step of which, either way we took it,
fed us with some interesting, some admirable image, kept us in relation
to something nobly intended? That particular walk was not prescribed us,
yet we appear to have hugged it, across the Champs-Elysées to the river,
and so over the nearest bridge and the quays of the left bank to the Rue
de Seine, as if it somehow held the secret of our future; to the extent
even of my more or less sneaking off on occasion to take it by myself,
to taste of it with a due undiverted intensity and the throb as of the
finest, which _could_ only mean the most Parisian, adventure. The
further quays, with their innumerable old bookshops and print-shops, the
long cases of each of these commodities, exposed on the parapets in
especial, must have come to know us almost as well as we knew them; with
plot thickening and emotion deepening steadily, however, as we mounted
the long, black Rue de Seine--_such_ a stretch of perspective, _such_ an
intensity of tone as it offered in those days; where every low-browed
vitrine waylaid us and we moved in a world of which the dark message,
expressed in we couldn't have said what sinister way too, might have
been "Art, art, art, don't you see? Learn, little gaping pilgrims, what
_that_ is!" Oh we learned, that is we tried to, as hard as ever we
could, and were fairly well at it, I always felt, even by the time we
had passed up into that comparatively short but wider and finer vista of
the Rue de Tournon, which in those days more abruptly crowned the more
compressed approach and served in a manner as a great outer vestibule to
the Palace. Style, dimly described, looked down there, as with conscious
encouragement, from the high grey-headed, clear-faced, straight-standing
old houses--very much as if wishing to say "Yes, small staring jeune
homme, we are dignity and memory and measure, we are conscience and
proportion and taste, not to mention strong sense too: for all of which
good things take us--you won't find one of them when you find (as you're
going soon to begin to at such a rate) vulgarity." This, I admit, was an
abundance of remark to such young ears; but it did all, I maintain,
tremble in the air, with the sense that the Rue de Tournon, cobbled and
a little grass-grown, might more or less have figured some fine old
street _de province_: I cherished in short its very name and think I
really hadn't to wait to prefer the then, the unmenaced, the inviolate
Café Foyot of the left hand corner, the much-loved and so haunted Café
Foyot of the old Paris, to its--well, to its roaring successor. The wide
mouth of the present Boulevard Saint-Michel, a short way round the
corner, had not yet been forced open to the exhibition of more or less
glittering fangs; old Paris still pressed round the Palace and its
gardens, which formed the right, the sober social antithesis to the
"elegant" Tuileries, and which in fine, with these renewals of our young
confidence, reinforced both in a general and in a particular way one of
the fondest of our literary curiosities of that time, the conscientious
study of Les Français Peints par Eux-Mêmes, rich in wood-cuts of
Gavarni, of Grandville, of Henri-Monnier, which we held it rather our
duty to admire and W. J. even a little his opportunity to copy in
pen-and-ink. This gilt-edged and double-columned octavo it was that
first disclosed to me, forestalling a better ground of acquaintance, the
great name of Balzac, who, in common with every other "light" writer of
his day, contributed to its pages: hadn't I pored over his exposition
there of the contrasted types of L'Habituée des Tuileries and L'Habituée
du Luxembourg?--finding it very _serré_, in fact what I didn't then know
enough to call very stodgy, but flavoured withal and a trifle lubricated
by Gavarni's two drawings, which had somehow so much, in general, to
say.

Let me not however dally by the way, when nothing, at those hours, I
make out, so much spoke to us as the animated pictured halls within the
Palace, primarily those of the Senate of the Empire, but then also
forming, as with extensions they still and much more copiously form, the
great Paris museum of contemporary art. This array was at that stage a
comparatively (though only comparatively) small affair; in spite of
which fact we supposed it vast and final--so that it would have shocked
us to foreknow how in many a case, and of the most cherished cases, the
finality was to break down. Most of the works of the modern schools that
we most admired are begging their bread, I fear, from door to door--that
is from one provincial museum or dim back seat to another; though we
were on much-subsequent returns to draw a long breath for the saved
state of some of the great things as to which our faith had been
clearest. It had been clearer for none, I recover, than for Couture's
Romains de la Décadence, recently acclaimed, at that time, as the last
word of the grand manner, but of the grand manner modernised, humanised,
philosophised, redeemed from academic death; so that it was to this
master's school that the young American contemporary flutter taught its
wings to fly straightest, and that I could never, in the long aftertime,
face his masterpiece and all its old meanings and marvels without a rush
of memories and a stir of ghosts. William Hunt, the New Englander of
genius, the "Boston painter" whose authority was greatest during the
thirty years from 1857 or so, and with whom for a time in the early
period W. J. was to work all devotedly, had prolonged his studies in
Paris under the inspiration of Couture and of Edouard Frère; masters in
a group completed by three or four of the so finely interesting
landscapists of that and the directly previous age, Troyon, Rousseau,
Daubigny, even Lambinet and others, and which summed up for the American
collector and in the New York and Boston markets the idea of the modern
in the masterly. It was a comfortable time--when appreciation could go
so straight, could rise, and rise higher, without critical contortions;
when we could, I mean, be both so intelligent and so "quiet." We were
in our immediate circle to know Couture himself a little toward the end
of his life, and I was somewhat to wonder then where he had picked up
the æsthetic hint for the beautiful Page with a Falcon, if I have the
designation right, his other great bid for style and capture of
it--which we were long to continue to suppose perhaps the rarest of all
modern pictures. The feasting Romans were conceivable enough, I mean
_as_ a conception; no mystery hung about them--in the sense of one's
asking one's self whence they had come and by what romantic or
roundabout or nobly-dangerous journey; which is that air of the poetic
shaken out as from strong wings when great presences, in any one of the
arts, appear to alight. What I remember, on the other hand, of the
splendid fair youth in black velvet and satin or whatever who, while he
mounts the marble staircase, shows off the great bird on his forefinger
with a grace that shows _him_ off, was that it failed to help us to
divine, during that after-lapse of the glory of which I speak, by what
rare chance, for the obscured old ex-celebrity we visited, the heavens
had once opened. Poetry had swooped down, breathed on him for an hour
and fled. Such at any rate are the see-saws of reputations--which it
contributes to the interest of any observational lingering on this
planet to have caught so repeatedly in their weird motion; the question
of what may happen, under one's eyes, in particular cases, before that
motion sinks to rest, whether at the up or at the down end, being really
a bribe to one's own non-departure. Especially great the interest of
having noted all the rises and falls and of being able to compare the
final point--so far as any certainty may go as to that--either with the
greatest or the least previous altitudes; since it is only when there
have been exaltations (which is what is not commonest), that our
attention is most rewarded.

If the see-saw was to have operated indeed for Eugène Delacroix, our
next young admiration, though much more intelligently my brother's than
mine, that had already taken place and settled, for we were to go on
seeing him, and to the end, in firm possession of his crown, and to take
even, I think, a harmless pleasure in our sense of having from so far
back been sure of it. I was sure of it, I must properly add, but as an
effect of my brother's sureness; since I must, by what I remember, have
been as sure of Paul Delaroche--for whom the pendulum was at last to be
arrested at a very different point. I could see in a manner, for all the
queerness, what W. J. meant by that beauty and, above all, that living
interest in La Barque du Dante, where the queerness, according to him,
was perhaps what contributed most; see it doubtless in particular when
he reproduced the work, at home, from a memory aided by a lithograph.
Yet Les Enfants d'Edouard thrilled me to a different tune, and I
couldn't doubt that the long-drawn odd face of the elder prince, sad and
sore and sick, with his wide crimped side-locks of fair hair and his
violet legs marked by the Garter and dangling from the bed, was a
reconstitution of far-off history of the subtlest and most "last word"
modern or psychologic kind. I had never heard of psychology in art or
anywhere else--scarcely anyone then had; but I truly felt the nameless
force at play. Thus if I also in my way "subtly" admired, one's noted
practice of that virtue (mainly regarded indeed, I judge, as a vice)
would appear to have at the time I refer to set in, under such
encouragements, once for all; and I can surely have enjoyed up to then
no formal exhibition of anything as I at one of those seasons enjoyed
the commemorative show of Delaroche given, soon after his death, in one
of the rather bleak salles of the École des Beaux-Arts to which access
was had from the quay. _There_ was reconstituted history if one would,
in the straw-littered scaffold, the distracted ladies with
three-cornered coifs and those immense hanging sleeves that made them
look as if they had bath-towels over their arms; in the block, the
headsman, the bandaged eyes and groping hands, of Lady Jane Grey--not
less than in the noble indifference of Charles the First, compromised
king but perfect gentleman, at his inscrutable ease in his chair and as
if on his throne, while the Puritan soldiers insult and badger him: the
thrill of which was all the greater from its pertaining to that English
lore which the good Robert Thompson had, to my responsive delight,
rubbed into us more than anything else and all from a fine old
conservative and monarchical point of view. Yet of these things W. J.
attempted no reproduction, though I remember his repeatedly laying his
hand on Delacroix, whom he found always and everywhere interesting--to
the point of trying effects, with charcoal and crayon, in his manner;
and not less in the manner of Decamps, whom we regarded as more or less
of a genius of the same rare family. They were touched with the
ineffable, the inscrutable, and Delacroix in especial with the
incalculable; categories these toward which we had even then, by a happy
transition, begun to yearn and languish. We were not yet aware of style,
though on the way to become so, but were aware of mystery, which indeed
was one of its forms--while we saw all the others, without exception,
exhibited at the Louvre, where at first they simply overwhelmed and
bewildered me.

It was as if they had gathered there into a vast deafening chorus; I
shall never forget how--speaking, that is, for my own sense--they
filled those vast halls with the influence rather of some complicated
sound, diffused and reverberant, than of such visibilities as one could
directly deal with. To distinguish among these, in the charged and
coloured and confounding air, was difficult--it discouraged and defied;
which was doubtless why my impression originally best entertained was
that of those magnificent parts of the great gallery simply not inviting
us to distinguish. They only arched over us in the wonder of their
endless golden riot and relief, figured and flourished in perpetual
revolution, breaking into great high-hung circles and symmetries of
squandered picture, opening into deep outward embrasures that threw off
the rest of monumental Paris somehow as a told story, a sort of wrought
effect or bold ambiguity for a vista, and yet held it there, at every
point, as a vast bright gage, even at moments a felt adventure, of
experience. This comes to saying that in those beginnings I felt myself
most happily cross that bridge over to Style constituted by the wondrous
Galerie d'Apollon, drawn out for me as a long but assured initiation and
seeming to form with its supreme coved ceiling and inordinately shining
parquet a prodigious tube or tunnel through which I inhaled little by
little, that is again and again, a general sense of _glory_. The glory
meant ever so many things at once, not only beauty and art and supreme
design, but history and fame and power, the world in fine raised to the
richest and noblest expression. The world there was at the same time, by
an odd extension or intensification, the local present fact, to my small
imagination, of the Second Empire, which was (for my notified
consciousness) new and queer and perhaps even wrong, but on the spot so
amply radiant and elegant that it took to itself, took under its
protection with a splendour of insolence, the state and ancientry of the
whole scene, profiting thus, to one's dim historic vision, confusedly
though it might be, by the unparalleled luxury and variety of its
heritage. But who shall count the sources at which an intense young
fancy (when a young fancy _is_ intense) capriciously, absurdly
drinks?--so that the effect is, in twenty connections, that of a
love-philtre or fear-philtre which fixes for the senses their supreme
symbol of the fair or the strange. The Galerie d'Apollon became for
years what I can only term a splendid scene of things, even of the quite
irrelevant or, as might be, almost unworthy; and I recall to this hour,
with the last vividness, what a precious part it played for me, and
exactly by that continuity of honour, on my awaking, in a summer dawn
many years later, to the fortunate, the instantaneous recovery and
capture of the most appalling yet most admirable nightmare of my life.
The climax of this extraordinary experience--which stands alone for me
as a dream-adventure founded in the deepest, quickest, clearest act of
cogitation and comparison, act indeed of life-saving energy, as well as
in unutterable fear--was the sudden pursuit, through an open door, along
a huge high saloon, of a just dimly-descried figure that retreated in
terror before my rush and dash (a glare of inspired reaction from
irresistible but shameful dread,) out of the room I had a moment before
been desperately, and all the more abjectly, defending by the push of my
shoulder against hard pressure on lock and bar from the other side. The
lucidity, not to say the sublimity, of the crisis had consisted of the
great thought that I, in my appalled state, was probably still more
appalling than the awful agent, creature or presence, whatever he was,
whom I had guessed, in the suddenest wild start from sleep, the sleep
within my sleep, to be making for my place of rest. The triumph of my
impulse, perceived in a flash as I acted on it by myself at a bound,
forcing the door outward, was the grand thing, but the great point of
the whole was the wonder of my final recognition. Routed, dismayed, the
tables turned upon him by my so surpassing him for straight aggression
and dire intention, my visitant was already but a diminished spot in the
long perspective, the tremendous, glorious hall, as I say, over the
far-gleaming floor of which, cleared for the occasion of its great line
of priceless vitrines down the middle, he sped for _his_ life, while a
great storm of thunder and lightning played through the deep embrasures
of high windows at the right. The lightning that revealed the retreat
revealed also the wondrous place and, by the same amazing play, my young
imaginative life in it of long before, the sense of which, deep within
me, had kept it whole, preserved it to this thrilling use; for what in
the world were the deep embrasures and the so polished floor but those
of the Galerie d'Apollon of my childhood? The "scene of something" I had
vaguely then felt it? Well I might, since it was to be the scene of that
immense hallucination.

Of what, at the same time, in those years, were the great rooms of the
Louvre almost equally, above and below, not the scene, from the moment
they so wrought, stage by stage, upon our perceptions?--literally on
almost all of these, in one way and another; quite in such a manner, I
more and more see, as to have been educative, formative, fertilising, in
a degree which no other "intellectual experience" our youth was to know
could pretend, as a comprehensive, conducive thing, to rival. The sharp
and strange, the quite heart-shaking little prevision had come to me,
for myself, I make out, on the occasion of our very first visit of all,
my brother's and mine, under conduct of the good Jean Nadali,
before-mentioned, trustfully deputed by our parents, in the Rue de la
Paix, on the morrow of our first arrival in Paris (July 1855) and while
they were otherwise concerned. I hang again, appalled but uplifted, on
brave Nadali's arm--his professional acquaintance with the splendours
about us added for me on the spot to the charm of his "European"
character: I cling to him while I gape at Géricault's Radeau de la
Méduse, _the_ sensation, for splendour and terror of interest, of that
juncture to me, and ever afterwards to be associated, along with two or
three other more or less contemporary products, Guérin's Burial of
Atala, Prudhon's Cupid and Psyche, David's helmetted Romanisms, Madame
Vigée-Lebrun's "ravishing" portrait of herself and her little girl, with
how can I say what foretaste (as determined by that instant as if the
hour had struck from a clock) of all the fun, confusedly speaking, that
one was going to have, and the kind of life, always of the queer
so-called inward sort, tremendously "sporting" in its way--though that
description didn't then wait upon it, that one was going to lead. It
came of itself, this almost awful apprehension in all the presences,
under our courier's protection and in my brother's company--it came just
there and so; there was alarm in it somehow as well as bliss. The bliss
in fact I think scarce disengaged itself at all, but only the sense of
a freedom of contact and appreciation really too big for one, and
leaving such a mark on the very place, the pictures, the frames
themselves, the figures within them, the particular parts and features
of each, the look of the rich light, the smell of the massively enclosed
air, that I have never since renewed the old exposure without renewing
again the old emotion and taking up the small scared consciousness.
_That_, with so many of the conditions repeated, is the charm--to feel
afresh the beginning of so much that was to be. The beginning in short
was with Géricault and David, but it went on and on and slowly spread;
so that one's stretched, one's even strained, perceptions, one's
discoveries and extensions piece by piece, come back, on the great
premises, almost as so many explorations of the house of life, so many
circlings and hoverings round the image of the world. I have dim
reminiscences of permitted independent visits, uncorrectedly juvenile
though I might still be, during which the house of life and the palace
of art became so mixed and interchangeable--the Louvre being, under a
general description, the most peopled of all scenes not less than the
most hushed of all temples--that an excursion to look at pictures would
have but half expressed my afternoon. I had looked at pictures, looked
and looked again, at the vast Veronese, at Murillo's moon-borne
Madonna, at Leonardo's almost unholy dame with the folded hands,
treasures of the Salon Carré as that display was then composed; but I
had also looked at France and looked at Europe, looked even at America
as Europe itself might be conceived so to look, looked at history, as a
still-felt past and a complacently personal future, at society, manners,
types, characters, possibilities and prodigies and mysteries of fifty
sorts; and all in the light of being splendidly "on my own," as I
supposed it, though we hadn't then that perfection of slang, and of (in
especial) going and coming along that interminable and incomparable
Seine-side front of the Palace against which young sensibility felt
itself almost rub, for endearment and consecration, as a cat invokes the
friction of a protective piece of furniture. Such were at any rate some
of the vague processes--I see for how utterly vague they must show--of
picking up an education; and I was, in spite of the vagueness, so far
from agreeing with my brother afterwards that we didn't pick one up and
that that never _is_ done, in any sense not negligible, and also that an
education might, or should, in particular, have picked _us_ up, and yet
didn't--I was so far dissentient, I say, that I think I quite came to
glorify such passages and see them as part of an order really fortunate.
If we had been little asses, I seem to have reasoned, a higher
intention driving us wouldn't have made us less so--to any point worth
mentioning; and as we extracted such impressions, to put it at the
worst, from redemptive accidents (to call Louvres and Luxembourgs
nothing better) why we weren't little asses, but something wholly other:
which appeared all I needed to contend for. Above all it would have been
stupid and ignoble, an attested and lasting dishonour, not, with our
chance, to have followed our straggling clues, as many as we could and
disengaging as we happily did, I felt, the gold and the silver ones,
whatever the others might have been--not to have followed them and not
to have arrived by them, so far as we were to arrive. Instinctively, for
any dim designs we might have nourished, we picked out the silver and
the gold, attenuated threads though they must have been, and I
positively feel that there were more of these, far more, casually
interwoven, than will reward any present patience for my unravelling of
the too fine tissue.




XXVI


I allude of course in particular here to the æsthetic clue in general,
with which it was that we most (or that I at any rate most) fumbled,
without our in the least having then, as I have already noted, any such
rare name for it. There were sides on which it fairly dangled about us,
involving our small steps and wits; though others too where I could, for
my own part, but clutch at it in the void. Our experience of the theatre
for instance, which had played such a part for us at home, almost wholly
dropped in just the most propitious air: an anomaly indeed half
explained by the fact that life in general, all round us, was
perceptibly more theatrical. And there were other reasons, whether
definitely set before us or not, which we grasped in proportion as we
gathered, by depressing hearsay, that the French drama, great, strange
and important, was as much out of relation to our time of life, our so
little native strain and our cultivated innocence, as the American and
English had been directly addressed to them. To the Cirque d'Été, the
Cirque d'Hiver, the Théâtre du Cirque we were on occasion conducted--we
had fallen so to the level of circuses, and that name appeared a
safety; in addition to which the big theatre most bravely bearing it,
the especial home at that time of the glittering and multitudinous
_féerie_, did seem to lift the whole scenic possibility, for our eyes,
into a higher sphere of light and grace than any previously disclosed. I
recall Le Diable d'Argent as in particular a radiant revelation--kept
before us a whole long evening and as an almost blinding glare; which
was quite right for the _donnée_, the gradual shrinkage of the Shining
One, the money-monster hugely inflated at first, to all the successive
degrees of loose bagginess as he leads the reckless young man he has
originally contracted with from dazzling pleasure to pleasure, till at
last he is a mere shrivelled silver string such as you could almost draw
through a keyhole. That was the striking moral, for the young man,
however regaled, had been somehow "sold"; which _we_ hadn't in the least
been, who had had all his pleasures and none of his penalty, whatever
this was to be. I was to repine a little, in these connections, at a
much later time, on reflecting that had we only been "taken" in the
Paris of that period as we had been taken in New York we might have come
in for celebrities--supremely fine, perhaps supremely rank, flowers of
the histrionic temperament, springing as they did from the soil of the
richest romanticism and adding to its richness--who practised that
braver art and finer finish which a comparatively homogenous public,
forming a compact critical body, still left possible. Rachel was alive,
but dying; the memory of Mademoiselle Mars, at her latest, was still in
the air; Mademoiselle Georges, a massive, a monstrous antique, had
withal returned for a season to the stage; but we missed her, as we
missed Déjazet and Frédéric Lemâitre and Mélingue and Samson; to say
nothing of others of the age before the flood--taking for the flood that
actual high tide of the outer barbarian presence, the general alien and
polyglot, in stalls and boxes, which I remember to have heard Gustave
Flaubert lament as the ruin of the theatre through the assumption of
judgeship by a bench to whom the very values of the speech of author and
actor were virtually closed, or at the best uncertain.

I enjoyed but two snatches of the older representational art--no
particular of either of which, however, has faded from me; the earlier
and rarer of these an evening at the Gymnase for a _spectacle coupé_,
with Mesdames Rose Chéri, Mélanie, Delaporte and Victoria (afterwards
Victoria-La-fontaine). I squeeze again with my mother, my aunt and my
brother into the stuffy baignoire, and I take to my memory in especial
Madame de Girardin's Une Femme qui Déteste son Mari; the thrilling
story, as I judged it, of an admirable lady who, to save her loyalist
husband, during the Revolution, feigns the most Jacobin opinions,
represents herself a citoyenne of citoyennes, in order to keep him the
more safely concealed in her house. He flattens himself, to almost
greater peril of life, behind a panel of the wainscot, which she has a
secret for opening when he requires air and food and they may for a
fearful fleeting instant be alone together; and the point of the picture
is in the contrast between these melting moments and the heroine's
_tenue_ under the tremendous strain of receiving on the one side the
invading, investigating Terrorist commissaries, sharply suspicious but
successfully baffled, and on the other her noble relatives, her
husband's mother and sister if I rightly remember, who are not in the
secret and whom, for perfect prudence, she keeps out of it, though alone
with her, and themselves in hourly danger, they might be trusted, and
who, believing him concealed elsewhere and terribly tracked, treat her,
in her republican rage, as lost to all honour and all duty. One's sense
of such things after so long a time has of course scant authority for
others; but I myself trust my vision of Rose Chéri's fine play just as I
trust that of her _physique ingrat_, her at first extremely odd and
positively osseous appearance; an emaciated woman with a high bulging
forehead, somewhat of the form of Rachel's, for whom the triumphs of
produced illusion, as in the second, third and fourth great dramas of
the younger Dumas, had to be triumphs indeed. My one other reminiscence
of this order connects itself, and quite three years later, with the old
dingy Vaudeville of the Place de la Bourse, where I saw in my brother's
company a rhymed domestic drama of the then still admired Ponsard, Ce
qui Plaît aux Femmes; a piece that enjoyed, I believe, scant success,
but that was to leave with me ineffaceable images. How was it possible,
I wondered, to have more grace and talent, a rarer, cooler art, than
Mademoiselle Fargeuil, the heroine?--the fine lady whom a pair of rival
lovers, seeking to win her hand by offering her what will most please
her, treat, in the one case, to a brilliant fête, a little play within a
play, at which we assist, and in the other to the inside view of an
attic of misery, into which the more cunning suitor introduces her just
in time to save a poor girl, the tenant of the place, from being
ruinously, that is successfully, tempted by a terrible old woman, a
prowling _revendeuse_, who dangles before her the condition on which so
pretty a person may enjoy every comfort. Her happier sister, the courted
young widow, intervenes in time, reinforces her tottering virtue, opens
for her an account with baker and butcher, and, doubting no longer which
flame is to be crowned, charmingly shows us that what pleases women most
is the exercise of charity.

Then it was I first beheld that extraordinary veteran of the stage,
Mademoiselle Pierson, almost immemorially attached, for later
generations, to the Théâtre Français, the span of whose career thus
strikes me as fabulous, though she figured as a very juvenile beauty in
the small _féerie_ or allegory forming M. Ponsard's second act. She has
been playing mothers and aunts this many and many a year--and still
indeed much as a juvenile beauty. Not that light circumstance, however,
pleads for commemoration, nor yet the further fact that I was to admire
Mademoiselle Fargeuil, in the after-time, the time after she had given
all Sardou's earlier successes the help of her shining firmness, when
she had passed from interesting comedy and even from romantic drama--not
less, perhaps still more, interesting, with Sardou's Patrie as a
bridge--to the use of the bigger brush of the Ambigu and other homes of
melodrama. The sense, such as it is, that I extract from the pair of
modest memories in question is rather their value as a glimpse of the
old order that spoke so much less of our hundred modern material
resources, matters the stage of to-day appears mainly to live by, and
such volumes more of the one thing that was then, and that, given
various other things, had to be, of the essence. That one thing was the
quality, to say nothing of the quantity, of the actor's personal
resource, technical history, tested temper, proved experience; on which
almost everything had to depend, and the thought of which makes the mere
starved scene and medium of the period, the _rest_ of the picture, a
more confessed and more heroic battle-ground. They have been more and
more eased off, the scene and medium, for our couple of generations, so
much so in fact that the rest of the picture has become almost _all_ the
picture: the author and the producer, among us, lift the weight of the
play from the performer--particularly of the play dealing with our
immediate life and manners and aspects--after a fashion which does half
the work, thus reducing the "personal equation," the demand for the
maximum of individual doing, to a contribution mostly of the loosest and
sparest. As a sop to historic curiosity at all events may even so short
an impression serve; impression of the strenuous age and its fine old
masterful _assouplissement_ of its victims--who were not the expert
spectators. The spectators were so expert, so broken in to material
suffering for the sake of their passion, that, as the suffering was only
material, they found the æsthetic reward, the critical relish of the
essence, all adequate; a fact that seems in a sort to point a moral of
large application. Everything but the "interpretation," the personal, in
the French theatre of those days, had kinds and degrees of weakness and
futility, say even falsity, of which our modern habit is wholly
impatient--let alone other conditions still that were detestable even at
the time, and some of which, forms of discomfort and annoyance, linger
on to this day. The playhouse, in short, was almost a place of physical
torture, and it is still rarely in Paris a place of physical ease. Add
to this the old thinness of the school of Scribe and the old emptiness
of the thousand vaudevillistes; which part of the exhibition, till
modern comedy began, under the younger Dumas and Augier, had for its
counterpart but the terrible dead weight, or at least the prodigious
prolixity and absurdity, of much, not to say of most, of the romantic
and melodramatic "output." It _paid_ apparently, in the golden age of
acting, to sit through interminable evenings in impossible places--since
to assume that the age _was_ in that particular respect golden (for
which we have in fact a good deal of evidence) alone explains the
patience of the public. With the public the _actors_ were, according to
their seasoned strength, almost exclusively appointed to deal, just as
in the conditions most familiar to-day to ourselves this charge is laid
on almost everyone concerned in the case save the representatives of the
parts. And far more other people are now concerned than of old; not
least those who have learned to make the playhouse endurable. All of
which leaves us with this interesting vision of a possibly great truth,
the truth that you can't have more than one kind of intensity--intensity
worthy of the name--at once. The intensity of the golden age of the
histrion was the intensity of _his_ good faith. The intensity of our
period is that of the "producer's" and machinist's, to which add even
that of architect, author and critic. Between which derivative kind of
that article, as we may call it, and the other, the immediate kind, it
would appear that you have absolutely to choose.




XXVII


I see much of the rest of that particular Paris time in the light of the
Institution Fezandié, and I see the Institution Fezandié, Rue Balzac, in
the light, if not quite of Alphonse Daudet's lean asylum for the _petits
pays chauds_, of which I have felt the previous institutions of New York
sketchily remind me, at least in that of certain other of his studies in
that field of the precarious, the ambiguous Paris over parts of which
the great Arch at the top of the Champs-Elysées flings, at its hours, by
its wide protective plausible shadow, a precious mantle of "tone." They
gather, these chequered parts, into its vast paternal presence and enjoy
at its expense a degree of reflected dignity. It was to the big square
villa of the Rue Balzac that we turned, as pupils not unacquainted with
vicissitudes, from a scene swept bare of M. Lerambert, an establishment
that strikes me, at this distance of time, as of the oddest and most
indescribable--or as describable at best in some of the finer turns and
touches of Daudet's best method. The picture indeed should not be
invidious--it so little needs that, I feel, for its due measure of the
vivid, the queer, the droll, all coming back to me without prejudice to
its air as of an equally futile felicity. I see it as bright and loose
and vague, as confused and embarrassed and helpless; I see it, I fear,
as quite ridiculous, but as wholly harmless to my brothers and me at
least, and as having left us with a fund of human impressions; it played
before us such a variety of figure and character and so relieved us of a
sense of untoward discipline or of the pursuit of abstract knowledge. It
was a recreational, or at least a social, rather than a tuitional house;
which fact had, I really believe, weighed favourably with our parents,
when, bereft of M. Lerambert, they asked themselves, with their
considerable practice, how next to bestow us. Our father, like so many
free spirits of that time in New York and Boston, had been much
interested in the writings of Charles Fourier and in his scheme of the
"phalanstery" as the solution of human troubles, and it comes to me that
he must have met or in other words heard of M. Fezandié as an active and
sympathetic ex-Fourierist (I think there were only ex-Fourierists by
that time,) who was embarking, not far from us, on an experiment if not
absolutely phalansteric at least inspired, or at any rate enriched, by a
bold idealism. I like to think of the Institution as all but
phalansteric--it so corrects any fear that such places might be dreary.
I recall this one as positively gay--bristling and bustling and
resonant, untouched by the strenuous note, for instance, of Hawthorne's
co-operative Blithedale. I like to think that, in its then still almost
suburban, its pleasantly heterogeneous quarter, now oppressively
uniform, it was close to where Balzac had ended his life, though I
question its identity--as for a while I tried not to--with the scene
itself of the great man's catastrophe. Round its high-walled garden at
all events he would have come and gone--a throb of inference that had
for some years indeed to be postponed for me; though an association
displacing to-day, over the whole spot, every other interest. I in any
case can't pretend not to have been most appealed to by that especial
phase of our education from which the pedagogic process as commonly
understood was most fantastically absent. It excelled in this respect,
the Fezandié phase, even others exceptionally appointed, heaven knows,
for the supremacy; and yet its glory is that it was no poor blank, but
that it fairly creaked and groaned, heatedly overflowed, with its
wealth. We were _externes_, the three of us, but we remained in general
to luncheon; coming home then, late in the afternoon, with an almost
sore experience of multiplicity and vivacity of contact. For the beauty
of it all was that the Institution was, speaking technically, not more a
_pensionnat_, with prevailingly English and American pupils, than a
_pension_, with mature beneficiaries of both sexes, and that our two
categories were shaken up together to the liveliest effect. This had
been M. Fezandié's grand conception; a son of the south, bald and
slightly replete, with a delicate beard, a quick but anxious, rather
melancholy eye and a slim, graceful, juvenile wife, who multiplied
herself, though scarce knowing at moments, I think, where or how to
turn; I see him as a Daudet _méridional_, but of the sensitive, not the
sensual, type, as something of a rolling stone, rolling rather down
hill--he had enjoyed some arrested, possibly blighted, connection in
America--and as ready always again for some new application of faith and
funds. If fondly failing in the least to see why the particular
application in the Rue Balzac--the body of pensioners ranging from
infancy to hoary eld--shouldn't have been a bright success could have
made it one, it would have been a most original triumph.

I recover it as for ourselves a beautifully mixed adventure, a brave
little seeing of the world on the happy pretext of "lessons." We _had_
lessons from time to time, but had them in company with ladies and
gentlemen, young men and young women of the Anglo-Saxon family, who sat
at long boards of green cloth with us and with several of our
contemporaries, English and American boys, taking _dictées_ from the
head of the house himself or from the aged and most remarkable M.
Bonnefons, whom we believed to have been a superannuated actor (he above
all such a model for Daudet!) and who interrupted our abashed readings
aloud to him of the French classics older and newer by wondrous
reminiscences and even imitations of Talma. He moved among us in a cloud
of legend, the wigged and wrinkled, the impassioned, though I think alas
underfed, M. Bonnefons: it was our belief that he "went back," beyond
the first Empire, to the scenes of the Revolution--this perhaps partly
by reason, in the first place, of his scorn of our pronunciation, when
we met it, of the sovereign word _liberté_, the poverty of which, our
deplorable "libbeté," without r's, he mimicked and derided, sounding the
right, the revolutionary form out splendidly, with thirty r's, the
prolonged beat of a drum. And then we believed him, if artistically
conservative, politically obnoxious to the powers that then were, though
knowing that those so marked had to walk, and even to breathe,
cautiously for fear of the _mouchards_ of the tyrant; we knew all about
mouchards and talked of them as we do to-day of aviators or
suffragettes--to remember which in an age so candidly unconscious of
them is to feel how much history we have seen unrolled. There were times
when he but paced up and down and round the long table--I see him as
never seated, but always on the move, a weary Wandering Jew of the
_classe_; but in particular I hear him recite to us the combat with the
Moors from Le Cid and show us how Talma, describing it, seemed to crouch
down on his haunches in order to spring up again terrifically to the
height of "Nous nous levons alors!" which M. Bonnefons rendered as if on
the carpet there fifty men at least had leaped to their feet. But he
threw off these broken lights with a quick relapse to indifference; he
didn't like the Anglo-Saxon--of the children of Albion at least his view
was low; on his American specimens he had, I observed, more mercy; and
this imperfection of sympathy (the question of Waterloo apart) rested,
it was impossible not to feel, on his so resenting the dishonour
suffered at our hands by his beautiful tongue, to which, as the great
field of elocution, he was patriotically devoted. I think he fairly
loathed our closed English vowels and confused consonants, our
destitution of sounds that he recognised as sounds; though why in this
connection he put up best with our own compatriots, embroiled at that
time often in even stranger vocables than now, is more than I can say. I
think that would be explained perhaps by his feeling in them as an old
equalitarian certain accessibilities _quand même_. Besides, we of the
younger persuasion at least must have done his ear less violence than
those earnest ladies from beyond the sea and than those young Englishmen
qualifying for examinations and careers who flocked with us both to the
plausibly spread and the severely disgarnished table, and on whose part
I seem to see it again an effort of anguish to "pick up" the happy idiom
that we had unconsciously acquired. French, in the fine old formula of
those days, so much diffused, "was the language of the family"; but I
think it must have appeared to these students in general a family of
which the youngest members were but scantly kept in their place. We
piped with a greater facility and to a richer meed of recognition; which
sounds as if we might have become, in these strange collocations, fairly
offensive little prigs. That was none the less not the case, for there
were, oddly enough, a few French boys as well, to whom on the lingual or
the "family" ground, we felt ourselves feebly relative, and in
comparison with whom, for that matter, or with one of whom, I remember
an occasion of my having to sink to insignificance. There was at the
Institution little of a staff--besides waiters and bonnes; but it
embraced, such as it was, M. Mesnard as well as M. Bonnefons--M. Mesnard
of the new generation, instructor in whatever it might be, among the
arts, that didn't consist of our rolling our r's, and with them, to help
us out, more or less our eyes. It is significant that this elegant
branch is now quite vague to me; and I recall M. Mesnard, in fine, as no
less modern and cheap than M. Bonnefons was rare and unappraiseable. He
had nevertheless given me his attention, one morning, doubtless
patiently enough, in some corner of the villa that we had for the moment
practically to ourselves--I seem to see a small empty room looking on
the garden; when there entered to us, benevolently ushered by Madame
Fezandié, a small boy of very fair and romantic aspect, as it struck me,
a pupil newly arrived. I remember of him mainly that he had a sort of
nimbus of light curls, a face delicate and pale and that deeply hoarse
voice with which French children used to excite our wonder. M. Mesnard
asked of him at once, with interest, his name, and on his pronouncing it
sought to know, with livelier attention, if he were then the son of M.
Arsène Houssaye, lately director of the Théâtre Français. To this
distinction the boy confessed--all to such intensification of our
répétiteur's interest that I knew myself quite dropped, in comparison,
from his scheme of things. Such an origin as our little visitor's
affected him visibly as dazzling, and I felt justified after a while, in
stealing away into the shade. The beautiful little boy was to live to be
the late M. Henry Houssaye, the shining hellenist and historian. I have
never forgotten the ecstasy of hope in M. Mesnard's question--as a
light on the reverence then entertained for the institution M. Houssaye
the elder had administered.




XXVIII


There comes to me, in spite of these memories of an extended connection,
a sense as of some shrinkage or decline in the _beaux jours_ of the
Institution; which seems to have found its current run a bit thick and
troubled, rather than with the pleasant plash in which we at first
appeared all equally to bathe. I gather, as I try to reconstitute, that
the general enterprise simply proved a fantasy not workable, and that at
any rate the elders, and often such queer elders, tended to outnumber
the candid _jeunesse_; so that I wonder by the same token on what theory
of the Castalian spring, as taught there to trickle, if not to flow, M.
Houssaye, holding his small son by the heel as it were, may have been
moved to dip him into our well. Shall I blush to relate that my own
impression of its virtue must have come exactly from this uncanny turn
taken--and quite in spite of the high Fezandié ideals--by the
_invraisemblable_ house of entertainment where the assimilation of no
form of innocence was doubted of by reason of the forms of experience
that insisted somehow on cropping up, and no form of experience too
directly deprecated by reason of the originally plotted tender growths
of innocence. And some of these shapes were precisely those from which
our good principal may well have first drawn his liveliest reassurance:
I seem to remember such ancient American virgins in especial and such
odd and either distinctively long-necked or more particularly
long-haired and chinless compatriots, in black frock-coats of no type or
"cut," no suggested application at all as garments--application, that
is, to anything in the nature of character or circumstance, function or
position--gathered about in the groups that M. Bonnefons almost
terrorised by his refusal to recognise, among the barbarous races, any
approach to his view of the great principle of Diction. I remember
deeply and privately enjoying some of his shades of scorn and seeing
how, given his own background, they were thoroughly founded; I remember
above all as burnt in by the impression he gave me of the creature
_wholly_ animated and containing no waste expressional spaces, no
imaginative flatnesses, the notion of the luxury of life, though indeed
of the amount of trouble of it too, when _none_ of the letters of the
alphabet of sensibility might be dropped, involved in being a Frenchman.
The liveliest lesson I must have drawn, however, from that source makes
in any case, at the best, an odd educational connection, given the kind
of concentration at which education, even such as ours, is supposed
especially to aim: I speak of that direct promiscuity of insights which
might easily have been pronounced profitless, with their attendant
impressions and quickened sensibilities--yielding, as these last did,
harvests of apparitions. I positively cherish at the present hour the
fond fancy that we all soaked in some such sublime element as might
still have hung about there--I mean on the very spot--from the vital
presence, so lately extinct, of the prodigious Balzac; which had
involved, as by its mere respiration, so dense a cloud of other
presences, so arrayed an army of interrelated shades, that the air was
still thick as with the fumes of witchcraft, with infinite seeing and
supposing and creating, with a whole imaginative traffic. The Pension
Vauquer, then but lately existent, according to Le Père Goriot, on the
other side of the Seine, was still to be revealed to me; but the figures
peopling it are not to-day essentially more intense (that is as a matter
of the marked and featured, the terrible and the touching, as compared
with the paleness of the conned page in general,) than I persuade
myself, with so little difficulty, that I found the more numerous and
more shifting, though properly doubtless less inspiring, constituents of
the Pension Fezandié. Fantastic and all "subjective" that I should
attribute a part of their interest, or that of the scene spreading round
them, to any competent perception, in the small-boy mind, that the
general or public moment had a rarity and a brevity, a sharp intensity,
of its own; ruffling all things, as they came, with the morning breath
of the Second Empire and making them twinkle back with a light of
resigned acceptance, a freshness of cynicism, the force of a great
grimacing example. The grimace might have been legibly there in the air,
to the young apprehension, and could I but simplify this record enough I
should represent everything as part of it. I seemed at any rate
meanwhile to think of the Fezandié young men, young Englishmen mostly,
who were getting up their French, in that many-coloured air, for what I
supposed, in my candour, to be appointments and "posts," diplomatic,
commercial, vaguely official, and who, as I now infer, though I didn't
altogether embrace it at the time, must, under the loose rule of the
establishment, have been amusing themselves not a little. It was as a
side-wind of their free criticism, I take it, that I felt the first
chill of an apprehended decline of the establishment, some pang of
prevision of what might come, and come as with a crash, of the general
fine fallacy on which it rested. Their criticism was for that matter
free enough, causing me to admire it even while it terrified. They
expressed themselves in terms of magnificent scorn--such as might
naturally proceed, I think I felt, from a mightier race; they spoke of
poor old Bonnefons, they spoke of our good Fezandié himself, they spoke
more or less of everyone within view, as beggars and beasts, and I
remember to have heard on their lips no qualification of any dish served
to us at dêjeuner (and still more at the later meal, of which my
brothers and I didn't partake) but as rotten. These were expressions,
absent from our domestic, our American air either of fonder
discriminations or vaguer estimates, which fairly extended for me the
range of intellectual, or at least of social resource; and as the
general tone of them to-day comes back to me it floods somehow with
light the image of the fine old insular confidence (so intellectually
unregenerate then that such a name scarce covers it, though inward
stirrings and the growth of a _comparative_ sense of things have now
begun unnaturally to agitate and disfigure it,) in which the general
outward concussion of the English "abroad" with the fact of being abroad
took place. The Fezandié young men were as much abroad as might be, and
yet figured to me--largely by the upsetting force of that confidence,
all but physically exercised--as the finest, handsomest, knowingest
creatures; so that when I met them of an afternoon descending the
Champs-Elysées with fine long strides and in the costume of the period,
for which we can always refer to contemporary numbers of "Punch," the
fact that I was for the most part walking sedately either with my mother
or my aunt, or even with my sister and her governess, caused the spark
of my vision that they were armed for conquest, or at the least for
adventure, more expansively to glow. I am not sure whether as a general
thing they honoured me at such instants with a sign of recognition; but
I recover in especial the sense of an evening hour during which I had
accompanied my mother to the Hôtel Meurice, where one of the New York
cousins aforementioned, daughter of one of the Albany uncles--that is of
the Rhinebeck member of the group--had perched for a time, so
incongruously, one already seemed to feel, after the sorriest stroke of
fate. I see again the gaslit glare of the Rue de Rivoli in the spring or
the autumn evening (I forget which, for our year of the Rue d'Angoulême
had been followed by a migration to the Rue Montaigne, with a period, or
rather with two periods, of Boulogne-sur-mer interwoven, and we might
have made our beguiled way from either domicile); and the whole
impression seemed to hang too numerous lamps and too glittering
_vitrines_ about the poor Pendletons' bereavement, their loss of their
only, their so sturdily handsome, little boy, and to suffuse their state
with the warm rich exhalations of subterraneous cookery with which I
find my recall of Paris from those years so disproportionately and so
quite other than stomachically charged. The point of all of which is
simply that just as we had issued from the hotel, my mother anxiously
urging me through the cross currents and queer contacts, as it were, of
the great bazaar (of which the Rue de Rivoli was then a much more
bristling avenue than now) rather than depending on me for support and
protection, there swung into view the most splendid, as I at least
esteemed him, of my elders and betters in the Rue Balzac, who had left
the questions there supposedly engaging us far behind, and, with his
high hat a trifle askew and his cigar actively alight, revealed to me at
a glance what it was to be in full possession of Paris. There was speed
in his step, assurance in his air, he was visibly, impatiently on the
way; and he gave me thereby my first full image of what it was exactly
to _be_ on the way. He gave it the more, doubtless, through the fact
that, with a flourish of the aforesaid high hat (from which the
Englishman of that age was so singularly inseparable) he testified to
the act of recognition, and to deference to my companion, but with a
grand big-boy good-humour that--as I remember from childhood the so
frequent effect of an easy patronage, compared with a top-most
overlooking, on the part of an admired senior--only gave an accent to
the difference. As if he cared, or could have, that I but went forth
through the Paris night in the hand of my mamma; while he had greeted us
with a grace that was as a beat of the very wings of freedom! Of such
shreds, at any rate, proves to be woven the stuff of young
sensibility--when memory (if sensibility has at all existed for it)
rummages over our old trunkful of spiritual duds and, drawing forth ever
so tenderly this, that and the other tattered web, holds up the pattern
to the light. I find myself in this connection so restlessly and
tenderly rummage that the tatters, however thin, come out in handsful
and every shred seems tangled with another.

Gertrude Pendleton's mere name, for instance, becomes, and very
preferably, the frame of another and a better picture, drawing to it
cognate associations, those of that element of the New York cousinship
which had originally operated to place there in a shining and even, as
it were, an economic light a "preference for Paris"--which preference,
during the period of the Rue d'Angoulême and the Rue Montaigne, we
wistfully saw at play, the very lightest and freest, on the part of the
inimitable Masons. Their earlier days of Tours and Trouville were over;
a period of relative rigour at the Florence of the still encircling
walls, the still so existent abuses and felicities, was also, I seem to
gather, a thing of the past; great accessions, consciously awaited
during the previous leaner time, had beautifully befallen them, and my
own whole consciousness of the general air--so insistently I
discriminate for that alone--was coloured by a familiar view of their
enjoyment of these on a tremendously draped and festooned _premier_ of
the Rue-St.-Honoré, bristling with ormolu and Pradier statuettes and
looking almost straight across to the British Embassy; rather a low
premier, after the manner of an entresol, as I remember it, and where
the closed windows, which but scantly distinguished between our own
sounds and those of the sociable, and yet the terrible, street of
records and memories, seemed to maintain an air and a light thick with a
mixture of every sort of queer old Parisian amenity and reference: as if
to look or to listen or to touch were somehow at the same time to probe,
to recover and communicate, to behold, to taste and even to smell--to
one's greater assault by suggestion, no doubt, but also to the effect of
some sweet and strange repletion, as from the continued consumption,
say, out of flounced and puckered boxes, of serried rows of chocolate
and other bonbons. I must have felt the whole thing as something for
one's developed senses to live up to and make light of, and have been
rather ashamed of my own for just a little sickishly staggering under
it. This goes, however, with the fondest recall of our cousins' inbred
ease, from far back, in all such assumable relations; and of how, four
of the simplest, sweetest, best-natured girls as they were (with the
eldest, a charming beauty, to settle on the general ground, after
marriage and widowhood, and still to be blooming there), they were
possessed of the scene and its great reaches and resources and
possibilities in a degree that reduced us to small provincialism and a
hanging on their lips when they told us, that is when the gentlest of
mammas and the lovely daughter who was "out" did, of presentations at
the Tuileries to the then all-wonderful, the ineffable Empress: reports
touchingly qualified, on the part of our so exposed, yet after all so
scantily indurated relatives, by the question of whether occasions so
great didn't perhaps nevertheless profane the Sundays for which they
were usually appointed. There was something of an implication in the air
of those days, when young Americans were more numerously lovely than
now, or at least more wide-eyed, it would fairly appear, that some
account of the only tradition they had ever been rumoured to observe
(that of the Lord's day) might have been taken even at the Tuileries.

But what most comes back to me as the very note and fragrance of the New
York cousinship in this general connection is a time that I remember to
have glanced at on a page distinct from these, when the particular
cousins I now speak of had conceived, under the influence of I know not
what unextinguished morning star, the liveliest taste for the earliest
possible rambles and researches, in which they were so good as to allow
me, when I was otherwise allowed, to participate: health-giving walks,
of an extraordinarily _matinal_ character, at the hour of the meticulous
rag-pickers and exceptionally French polishers known to the Paris dawns
of the Second Empire as at no time since; which made us all feel
together, under the conduct of Honorine, bright child of the pavement
herself, as if _we_, in our fresh curiosity and admiration, had also
something to say to the great show presently to be opened, and were
free, throughout the place, as those are free of a house who know its
aspects of attic and cellar or how it looks from behind. I call our
shepherdess Honorine even though perhaps not infallibly naming the
sociable soubrette who might, with all her gay bold confidence, have
been an official inspectress in person, and to whose easy care or, more
particularly, expert sensibility and candour of sympathy and curiosity,
our flock was freely confided. If she wasn't Honorine she was Clémentine
or Augustine--which is a trifle; since what I thus recover, in any case,
of these brushings of the strange Parisian dew, is those communities of
contemplation that made us most hang about the jewellers' windows in the
Palais Royal and the public playbills of the theatres on the Boulevard.
The Palais Royal, now so dishonoured and disavowed, was then the very
Paris of Paris; the shutters of the shops seemed taken down, at that
hour, for our especial benefit, and I remember well how, the "dressing"
of so large a number of the compact and richly condensed fronts being
more often than not a matter of diamonds and pearls, rubies and
sapphires, that represented, in their ingenuities of combination and
contortion, the highest taste of the time, I found open to me any amount
of superior study of the fact that the spell of gems seemed for the
feminine nature almost alarmingly boundless. I stared too, it comes back
to me, at these exhibitions, and perhaps even thought it became a young
man of the world to express as to this or that object a refined and
intelligent preference; but what I really most had before me was the
chorus of abjection, as I might well have called it, led, at the highest
pitch, by Honorine and vaguely suggesting to me, by the crudity, so to
say, of its wistfulness, a natural frankness of passion--goodness knew
in fact (for my small intelligence really didn't) what depths of
corruptibility. Droll enough, as I win them again, these queer dim plays
of consciousness: my sense that my innocent companions, Honorine _en
tête_, would have done anything or everything for the richest ruby, and
that though one couldn't one's self be decently dead to that richness
one didn't at all know what "anything" might be or in the least what
"everything" was. The gushing cousins, at the same time, assuredly knew
still less of that, and Honorine's brave gloss of a whole range alike of
possibilities and actualities was in itself a true social grace.

They all enjoyed, in fine, while I somehow but wastefully mused--which
was after all my form of enjoyment; I was shy for it, though it was a
truth and perhaps odd enough withal, that I didn't really at all care
for gems, that rubies and pearls, in no matter what collocations, left
me comparatively cold; that I actually cared for them about as little
as, monstrously, secretly, painfully, I cared for flowers. Later on I
was to become aware that I "adored" trees and architectural
marbles--that for a sufficient slab of a sufficiently rare, sufficiently
bestreaked or empurpled marble in particular I would have given a bag of
rubies; but by then the time had passed for my being troubled to make
out what in that case would represent on a small boy's part the
corruptibility, so to call it, proclaimed, before the _vitrines_, by the
cousins. That hadn't, as a question, later on, its actuality; but it had
so much at the time that if it had been frankly put to me I must have
quite confessed my inability to say--and must, I gather, by the same
stroke, have been ashamed of such inward penury; feeling that as a boy I
showed more poorly than girls. There was a difference meanwhile for such
puzzlements before the porticos of the theatres; all questions melted
for me there into the single depth of envy--envy of the equal, the
beatific command of the evening hour, in the _régime_ of Honorine's
young train, who were fresh for the early sparrow and the chiffonier
even after shedding buckets of tears the night before, and not so much
as for the first or the second time, over the beautiful story of La Dame
aux Camélias. There indeed was another humiliation, but by my weakness
of position much more than of nature: whatever doing of "everything"
might have been revealed to me as a means to the end, I would certainly
have done it for a sight of Madame Doche and Fechter in Dumas's
triumphant idyll--now enjoying the fullest honours of innocuous
classicism; with which, as with the merits of its interpreters,
Honorine's happy charges had become perfectly and if not quite serenely,
at least ever so responsively and feelingly, familiar. Of a wondrous
mixed sweetness and sharpness and queerness of uneffaced reminiscence is
all that aspect of the cousins and the rambles and the overlapping
nights melting along the odorously bedamped and retouched streets and
arcades; bright in the ineffable morning light, above all, of our
peculiar young culture and candour!

All of which again has too easily led me to drop for a moment my more
leading clue of that radiation of goodnature from Gertrude Pendleton and
her headlong hospitalities in which we perhaps most complacently basked.
The becraped passage at Meurice's alluded to a little back was of a
later season, and the radiation, as I recall it, had been, that first
winter, mainly from a _petit hôtel_ somewhere "on the other side," as
we used with a large sketchiness to say, of the Champs Elysées; a region
at that time reduced to no regularity, but figuring to my fond fancy as
a chaos of accidents and contrasts where _petits hôtels_ of archaic type
were elbowed by woodyards and cabarets, and pavilions ever so
characteristic, yet ever so indefinable, snuggled between frank
industries and vulgarities--all brightened these indeed by the sociable
note of Paris, be it only that of chaffering or of other _bavardise_.
The great consistencies of arch-refinement, now of so large a harmony,
were still to come, so that it seemed rather original to live there; in
spite of which the attraction of the hazard of it on the part of our
then so uniformly natural young kinswoman, not so much ingeniously, or
even expressively, as just gesticulatively and helplessly gay--since
that earlier pitch of New York parlance scarce arrived at, or for that
matter pretended to, enunciation--was quite in what I at least took to
be the glitter of her very conventions and traditions themselves;
exemplified for instance by a bright nocturnal christening-party in
honour of the small son of all hopes whom she was so precipitately to
lose: an occasion which, as we had, in our way, known the act of baptism
but as so abbreviated and in fact so tacit a business, had the effect
for us of one of the great "forms" of a society taking itself with
typical seriousness. We were much more serious than the Pendletons,
but, paradoxically enough, there was that weakness in our state of our
being able to make no such attestation of it. The evening can have been
but of the friendliest, easiest and least pompous nature, with small
guests, in congruity with its small hero, as well as large; but I must
have found myself more than ever yet in presence of a "rite," one of
those round which as many kinds of circumstance as possible
clustered--so that the more of these there were the more one might
imagine a great social order observed. How shall I now pretend to say
how many kinds of circumstance I supposed I recognised?--with the
remarkable one, to begin with, and which led fancy so far afield, that
the "religious ceremony" was at the same time a "party," of twinkling
lustres and disposed flowers and ladies with bare shoulders (that
platitudinous bareness of the period that suggested somehow the moral
line, drawn as with a ruler and a firm pencil); with little English
girls, daughters of a famous physician of that nationality then pursuing
a Parisian career (he must have helped the little victim into the
world), and whose emphasised type much impressed itself; with round
glazed and beribboned boxes of multi-coloured sugared almonds, dragées
de baptême above all, which we harvested, in their heaps, as we might
have gathered apples from a shaken tree, and which symbolised as nothing
else the ritual dignity. Perhaps this grand impression really came back
but to the dragées de baptême, not strictly more immemorial to our young
appreciation than the New Year's cake and the "Election" cake known to
us in New York, yet immensely more official and of the nature of
scattered largesse; partly through the days and days, as it seemed to
me, that our life was to be furnished, reinforced and almost encumbered
with them. It wasn't simply that they were so toothsome, but that they
were somehow so important and so historic.

It was with no such frippery, however, that I connected the occasional
presence among us of the young member of the cousinship (in this case of
the maternal) who most moved me to wistfulness of wonder, though not at
all, with his then marked difference of age, by inviting my free
approach. Vernon King, to whom I have in another part of this record
alluded, at that time doing his baccalauréat on the other side of the
Seine and coming over to our world at scraps of moments (for I recall my
awe of the tremendous nature, as I supposed it, of his toil), as to
quite a make-believe and gingerbread place, the lightest of substitutes
for the "Europe" in which he had been from the first so technically
plunged. His mother and sister, also on an earlier page referred to,
had, from their distance, committed him to the great city to be
"finished," educationally, to the point that for our strenuous cousin
Charlotte was the only proper one--and I feel sure he can have acquitted
himself in this particular in a manner that would have passed for
brilliant if such lights didn't, thanks to her stiff little standards,
always tend to burn low in her presence. These ladies were to develop
more and more the practice of living in odd places for abstract inhuman
reasons--at Marseilles, at Düsseldorf (if I rightly recall their
principal German sojourn), at Naples, above all, for a long stage;
where, in particular, their grounds of residence were somehow not as
those of others, even though I recollect, from a much later time,
attending them there at the opera, an experience which, in their
fashion, they succeeded in despoiling for me of every element of the
concrete, or at least of the pleasantly vulgar. Later impressions, few
but firm, were so to enhance one's tenderness for Vernon's own image,
the most interesting surely in all the troop of our young kinsmen early
baffled and gathered, that he glances at me out of the Paris period,
fresh-coloured, just blond-bearded, always smiling and catching his
breath a little as from a mixture of eagerness and shyness, with such an
appeal to the right idealisation, or to belated justice, as makes of
mere evocation a sort of exercise of loyalty. It seemed quite richly
laid upon me at the time--I get it all back--that he, two or three years
older than my elder brother and dipped more early, as well as held more
firmly, in the deep, the refining waters the virtue of which we all
together, though with our differences of consistency, recognised, was
the positive and living proof of what the process, comparatively poor
for ourselves, could do at its best and with clay originally and
domestically kneaded to the right plasticity; besides which he shone, to
my fancy, and all the more for its seeming so brightly and quietly in
his very grain, with the vague, the supposititious, but the intensely
accent-giving stamp of the Latin quarter, which we so thinly imagined
and so superficially brushed on our pious walks to the Luxembourg and
through the parts where the glamour might have hung thickest. We were to
see him a little--but two or three times--three or four years later,
when, just before our own return, he had come back to America for the
purpose, if my memory serves, of entering the Harvard Law School; and to
see him still always with the smile that was essentially as facial, as
livingly and loosely fixed, somehow, as his fresh complexion itself;
always too with the air of caring so little for what he had been put
through that, under any appeal to give out, more or less wonderfully,
some sample or echo of it, as who should say, he still mostly panted as
from a laughing mental embarrassment: he had been put through too much;
it was all stale to him, and he wouldn't have known where to begin. He
did give out, a little, on occasion--speaking, that is, on my different
plane, as it were, and by the roundabout report of my brother; he gave
out, it appeared, as they walked together across shining Newport sands,
some fragment, some beginning of a very youthful poem that "Europe" had,
with other results, moved him to, and a faint thin shred of which was to
stick in my remembrance for reasons independent of its quality:


     "Harold, rememberest thou the day,
       We rode along the Appian Way?
     Neglected tomb and altar cast
       Their lengthening shadow o'er the plain,
     And while we talked the mighty past
       Around us lived and breathed again!"


That was European enough, and yet he had returned to America really to
find himself, even with every effort made immediately near him to defeat
the discovery. He found himself, with the outbreak of the War, simply as
the American soldier, and not under any bribe, however dim, of the
epaulette or the girt sword; but just as the common enlisting native,
which he smiled and gasped--to the increase of his happy shortness of
breath, as from a repletion of culture, since it suggested no lack of
personal soundness--at feeling himself so _like_ to be. As strange, yet
as still more touching than strange, I recall the sight, even at a
distance, of the drop straight off him of all his layers of educational
varnish, the possession of the "advantages," the tongues, the degrees,
the diplomas, the reminiscences, a saturation too that had all sunk
in--a sacrifice of precious attributes that might almost have been
viewed as a wild bonfire. So his prodigious mother, whom I have perhaps
sufficiently presented for my reader to understand, didn't fail to view
it--judging it also, sharply hostile to the action of the North as the
whole dreadful situation found her, with deep and resentful displeasure.
I remember how I thought of Vernon himself, during the business, as at
once so despoiled, so diverted, and above all so resistantly bright, as
vaguely to suggest something more in him still, some deep-down reaction,
some extremity of indifference and defiance, some exhibition of a young
character too long pressed and impressed, too long prescribed to and
with too much expected of it, and all under too firmer a will; so that
the public pretext had given him a lift, or lent him wings, which
without its greatness might have failed him. As the case was to turn
nothing--that is nothing he most wanted and, remarkably, most
enjoyed--did fail him at all. I forget with which of the possible
States, New York, Massachusetts or Rhode Island (though I think the
first) he had taken service; only seeming to remember that this all went
on for him at the start in McClellan's and later on in Grant's army,
and that, badly wounded in a Virginia battle, he came home to be nursed
by his mother, recently restored to America for a brief stay. She held,
I believe, in the event, that he had, under her care, given her his vow
that, his term being up, he would not, should he get sufficiently well,
re-engage. The question here was between them, but it was definite that,
materially speaking, she was in no degree dependent on him. The old, the
irrepressible adage, however, was to live again between them: when the
devil was sick the devil a saint would be; when the devil was well the
devil a saint was he!

The devil a saint, at all events, was Vernon, who denied that he had
passed his word, and who, as soon as he had surmounted his first
disablement, passionately and quite admirably re-enlisted. At once
restored to the front and to what now gave life for him its
indispensable relish, he was in the thick, again, of the great carnage
roundabout Richmond, where, again gravely wounded, he (as I figure still
incorrigibly smiling) succumbed. His mother had by this time indignantly
returned to Europe, accompanied by her daughter and her younger son--the
former of whom accepted, for our great pity, a little later on, the
office of closing the story. Anne King, young and frail, but not less
firm, under stress, than the others of her blood, came back, on her
brother's death, and, quietest, most colourless Electra of a lucidest
Orestes, making her difficult way amid massed armies and battle-drenched
fields, got possession of his buried body and bore it for reinterment to
Newport, the old habitation, as I have mentioned, of their father's
people, both Vernons and Kings. It must have been to see my mother, as
well as to sail again for Europe, that she afterwards came to Boston,
where I remember going down with her, at the last, to the dock of the
English steamer, some black and tub-like Cunarder, an archaic "Africa"
or "Asia" sufficing to the Boston service of those days. I saw her off
drearily and helplessly enough, I well remember, and even at that moment
found for her another image: what was she most like, though in a still
sparer and dryer form, but some low-toned, some employed little Brontë
heroine?--though more indeed a Lucy Snowe than a Jane Eyre, and with no
shade of a Brontë hero within sight. To this all the fine privilege and
fine culture of all the fine countries (collective matter, from far
back, of our intimated envy) had "amounted"; just as it had amounted for
Vernon to the bare headstone on the Newport hillside where, by his
mother's decree, as I have already noted, there figured no hint of the
manner of his death. So grand, so finely personal a manner it appeared
to me at the time, and has indeed appeared ever since, that this brief
record irrepressibly springs from that. His mother, as I have equally
noted, was however, with her views, to find no grace in it so long as
she lived; and his sister went back to her, and to Marseille, as they
always called it, but prematurely to die.




XXIX


I feel that much might be made of my memories of Boulogne-sur-Mer had I
but here left room for the vast little subject; in which I should
probably, once started, wander to and fro as exploringly, as
perceivingly, as discoveringly, I am fairly tempted to call it, as might
really give the measure of my small operations at the time. I was almost
wholly reduced there to operations of that mere inward and superficially
idle order at which we have already so freely assisted; reduced by a
cause I shall presently mention, the production of a great blur,
well-nigh after the fashion of some mild domestic but quite considerably
spreading grease-spot, in respect to the world of action, such as it
was, more or less immediately about me. I must personally have lived
during this pale predicament almost only by seeing what I could, after
my incorrigible ambulant fashion--a practice that may well have made me
pass for bringing home nothing in the least exhibitional--rather than by
pursuing the inquiries and interests that agitated, to whatever
intensity, our on the whole widening little circle. The images I speak
of as matter for more evocation that I can spare them were the fruit of
two different periods at Boulogne, a shorter and a longer; this second
appearing to us all, at the time, I gather, too endlessly and
blightingly prolonged: so sharply, before it was over, did I at any rate
come to yearn for the Rue Montaigne again, the Rue Montaigne "sublet"
for a term under a flurry produced in my parents' breasts by a
"financial crisis" of great violence to which the American world, as a
matter now of recorded history, I believe, had tragically fallen victim,
and which had imperilled or curtailed for some months our moderate means
of existence. We were to recover, I make out, our disturbed balance, and
were to pursue awhile further our chase of the alien, the somehow
repeatedly postponed _real_ opportunity; and the second, the
comparatively cramped and depressed connection with the classic refuge,
as it then was, of spasmodic thrift, when not of settled indigence, for
the embarrassed of our race in the largest sense of this matter, was to
be shuffled off at last with no scant relief and reaction. This is
perhaps exactly why the whole picture of our existence at the
Pas-de-Calais watering place pleads to me now for the full indulgence,
what would be in other words every touch of tenderness workable, after
all the years, over the lost and confused and above all, on their own
side, poor ultimately rather vulgarised and violated little sources of
impression: items and aspects these which while they in their degree
and after their sort flourished we only asked to admire, or at least to
appreciate, for their rewarding extreme queerness. The very centre of my
particular consciousness of the place turned too soon to the fact of my
coming in there for the gravest illness of my life, an all but mortal
attack of the malignant typhus of old days; which, after laying me as
low as I could well be laid for many weeks, condemned me to a
convalescence so arduous that I saw my apparently scant possibilities,
by the measure of them then taken, even as through a glass darkly, or
through the expansive blur for which I found just above a homely image.

This experience was to become when I had emerged from it the great
reminiscence or circumstance of old Boulogne for me, and I was to regard
it, with much intelligence, I should have maintained, as the marked
limit of my state of being a small boy. I took on, when I had decently,
and all the more because I had so retardedly, recovered, the sense of
being a boy of other dimensions somehow altogether, and even with a new
dimension introduced and acquired; a dimension that I was eventually to
think of as a stretch in the direction of essential change or of living
straight into a part of myself previously quite unvisited and now made
accessible as by the sharp forcing of a closed door. The blur of
consciousness imaged by my grease-spot was not, I hasten to declare,
without its relenting edges and even, during its major insistence,
fainter thicknesses; short of which, I see, my picture, the picture I
was always so incurably "after," would have failed of animation
altogether--quite have failed to bristle with characteristics, with
figures and objects and scenic facts, particular passages and moments,
the stuff, in short, of that scrap of minor gain which I have spoken of
as our multiplied memories. Wasn't I even at the time, and much more
later on, to feel how we had been, through the thick and thin of the
whole adventure, assaulted as never before in so concentrated a way by
local and social character? Such was the fashion after which the
Boulogne of long ago--I have known next to nothing of it since--could
come forth, come more than half-way, as we say, to meet the imagination
open to such advances. It was, taking one thing with another, so verily
drenched in character that I see myself catching this fine flagrancy
almost equally in everything; unless indeed I may have felt it rather
smothered than presented on the comparatively sordid scene of the
Collège Communal, not long afterwards to expand, I believe, into the
local Lycée, to which the inimitable process of our education promptly
introduced us. I was to have less of the Collège than my elder and my
younger brother, thanks to the interrupting illness that placed me so
long, with its trail of after-effects, half complacently, half ruefully
apart; but I suffered for a few early weeks the mainly malodorous sense
of the braver life, produced as this was by a deeply democratic
institution from which no small son even of the most soapless home could
possibly know exclusion. Odd, I recognise, that I should inhale the air
of the place so particularly, so almost only, to that dismal effect;
since character was there too, for whom it should concern, and my view
of some of the material conditions, of the general collegiate presence
toward the top of the steepish Grand' Rue, on the right and not much
short, as it comes back to me, of the then closely clustered and
inviolate haute ville, the more or less surviving old town, the idle
grey rampart, the moated and towered citadel, the tree-shaded bastion
for strolling and sitting "immortalised" by Thackeray, achieved the
monumental, in its degree, after a fashion never yet associated for us
with the pursuit of learning. Didn't the Campaigner, suffering indigence
at the misapplied hands of Colonel Newcome, rage at that hushed victim
supremely and dreadfully just thereabouts--by which I mean in the _haute
ville_--over some question of a sacrificed sweetbread or a cold hacked
joint that somebody had been "at"? Beside such builded approaches to an
education as we had elsewhere known the Collège exhibited, with whatever
reserves, the measure of style which almost any French accident of the
administratively architectural order more easily rises to than fails
of; even if the matter be but a question of the shyest similitude of a
_cour d'honneur_, the court disconnecting the scene, by intention at
least, from the basely bourgeois and giving value to the whole effect of
opposed and windowed wall and important, or balanced and "placed,"
_perron_. These are many words for the dull precinct, as then presented,
I admit, and they are perhaps half prompted by a special association,
too ghostly now quite to catch again--the sense of certain Sundays,
distinct from the grim, that is the flatly instructional, body of the
week, when I seem to myself to have successfully flouted the whole
constituted field by passing across it and from it to some quite ideally
old-world little annexed _musée de province_, as inviolate in its way as
the grey rampart and bare citadel, and very like them in unrelieved
tone, where I repeatedly, and without another presence to hinder, looked
about me at goodness knows what weird ancientries of stale academic art.
Not one of these treasures, in its habit as it lived, do I recall; yet
the sense and the "note" of them was at the time, none the less, not so
elusive that I didn't somehow draw straight from them intimations of the
interesting, that is revelations of the æsthetic, the historic, the
critical mystery and charm of things (of such things taken altogether),
that added to my small loose handful of the seed of culture.

That apprehension was, in its way, of our house of learning too, and
yet I recall how, on the scant and simple terms I have glanced at, I
quite revelled in it; whereas other impressions of my brief ordeal
shrink, for anything in the nature of interest, but to three or four
recovered marks of the social composition of the school. There were the
sons of all the small shop-keepers and not less, by my remembrance, of
certain of the mechanics and artisans; but there was also the English
contingent, these predominantly _internes_ and uniformed, blue-jacketed
and brass-buttoned, even to an effect of odd redundancy, who by my
conceit gave our association a lift. Vivid still to me is the summer
morning on which, in the wide court--as wide, that is, as I liked to
suppose it, and where we hung about helplessly enough for recreation--a
brownish black-eyed youth, of about my own degree of youthfulness,
mentioned to me with an air that comes back as that of the liveliest
informational resource the outbreak, just heard of, of an awful Mutiny
in India, where his military parents, who had not so long before sent
him over thence, with such weakness of imagination, as I measured it, to
the poor spot on which we stood, were in mortal danger of their lives;
so that news of their having been killed would perhaps be already on the
way. They might well have been military, these impressively exposed
characters, since my friend's name was Napier, or Nappié as he was
called at the school, and since, I may add also, there attached to him,
in my eyes, the glamour of an altogether new emphasis of type. The
English boys within our ken since our coming abroad had been of the
fewest--the Fezandié youths, whether English or American, besides being
but scantly boys, had been so lost, on that scene, in our heap of
disparities; and it pressed upon me after a fashion of its own that
those we had known in New York, and all aware of their varieties and
"personalities" as one had supposed one's self, had in no case
challenged the restless "placing" impulse with any such force as the
finished little Nappié. They had not been, as he was by the very
perversity of his finish, resultants of forces at all--or comparatively
speaking; it was as if their producing elements had been simple and few,
whereas behind this more mixed and, as we have learnt to say, evolved
companion (his very simplicities, his gaps of possibility, being still
evolved), there massed itself I couldn't have said what protective
social order, what tangled creative complexity. Why I should have
thought him almost Indian of stamp and hue because his English parents
were of the so general Indian peril is more than I can say; yet I have
his exotic and above all his bold, his imaginably even "bad," young
face, finely unacquainted with law, before me at this hour quite
undimmed--announcing, as I conceived it, and quite as a shock, any
awful adventure one would, as well as something that I must even at the
time have vaguely taken as the play of the "passions." He vanishes, and
I dare say I but make him over, as I make everything; and he must have
led his life, whatever it was to become, with the least possible waiting
on the hour or the major consequence and no waste of energy at all in
mooning, no patience with any substitute for his very own humour. We had
another schoolmate, this one native to the soil, whose references were
with the last vividness local and who was yet to escape with brilliancy
in the aftertime the smallest shadow of effacement. His most direct
reference at that season was to the principal pastry-cook's of the town,
an establishment we then found supreme for little criss-crossed apple
tartlets and melting _babas_--young Coquelin's home life amid which we
the more acutely envied that the upward cock of his so all-important
nose testified, for my fancy, to the largest range of free familiar
sniffing. C.-B. Coquelin is personally most present to me, in the form
of that hour, by the value, as we were to learn to put it, of this nose,
the fine assurance and impudence of which fairly made it a trumpet for
promises; yet in spite of that, the very gage, as it were, of his long
career as the most interesting and many-sided comedian, or at least most
unsurpassed dramatic _diseur_ of his time, I failed to doubt that, with
the rich recesses of the parental industry for his background, his
subtlest identity was in his privilege, or perhaps even in his expertest
trick, of helping himself well.

These images, however, were but drops in the bucket of my sense of
catching character, roundabout us, as I say, at every turn and in every
aspect; character that began even, as I was pleased to think, in our own
habitation, the most spacious and pompous Europe had yet treated us to,
in spite of its fronting on the Rue Neuve Chaussée, a street of lively
shopping, by the measure of that innocent age, and with its own
ground-floor occupied by a bristling exhibition of indescribably futile
_articles de Paris_. Modern and commodious itself, it looked from its
balcony at serried and mismatched and quaintly-named haunts of old
provincial, of sedately passive rather than confidently eager, traffic;
but this made, among us, for much harmless inquisitory life--while we
were fairly assaulted, at home, by the scale and some of the striking
notes of our fine modernity. The young, the agreeable (agreeable to
anything), the apparently opulent M. Prosper Sauvage--wasn't it?--had
not long before, unless I mistake, inherited the place as a monument of
"family," quite modestly local yet propitious family, ambition; with an
ample extension in the rear, and across the clearest prettiest court,
for his own dwelling, which thus became elegant, _entre cour et
jardin_, and showed all the happy symmetries and proper conventions.
Here flourished, or rather, I surmise at this time of day, here
languished, a domestic drama of which we enjoyed the murmurous overflow:
frankly astounding to me, I confess, how I remain still in sensitive
presence of our resigned proprietor's domestic drama, in and out of
which I see a pair of figures quite up to the dramatic mark flit again
with their air of the very rightest finish. I must but note these
things, none the less, and pass; for scarce another item of the whole
Boulogne concert of salient images failed, after all, of a significance
either still more strangely social or more distinctively spectacular.
These appearances indeed melt together for my interest, I once more
feel, as, during the interminable stretch of the prescribed and for the
most part solitary airings and outings involved in my slow convalescence
from the extremity of fever, I approached that straitened and somewhat
bedarkened issue of the Rue de l'Écu (was it?) toward the
bright-coloured, strongly-peopled Port just where Merridew's English
Library, solace of my vacuous hours and temple, in its degree too, of
deep initiations, mounted guard at the right. Here, frankly,
discrimination drops--every particular in the impression once so quick
and fresh sits interlinked with every other in the large lap of the
whole. The motley, sunny, breezy, bustling Port, with its classic, its
admirable fisher-folk of both sexes, models of type and tone and of what
might be handsomest in the thoroughly weathered condition, would have
seemed the straightest appeal to curiosity had not the old Thackerayan
side, as I may comprehensively call it, and the scattered wealth of
illustration of _his_ sharpest satiric range, not so constantly
interposed and competed with it. The scene bristled, as I look back at
it, with images from Men's Wives, from the society of Mr. Deuceace and
that of fifty other figures of the same creation, with Bareacreses and
Rawdon Crawleys and of course with Mrs. Macks, with Roseys of a more or
less crumpled freshness and blighted bloom, with battered and bent,
though doubtless never quite so fine, Colonel Newcomes not less; with
more reminders in short than I can now gather in. Of those forms of the
seedy, the subtly sinister, the vainly "genteel," the generally damaged
and desperate, and in particular perhaps the invincibly impudent, all
the marks, I feel sure, were stronger and straighter than such as we
meet in generally like cases under our present levelling light. Such
anointed and whiskered and eked-out, such brazen, bluffing, swaggering
gentlemen, such floridly repaired ladies, their mates, all looking as
hard as they could as if they were there for mere harmless amusement--it
was as good, among them, as just _being_ Arthur Pendennis to know so
well, or at least to guess so fearfully, who and what they might be.
They were floated on the tide of the manners then prevailing, I judge,
with a rich processional effect that so many of our own grand lapses,
when not of our mere final flatnesses, leave no material for; so that
the living note of Boulogne was really, on a more sustained view, the
opposition between a native race the most happily tempered, the most
becomingly seasoned and salted and self-dependent, and a shifting
colony--so far as the persons composing it _could_ either urgently or
speculatively shift--inimitably at odds with any active freshness. And
the stale and the light, even though so scantly rebounding, the too
densely socialised, group was the English, and the "positive" and hardy
and steady and wind-washed the French; and it was all as flushed with
colour and patched with costume and referable to record and picture, to
literature and history, as a more easily amusing and less earnestly
uniform age could make it. When I speak of this opposition indeed I see
it again most take effect in an antithesis that, on one side and the
other, swallowed all differences at a gulp. The general British show, as
we had it there, in the artless mid-Victorian desert, had, I think, for
its most sweeping sign the high assurance of its dowdiness; whereas one
had only to glance about at the sea-faring and fisher-folk who were the
real strength of the place to feel them shed at every step and by their
every instinct of appearance the perfect lesson of taste. There it was
to be learnt and taken home--with never a moral, none the less, drawn
from it by the "higher types." I speak of course in particular of the
tanned and trussed and kerchiefed, the active and productive women, all
so short-skirted and free-limbed under stress; for as by the rule of the
dowdy their sex is ever the finer example, so where the sense of the
suitable, of the charmingly and harmoniously right prevails, they
preserve the pitch even as a treasure committed to their piety. To hit
that happy mean of rightness amid the mixed occupations of a home-mother
and a fishwife, to be in especial both so bravely stripped below and so
perfectly enveloped above as the deep-wading, far-striding,
shrimp-netting, crab-gathering matrons or maidens who played,
waist-high, with the tides and racily quickened the market, was to make
grace thoroughly practical and discretion thoroughly vivid. These
attributes had with them all, for the eye, however, a range too great
for me to follow, since, as their professional undress was a turn-out
positively self-consistent, so their household, or more responsibly
public, or altogether festal, array played through the varied essentials
of fluted coif and folded kerchief and sober skirt and tense, dark,
displayed stocking and clicking wooden slipper, to say nothing of long
gold ear-drop or solid short-hung pectoral cross, with a respect for
the rigour of conventions that had the beauty of self-respect.

I owe to no season of the general period such a preserved sense of
innumerable unaccompanied walks--at the reason of which luxury of
freedom I have glanced; which as often as not were through the steep and
low-browed and brightly-daubed _ruelles_ of the fishing-town and either
across and along the level sea-marge and sustained cliff beyond; this
latter the site of the first Napoleon's so tremendously mustered camp of
invasion, with a monument as futile, by my remembrance, as that
enterprise itself had proved, to give it all the special accent I could
ask for. Or I was as free for the _haute ville_ and the ramparts and the
scattered, battered benches of reverie--if I may so honour my use of
them; they kept me not less complacently in touch with those of the so
anciently odd and mainly contracted houses over which the stiff citadel
and the ghost of Catherine de Médicis, who had dismally sojourned in it,
struck me as throwing such a chill, and one of which precisely must have
witnessed the never-to-be-forgotten Campaigner's passage in respect to
her cold beef. Far from extinct for me is my small question of those
hours, doubtless so mentally, so shamelessly wanton, as to what human
life might be tucked away in such retreats, which expressed the last
acceptance whether of desired or of imposed quiet; so absolutely
appointed and obliged did I feel to make out, so far as I could, what,
in so significant a world, they on their part _represented_. I think the
force mainly sustaining me at that rather dreary time--as I see it can
only show for--was this lively felt need that everything should
represent something more than what immediately and all too blankly met
the eye; I seem to myself to have carried it about everywhere and,
though of course only without outward signs that might have betrayed my
fatuity, and insistently, quite yearningly applied it. What I wanted, in
my presumption, was that the object, the place, the person, the
unreduced impression, often doubtless so difficult or so impossible to
reduce, should give out to me something of a situation; living as I did
in confused and confusing situations and thus hooking them on, however
awkwardly, to almost any at all living surface I chanced to meet. My
memory of Boulogne is that we had almost no society of any sort at
home--there appearing to be about us but one sort, and that of far too
great, or too fearful, an immediate bravery. Yet there were occasional
figures that I recover from our scant circle and that I associate,
whatever links I may miss, with the small still houses on the rampart;
figures of the quaintest, quite perhaps the frowsiest, little English
ladies in such mushroom hats, such extremely circular and bestriped
scarlet petticoats, such perpetual tight gauntlets, such explicit
claims to long descent, which showed them for everything that everyone
else at Boulogne was not. These mid-Victorian samples of a perfect
consistency "represented," by my measure, as hard as ever they
could--and represented, of all things, literature and history and
society. The literature was that of the three-volume novel, then, and
for much after, enjoying its loosest and serenest spread; for they
separately and anxiously and awfully "wrote"--and that must almost by
itself have amounted in them to all the history I evoked.

The dreary months, as I am content that in their second phase especially
they should be called, are subject, I repeat, to the perversion, quite
perhaps to the obscuration, of my temporarily hindered health--which
should keep me from being too sure of these small _proportions_ of
experience--I was to look back afterwards as over so grey a desert;
through which, none the less, there flush as sharp little certainties,
not to be disallowed, such matters as the general romance of Merridew,
the English Librarian, before mentioned, at the mouth of the Port; a
connection that thrusts itself upon me now as after all the truest
centre of my perceptions--waylaying my steps at the time, as I came and
went, more than any other object or impression. The question of what
_that_ spot represented, or could be encouraged, could be aided and
abetted, to represent, may well have supremely engaged me--for depth
within depth there could only open before me. The place "meant," on
these terms, to begin with, frank and licensed fiction, licensed to my
recordedly relaxed state; and what this particular luxury represented it
might have taken me even more time than I had to give to make out. The
blest novel in three volumes exercised through its form, to my sense, on
grounds lying deeper for me to-day than my deepest sounding, an appeal
that fairly made it do with me what it would. Possibly a drivelling
confession, and the more drivelling perhaps the more development I
should attempt for it; from which, however, the very difficulty of the
case saves me. Too many associations, too much of the ferment of memory
and fancy, are somehow stirred; they beset me again, they hover and
whirl about me while I stand, as I used to stand, within the positively
sanctified walls of the shop (so of the _vieux temps_ now their aspect
and fashion and worked system: by which I mean again of the frumpiest
and civillest mid-Victorian), and surrender to the vision of the shelves
packed with their rich individual trinities. Why should it have affected
me so that my choice, so difficult in such a dazzle, could only be for a
trinity? I am unable fully to say--such a magic dwelt in the mere rich
fact of the trio. When the novel of that age was "bad," as it so
helplessly, so abjectly and prevailingly consented to be, the three
volumes still did something for it, a something that was, all strangely,
not an aggravation of its case. When it was "good" (our analysis, our
terms of appreciation, had a simplicity that has lingered on) they made
it copiously, opulently better; so that when, after the span of the
years, my relation with them became, from that of comparatively artless
reader, and to the effect of a superior fondness and acuteness, that of
complacent author, the tradition of infatuated youth still flung over
them its mantle: this at least till _all_ relation, by one of the very
rudest turns of life we of the profession were to have known, broke off,
in clumsy interfering hands and with almost no notice given, in a day,
in an hour. Besides connecting me with the lost but unforgotten note of
waiting service and sympathy that quavered on the Merridew air, they
represented just for intrinsic charm more than I could at any moment
have given a plain account of; they fell, by their ineffable history,
every trio I ever touched, into the category of such prized phenomena as
my memory, for instance, of fairly hanging about the Rue des Vieillards,
at the season I speak of, through the apprehension that something vague
and sweet--if I shouldn't indeed rather say something of infinite future
point and application--would come of it. This is a reminiscence that
nothing would induce me to verify, as for example by any revisiting
light; but it was going to be good for me, good, that is, for what I was
pleased to regard as my intelligence or my imagination, in fine for my
obscurely specific sense of things, that I _should_ so have hung about.
The name of the street was by itself of so gentle and intimate a
persuasion that I must have been ashamed not to proceed, for the very
grace of it, to some shade of active response. And there was always a
place of particular arrest in the vista brief and blank, but inclusively
blank, blank _after_ ancient, settled, more and more subsiding things,
blank almost, in short, with all Matthew Arnold's "ennui of the middle
ages," rather than, poorly and meanly and emptily, before such states,
which was previously what I had most known of blankness. This determined
pause was at the window of a spare and solitary shop, a place of no
amplitude at all, but as of an inveterate cheerful confidence, where,
among a few artists' materials, an exhibited water-colour from some
native and possibly then admired hand was changed but once in ever so
long. That was perhaps after all the pivot of my revolution--the
question of whether or no I should at a given moment find the old
picture replaced. I made this, when I had the luck, pass for an
event--yet an event which would _have_ to have had for its scene the
precious Rue des Vieillards, and pale though may be the recital of such
pleasures I lose myself in depths of kindness for my strain of
ingenuity.

All of which, and to that extent to be corrected, leaves small allowance
for my service to good M. Ansiot, rendered while my elder and younger
brothers--the younger completing our group of the ungovernessed--were
continuously subject to collegial durance. Their ordeal was, I still
blush to think, appreciably the heavier, as compared with mine, during
our longer term of thrifty exile from Paris--the time of stress, as I
find I recall it, when we had turned our backs on the Rue Montaigne and
my privilege was so to roam on the winter and the spring afternoons.
Mild M. Ansiot, "under" whom I for some three hours each forenoon sat
sole and underided--and actually by himself too--was a curiosity, a
benignity, a futility even, I gather; but save for a felt and remembered
impulse in me to open the window of our scene of study as soon as he had
gone was in no degree an ideal. He might rise here, could I do him
justice, as the rarest of my poor evocations; for he it was, to be
frank, who most literally smelt of the vieux temps--as to which I have
noted myself as wondering and musing as much as might be, with recovered
scraps and glimpses and other intimations, only never yet for such a
triumph of that particular sense. To be still frank, he was little less
than a monster--for mere unresisting or unresilient mass of personal
presence I mean; so that I fairly think of him as a form of bland
porpoise, violently blowing in an age not his own, as by having had to
exchange deep water for thin air. Thus he impressed me as with an
absolute ancientry of type, of tone, of responsible taste, above all;
this last I mean in literature, since it was literature we sociably
explored, to my at once charmed and shamed apprehension of the several
firm traditions, the pure proprieties, the discussabilities, in the
oddest way both so many and so few, of that field as they prevailed to
his pious view. I must have had hold, in this mere sovereign sample of
the accidentally, the quite unconsciously and unpretentiously, the all
negligibly or superfluously handed-down, of a rare case of the
provincial and academic _cuistre_; though even while I record it I see
the good man as too helpless and unaggressive, too smothered in his poor
facts of person and circumstance, of overgrown time of life alone, to
incur with justness the harshness of classification. He rested with a
weight I scarce even felt--such easy terms he made, without scruple, for
both of us--on the cheerful innocence of my barbarism; and though our
mornings were short and subject, I think, to quite drowsy lapses and
other honest aridities, we did scumble together, I make out, by the aid
of the collected extracts from the truly and academically great which
formed his sole resource and which he had, in a small portable and
pocketed library rather greasily preserved, some patch of picture of a
saving as distinguished from a losing classicism. The point remains for
me that when all was said--and even with everything that might directly
have counted unsaid--he discharged for me such an office that I was to
remain to this far-off hour in a state of possession of him that is the
very opposite of a blank: quite after the fashion again in which I had
all along and elsewhere suffered and resisted, and yet so perversely and
intimately appropriated, tutoring; which was with as little as ever to
show for my profit of his own express showings. The blank he fills out
crowds itself with a wealth of value, since I shouldn't without him have
been able to claim, for whatever it may be worth, a tenth (at that let
me handsomely put it), of my "working" sense of the vieux temps. How can
I allow then that we hadn't planted together, with a loose felicity,
some of the seed of work?--even though the sprouting was so long put
off. Everything, I have mentioned, had come at this time to be
acceptedly, though far from braggingly, put off; and the ministrations
of M. Ansiot really wash themselves over with the weak mixture that had
begun to spread for me, to immensity, during that summer day or two of
our earlier residence when, betraying strange pains and apprehensions, I
was with all decision put to bed. Present to me still is the fact of my
sharper sense, after an hour or two, of my being there in distress and,
as happened for the moment, alone; present to me are the sounds of the
soft afternoon, the mild animation of the Boulogne street through the
half-open windows; present to me above all the strange sense that
something had begun that would make more difference to me, directly and
indirectly, than anything had ever yet made. I might verily, on the
spot, have seen, as in a fading of day and a change to something
suddenly queer, the whole large extent of it. I must thus, much
impressed but half scared, have wanted to appeal; to which end I
tumbled, all too weakly, out of bed and wavered toward the bell just
across the room. The question of whether I really reached and rang it
was to remain lost afterwards in the strong sick whirl of everything
about me, under which I fell into a lapse of consciousness that I shall
conveniently here treat as a considerable gap.

THE END



CHAPTER I

It was in the early days of April; Bernard Longueville had been spending
the winter in Rome. He had travelled northward with the consciousness of
several social duties that appealed to him from the further side of the
Alps, but he was under the charm of the Italian spring, and he made a
pretext for lingering. He had spent five days at Siena, where he had
intended to spend but two, and still it was impossible to continue his
journey. He was a young man of a contemplative and speculative turn, and
this was his first visit to Italy, so that if he dallied by the way he
should not be harshly judged. He had a fancy for sketching, and it was
on his conscience to take a few pictorial notes. There were two old
inns at Siena, both of them very shabby and very dirty. The one at which
Longueville had taken up his abode was entered by a dark, pestiferous
arch-way, surmounted by a sign which at a distance might have been read
by the travellers as the Dantean injunction to renounce all hope. The
other was not far off, and the day after his arrival, as he passed
it, he saw two ladies going in who evidently belonged to the large
fraternity of Anglo-Saxon tourists, and one of whom was young and
carried herself very well. Longueville had his share--or more than his
share--of gallantry, and this incident awakened a regret. If he had
gone to the other inn he might have had charming company: at his own
establishment there was no one but an aesthetic German who smoked bad
tobacco in the dining-room. He remarked to himself that this was always
his luck, and the remark was characteristic of the man; it was charged
with the feeling of the moment, but it was not absolutely just; it was
the result of an acute impression made by the particular occasion;
but it failed in appreciation of a providence which had sprinkled
Longueville's career with happy accidents--accidents, especially, in
which his characteristic gallantry was not allowed to rust for want of
exercise. He lounged, however, contentedly enough through these bright,
still days of a Tuscan April, drawing much entertainment from the high
picturesqueness of the things about him. Siena, a few years since, was
a flawless gift of the Middle Ages to the modern imagination. No other
Italian city could have been more interesting to an observer fond
of reconstructing obsolete manners. This was a taste of Bernard
Longueville's, who had a relish for serious literature, and at one time
had made several lively excursions into mediaeval history. His friends
thought him very clever, and at the same time had an easy feeling about
him which was a tribute to his freedom from pedantry. He was clever
indeed, and an excellent companion; but the real measure of his
brilliancy was in the success with which he entertained himself. He was
much addicted to conversing with his own wit, and he greatly enjoyed his
own society. Clever as he often was in talking with his friends, I am
not sure that his best things, as the phrase is, were not for his
own ears. And this was not on account of any cynical contempt for the
understanding of his fellow-creatures: it was simply because what I have
called his own society was more of a stimulus than that of most other
people. And yet he was not for this reason fond of solitude; he was, on
the contrary, a very sociable animal. It must be admitted at the outset
that he had a nature which seemed at several points to contradict
itself, as will probably be perceived in the course of this narration.

He entertained himself greatly with his reflections and meditations upon
Sienese architecture and early Tuscan art, upon Italian street-life and
the geological idiosyncrasies of the Apennines. If he had only gone to
the other inn, that nice-looking girl whom he had seen passing under the
dusky portal with her face turned away from him might have broken bread
with him at this intellectual banquet. Then came a day, however, when
it seemed for a moment that if she were disposed she might gather up the
crumbs of the feast. Longueville, every morning after breakfast, took
a turn in the great square of Siena--the vast piazza, shaped like
a horse-shoe, where the market is held beneath the windows of that
crenellated palace from whose overhanging cornice a tall, straight tower
springs up with a movement as light as that of a single plume in the
bonnet of a captain. Here he strolled about, watching a brown contadino
disembarrass his donkey, noting the progress of half an hour's chaffer
over a bundle of carrots, wishing a young girl with eyes like animated
agates would let him sketch her, and gazing up at intervals at the
beautiful, slim tower, as it played at contrasts with the large blue
air. After he had spent the greater part of a week in these grave
considerations, he made up his mind to leave Siena. But he was not
content with what he had done for his portfolio. Siena was eminently
sketchable, but he had not been industrious. On the last morning of his
visit, as he stood staring about him in the crowded piazza, and feeling
that, in spite of its picturesqueness, this was an awkward place for
setting up an easel, he bethought himself, by contrast, of a quiet
corner in another part of the town, which he had chanced upon in one
of his first walks--an angle of a lonely terrace that abutted upon the
city-wall, where three or four superannuated objects seemed to slumber
in the sunshine--the open door of an empty church, with a faded fresco
exposed to the air in the arch above it, and an ancient beggar-woman
sitting beside it on a three-legged stool. The little terrace had an
old polished parapet, about as high as a man's breast, above which was
a view of strange, sad-colored hills. Outside, to the left, the wall
of the town made an outward bend, and exposed its rugged and rusty
complexion. There was a smooth stone bench set into the wall of the
church, on which Longueville had rested for an hour, observing the
composition of the little picture of which I have indicated the
elements, and of which the parapet of the terrace would form the
foreground. The thing was what painters call a subject, and he had
promised himself to come back with his utensils. This morning he
returned to the inn and took possession of them, and then he made his
way through a labyrinth of empty streets, lying on the edge of the town,
within the wall, like the superfluous folds of a garment whose wearer
has shrunken with old age. He reached his little grass-grown terrace,
and found it as sunny and as private as before. The old mendicant was
mumbling petitions, sacred and profane, at the church door; but save for
this the stillness was unbroken. The yellow sunshine warmed the brown
surface of the city-wall, and lighted the hollows of the Etruscan hills.
Longueville settled himself on the empty bench, and, arranging his
little portable apparatus, began to ply his brushes. He worked for some
time smoothly and rapidly, with an agreeable sense of the absence of
obstacles. It seemed almost an interruption when, in the silent air, he
heard a distant bell in the town strike noon. Shortly after this, there
was another interruption. The sound of a soft footstep caused him to
look up; whereupon he saw a young woman standing there and bending her
eyes upon the graceful artist. A second glance assured him that she
was that nice girl whom he had seen going into the other inn with her
mother, and suggested that she had just emerged from the little church.
He suspected, however--I hardly know why--that she had been looking
at him for some moments before he perceived her. It would perhaps be
impertinent to inquire what she thought of him; but Longueville, in the
space of an instant, made two or three reflections upon the young lady.
One of them was to the effect that she was a handsome creature, but
that she looked rather bold; the burden of the other was that--yes,
decidedly--she was a compatriot. She turned away almost as soon as she
met his eyes; he had hardly time to raise his hat, as, after a moment's
hesitation, he proceeded to do. She herself appeared to feel a certain
hesitation; she glanced back at the church door, as if under the impulse
to retrace her steps. She stood there a moment longer--long enough to
let him see that she was a person of easy attitudes--and then she walked
away slowly to the parapet of the terrace. Here she stationed herself,
leaning her arms upon the high stone ledge, presenting her back to
Longueville, and gazing at rural Italy. Longueville went on with his
sketch, but less attentively than before. He wondered what this young
lady was doing there alone, and then it occurred to him that her
companion--her mother, presumably--was in the church. The two ladies had
been in the church when he arrived; women liked to sit in churches; they
had been there more than half an hour, and the mother had not enough of
it even yet. The young lady, however, at present preferred the view that
Longueville was painting; he became aware that she had placed herself in
the very centre of his foreground. His first feeling was that she would
spoil it; his second was that she would improve it. Little by little she
turned more into profile, leaning only one arm upon the parapet, while
the other hand, holding her folded parasol, hung down at her side. She
was motionless; it was almost as if she were standing there on purpose
to be drawn. Yes, certainly she improved the picture. Her profile,
delicate and thin, defined itself against the sky, in the clear shadow
of a coquettish hat; her figure was light; she bent and leaned easily;
she wore a gray dress, fastened up as was then the fashion, and
displaying the broad edge of a crimson petticoat. She kept her position;
she seemed absorbed in the view. "Is she posing--is she attitudinizing
for my benefit?" Longueville asked of himself. And then it seemed to
him that this was a needless assumption, for the prospect was quite
beautiful enough to be looked at for itself, and there was nothing
impossible in a pretty girl having a love of fine landscape. "But posing
or not," he went on, "I will put her into my sketch. She has simply
put herself in. It will give it a human interest. There is nothing like
having a human interest." So, with the ready skill that he possessed, he
introduced the young girl's figure into his foreground, and at the
end of ten minutes he had almost made something that had the form of a
likeness. "If she will only be quiet for another ten minutes," he said,
"the thing will really be a picture." Unfortunately, the young lady was
not quiet; she had apparently had enough of her attitude and her view.
She turned away, facing Longueville again, and slowly came back, as if
to re-enter the church. To do so she had to pass near him, and as she
approached he instinctively got up, holding his drawing in one hand.
She looked at him again, with that expression that he had mentally
characterized as "bold," a few minutes before--with dark, intelligent
eyes. Her hair was dark and dense; she was a strikingly handsome girl.

"I am so sorry you moved," he said, confidently, in English. "You were
so--so beautiful."

She stopped, looking at him more directly than ever; and she looked at
his sketch, which he held out toward her. At the sketch, however, she
only glanced, whereas there was observation in the eye that she bent
upon Longueville. He never knew whether she had blushed; he afterward
thought she might have been frightened. Nevertheless, it was not exactly
terror that appeared to dictate her answer to Longueville's speech.

"I am much obliged to you. Don't you think you have looked at me
enough?"

"By no means. I should like so much to finish my drawing."

"I am not a professional model," said the young lady.

"No. That 's my difficulty," Longueville answered, laughing. "I can't
propose to remunerate you."

The young lady seemed to think this joke in indifferent taste. She
turned away in silence; but something in her expression, in his feeling
at the time, in the situation, incited Longueville to higher play. He
felt a lively need of carrying his point.

"You see it will be pure kindness," he went on,--"a simple act of
charity. Five minutes will be enough. Treat me as an Italian beggar."

She had laid down his sketch and had stepped forward. He stood there,
obsequious, clasping his hands and smiling.

His interruptress stopped and looked at him again, as if she thought him
a very odd person; but she seemed amused. Now, at any rate, she was not
frightened. She seemed even disposed to provoke him a little.

"I wish to go to my mother," she said.

"Where is your mother?" the young man asked.

"In the church, of course. I did n't come here alone!"

"Of course not; but you may be sure that your mother is very contented.
I have been in that little church. It is charming. She is just resting
there; she is probably tired. If you will kindly give me five minutes
more, she will come out to you."

"Five minutes?" the young girl asked.

"Five minutes will do. I shall be eternally grateful." Longueville was
amused at himself as he said this. He cared infinitely less for his
sketch than the words appeared to imply; but, somehow, he cared greatly
that this graceful stranger should do what he had proposed.

The graceful stranger dropped an eye on the sketch again.

"Is your picture so good as that?" she asked.

"I have a great deal of talent," he answered, laughing. "You shall see
for yourself, when it is finished."

She turned slowly toward the terrace again.

"You certainly have a great deal of talent, to induce me to do what you
ask." And she walked to where she had stood before. Longueville made a
movement to go with her, as if to show her the attitude he meant; but,
pointing with decision to his easel, she said--

"You have only five minutes." He immediately went back to his work, and
she made a vague attempt to take up her position. "You must tell me if
this will do," she added, in a moment.

"It will do beautifully," Longueville answered, in a happy tone, looking
at her and plying his brush. "It is immensely good of you to take so
much trouble."

For a moment she made no rejoinder, but presently she said--

"Of course if I pose at all I wish to pose well."

"You pose admirably," said Longueville.

After this she said nothing, and for several minutes he painted rapidly
and in silence. He felt a certain excitement, and the movement of his
thoughts kept pace with that of his brush. It was very true that she
posed admirably; she was a fine creature to paint. Her prettiness
inspired him, and also her audacity, as he was content to regard it
for the moment. He wondered about her--who she was, and what she
was--perceiving that the so-called audacity was not vulgar boldness,
but the play of an original and probably interesting character. It was
obvious that she was a perfect lady, but it was equally obvious that
she was irregularly clever. Longueville's little figure was a success--a
charming success, he thought, as he put on the last touches. While he
was doing this, his model's companion came into view. She came out of
the church, pausing a moment as she looked from her daughter to the
young man in the corner of the terrace; then she walked straight over
to the young girl. She was a delicate little gentlewoman, with a light,
quick step.

Longueville's five minutes were up; so, leaving his place, he approached
the two ladies, sketch in hand. The elder one, who had passed her hand
into her daughter's arm, looked up at him with clear, surprised eyes;
she was a charming old woman. Her eyes were very pretty, and on either
side of them, above a pair of fine dark brows, was a band of silvery
hair, rather coquettishly arranged.

"It is my portrait," said her daughter, as Longueville drew near. "This
gentleman has been sketching me."

"Sketching you, dearest?" murmured her mother. "Was n't it rather
sudden?"

"Very sudden--very abrupt!" exclaimed the young girl with a laugh.

"Considering all that, it 's very good," said Longueville, offering his
picture to the elder lady, who took it and began to examine it. "I can't
tell you how much I thank you," he said to his model.

"It 's very well for you to thank me now," she replied. "You really had
no right to begin."

"The temptation was so great."

"We should resist temptation. And you should have asked my leave."

"I was afraid you would refuse it; and you stood there, just in my line
of vision."

"You should have asked me to get out of it."

"I should have been very sorry. Besides, it would have been extremely
rude."

The young girl looked at him a moment.

"Yes, I think it would. But what you have done is ruder."

"It is a hard case!" said Longueville. "What could I have done, then,
decently?"

"It 's a beautiful drawing," murmured the elder lady, handing the thing
back to Longueville. Her daughter, meanwhile, had not even glanced at
it.

"You might have waited till I should go away," this argumentative young
person continued.

Longueville shook his head.

"I never lose opportunities!"

"You might have sketched me afterwards, from memory."

Longueville looked at her, smiling.

"Judge how much better my memory will be now!"

She also smiled a little, but instantly became serious.

"For myself, it 's an episode I shall try to forget. I don't like the
part I have played in it."

"May you never play a less becoming one!" cried Longueville. "I hope
that your mother, at least, will accept a memento of the occasion." And
he turned again with his sketch to her companion, who had been listening
to the girl's conversation with this enterprising stranger, and looking
from one to the other with an air of earnest confusion. "Won't you do me
the honor of keeping my sketch?" he said. "I think it really looks like
your daughter."

"Oh, thank you, thank you; I hardly dare," murmured the lady, with a
deprecating gesture.

"It will serve as a kind of amends for the liberty I have taken,"
Longueville added; and he began to remove the drawing from its paper
block.

"It makes it worse for you to give it to us," said the young girl.

"Oh, my dear, I am sure it 's lovely!" exclaimed her mother. "It 's
wonderfully like you."

"I think that also makes it worse!"

Longueville was at last nettled. The young lady's perversity was perhaps
not exactly malignant; but it was certainly ungracious. She seemed to
desire to present herself as a beautiful tormentress.

"How does it make it worse?" he asked, with a frown.

He believed she was clever, and she was certainly ready. Now, however,
she reflected a moment before answering.

"That you should give us your sketch," she said at last.

"It was to your mother I offered it," Longueville observed.

But this observation, the fruit of his irritation, appeared to have no
effect upon the young girl.

"Is n't it what painters call a study?" she went on. "A study is of use
to the painter himself. Your justification would be that you should keep
your sketch, and that it might be of use to you."

"My daughter is a study, sir, you will say," said the elder lady in a
little, light, conciliating voice, and graciously accepting the drawing
again.

"I will admit," said Longueville, "that I am very inconsistent. Set it
down to my esteem, madam," he added, looking at the mother.

"That 's for you, mamma," said his model, disengaging her arm from her
mother's hand and turning away.

The mamma stood looking at the sketch with a smile which seemed to
express a tender desire to reconcile all accidents.

"It 's extremely beautiful," she murmured, "and if you insist on my
taking it--"

"I shall regard it as a great honor."

"Very well, then; with many thanks, I will keep it." She looked at the
young man a moment, while her daughter walked away. Longueville thought
her a delightful little person; she struck him as a sort of transfigured
Quakeress--a mystic with a practical side. "I am sure you think she 's a
strange girl," she said.

"She is extremely pretty."

"She is very clever," said the mother.

"She is wonderfully graceful."

"Ah, but she 's good!" cried the old lady.

"I am sure she comes honestly by that," said Longueville, expressively,
while his companion, returning his salutation with a certain scrupulous
grace of her own, hurried after her daughter.

Longueville remained there staring at the view but not especially seeing
it. He felt as if he had at once enjoyed and lost an opportunity. After
a while he tried to make a sketch of the old beggar-woman who sat there
in a sort of palsied immobility, like a rickety statue at a church-door.
But his attempt to reproduce her features was not gratifying, and he
suddenly laid down his brush. She was not pretty enough--she had a bad
profile.







CHAPTER II

Two months later Bernard Longueville was at Venice, still under the
impression that he was leaving Italy. He was not a man who made plans
and held to them. He made them, indeed--few men made more--but he
made them as a basis for variation. He had gone to Venice to spend a
fortnight, and his fortnight had taken the form of eight enchanting
weeks. He had still a sort of conviction that he was carrying out his
plans; for it must be confessed that where his pleasure was concerned he
had considerable skill in accommodating his theory to his practice. His
enjoyment of Venice was extreme, but he was roused from it by a summons
he was indisposed to resist. This consisted of a letter from an intimate
friend who was living in Germany--a friend whose name was Gordon Wright.
He had been spending the winter in Dresden, but his letter bore the date
of Baden-Baden. As it was not long, I may give it entire.

"I wish very much that you would come to this place. I think you have
been here before, so that you know how pretty it is, and how amusing. I
shall probably be here the rest of the summer. There are some people I
know and whom I want you to know. Be so good as to arrive. Then I will
thank you properly for your various Italian rhapsodies. I can't reply on
the same scale--I have n't the time. Do you know what I am doing? I am
making love. I find it a most absorbing occupation. That is literally
why I have not written to you before. I have been making love ever since
the last of May. It takes an immense amount of time, and everything else
has got terribly behindhand. I don't mean to say that the experiment
itself has gone on very fast; but I am trying to push it forward. I have
n't yet had time to test its success; but in this I want your help.
You know we great physicists never make an experiment without an
'assistant'--a humble individual who burns his fingers and stains his
clothes in the cause of science, but whose interest in the problem is
only indirect. I want you to be my assistant, and I will guarantee
that your burns and stains shall not be dangerous. She is an extremely
interesting girl, and I really want you to see her--I want to know what
you think of her. She wants to know you, too, for I have talked a good
deal about you. There you have it, if gratified vanity will help you on
the way. Seriously, this is a real request. I want your opinion, your
impression. I want to see how she will affect you. I don't say I ask
for your advice; that, of course, you will not undertake to give. But
I desire a definition, a characterization; you know you toss off those
things. I don't see why I should n't tell you all this--I have always
told you everything. I have never pretended to know anything about
women, but I have always supposed that you knew everything. You
certainly have always had the tone of that sort of omniscience. So come
here as soon as possible and let me see that you are not a humbug. She
's a very handsome girl."

Longueville was so much amused with this appeal that he very soon
started for Germany. In the reader, Gordon Wright's letter will,
perhaps, excite surprise rather than hilarity; but Longueville thought
it highly characteristic of his friend. What it especially pointed to
was Gordon's want of imagination--a deficiency which was a matter of
common jocular allusion between the two young men, each of whom kept a
collection of acknowledged oddities as a playground for the other's
wit. Bernard had often spoken of his comrade's want of imagination as a
bottomless pit, into which Gordon was perpetually inviting him to lower
himself. "My dear fellow," Bernard said, "you must really excuse me; I
cannot take these subterranean excursions. I should lose my breath down
there; I should never come up alive. You know I have dropped things
down--little jokes and metaphors, little fantasies and paradoxes--and I
have never heard them touch bottom!" This was an epigram on the part
of a young man who had a lively play of fancy; but it was none the less
true that Gordon Wright had a firmly-treading, rather than a winged,
intellect. Every phrase in his letter seemed, to Bernard, to march
in stout-soled walking-boots, and nothing could better express his
attachment to the process of reasoning things out than this proposal
that his friend should come and make a chemical analysis--a geometrical
survey--of the lady of his love. "That I shall have any difficulty in
forming an opinion, and any difficulty in expressing it when formed--of
this he has as little idea as that he shall have any difficulty in
accepting it when expressed." So Bernard reflected, as he rolled in the
train to Munich. "Gordon's mind," he went on, "has no atmosphere; his
intellectual process goes on in the void. There are no currents and
eddies to affect it, no high winds nor hot suns, no changes of season
and temperature. His premises are neatly arranged, and his conclusions
are perfectly calculable."

Yet for the man on whose character he so freely exercised his wit
Bernard Longueville had a strong affection. It is nothing against
the validity of a friendship that the parties to it have not a mutual
resemblance. There must be a basis of agreement, but the structure
reared upon it may contain a thousand disparities. These two young men
had formed an alliance of old, in college days, and the bond between
them had been strengthened by the simple fact of its having survived the
sentimental revolutions of early life. Its strongest link was a sort of
mutual respect. Their tastes, their pursuits were different; but each
of them had a high esteem for the other's character. It may be said that
they were easily pleased; for it is certain that neither of them had
performed any very conspicuous action. They were highly civilized
young Americans, born to an easy fortune and a tranquil destiny, and
unfamiliar with the glitter of golden opportunities. If I did not shrink
from disparaging the constitution of their native land for their own
credit, I should say that it had never been very definitely proposed to
these young gentlemen to distinguish themselves. On reaching manhood,
they had each come into property sufficient to make violent exertion
superfluous. Gordon Wright, indeed, had inherited a large estate. Their
wants being tolerably modest, they had not been tempted to strive for
the glory of building up commercial fortunes--the most obvious career
open to young Americans. They had, indeed, embraced no career at all,
and if summoned to give an account of themselves would, perhaps, have
found it hard to tell any very impressive story. Gordon Wright was much
interested in physical science, and had ideas of his own on what is
called the endowment of research. His ideas had taken a practical
shape, and he had distributed money very freely among the investigating
classes, after which he had gone to spend a couple of years in Germany,
supposing it to be the land of laboratories. Here we find him at
present, cultivating relations with several learned bodies and promoting
the study of various tough branches of human knowledge, by paying the
expenses of difficult experiments. The experiments, it must be added,
were often of his own making, and he must have the honor of whatever
brilliancy attaches, in the estimation of the world, to such pursuits.
It was not, indeed, a brilliancy that dazzled Bernard Longueville, who,
however, was not easily dazzled by anything. It was because he regarded
him in so plain and direct a fashion, that Bernard had an affection
for his friend--an affection to which it would perhaps be difficult to
assign a definite cause. Personal sympathies are doubtless caused by
something; but the causes are remote, mysterious to our daily vision,
like those of the particular state of the weather. We content ourselves
with remarking that it is fine or that it rains, and the enjoyment of
our likes and dislikes is by no means apt to borrow its edge from
the keenness of our analysis. Longueville had a relish for fine
quality--superior savour; and he was sensible of this merit in the
simple, candid, manly, affectionate nature of his comrade, which seemed
to him an excellent thing of its kind. Gordon Wright had a tender heart
and a strong will--a combination which, when the understanding is not
too limited, is often the motive of admirable actions. There might
sometimes be a question whether Gordon's understanding were sufficiently
unlimited, but the impulses of a generous temper often play a useful
part in filling up the gaps of an incomplete imagination, and
the general impression that Wright produced was certainly that
of intelligent good-nature. The reasons for appreciating Bernard
Longueville were much more manifest. He pleased superficially, as well
as fundamentally. Nature had sent him into the world with an armful
of good gifts. He was very good-looking--tall, dark, agile, perfectly
finished, so good-looking that he might have been a fool and yet be
forgiven. As has already been intimated, however, he was far from being
a fool. He had a number of talents, which, during three or four years
that followed his leaving college, had received the discipline of the
study of the law. He had not made much of the law; but he had
made something of his talents. He was almost always spoken of as
"accomplished;" people asked why he did n't do something. This question
was never satisfactorily answered, the feeling being that Longueville
did more than many people in causing it to be asked. Moreover, there was
one thing he did constantly--he enjoyed himself. This is manifestly not
a career, and it has been said at the outset that he was not attached
to any of the recognized professions. But without going into details,
he was a charming fellow--clever, urbane, free-handed, and with that
fortunate quality in his appearance which is known as distinction.






CHAPTER III

He had not specified, in writing to Gordon Wright, the day on which
he should arrive at Baden-Baden; it must be confessed that he was
not addicted to specifying days. He came to his journey's end in the
evening, and, on presenting himself at the hotel from which his friend
had dated his letter, he learned that Gordon Wright had betaken himself
after dinner, according to the custom of Baden-Baden, to the grounds
of the Conversation-house. It was eight o'clock, and Longueville, after
removing the stains of travel, sat down to dine. His first impulse had
been to send for Gordon to come and keep him company at his repast; but
on second thought he determined to make it as brief as possible. Having
brought it to a close, he took his way to the Kursaal. The great German
watering-place is one of the prettiest nooks in Europe, and of a summer
evening in the gaming days, five-and-twenty years ago, it was one of the
most brilliant scenes. The lighted windows of the great temple of hazard
(of as chaste an architecture as if it had been devoted to a much purer
divinity) opened wide upon the gardens and groves; the little river that
issues from the bosky mountains of the Black Forest flowed, with an air
of brook-like innocence, past the expensive hotels and lodging-houses;
the orchestra, in a high pavilion on the terrace of the Kursaal, played
a discreet accompaniment to the conversation of the ladies and gentlemen
who, scattered over the large expanse on a thousand little chairs,
preferred for the time the beauties of nature to the shuffle of coin and
the calculation of chance; while the faint summer stars, twinkling above
the vague black hills and woods, looked down at the indifferent groups
without venturing to drop their light upon them.

Longueville, noting all this, went straight into the gaming-rooms; he
was curious to see whether his friend, being fond of experiments, was
trying combinations at roulette. But he was not to be found in any of
the gilded chambers, among the crowd that pressed in silence about the
tables; so that Bernard presently came and began to wander about the
lamp-lit terrace, where innumerable groups, seated and strolling, made
the place a gigantic conversazione. It seemed to him very agreeable and
amusing, and he remarked to himself that, for a man who was supposed not
to take especially the Epicurean view of life, Gordon Wright, in coming
to Baden, had certainly made himself comfortable. Longueville went his
way, glancing from one cluster of talkers to another; and at last he saw
a face which brought him to a stop. He stood a moment looking at it; he
knew he had seen it before. He had an excellent memory for faces; but
it was some time before he was able to attach an identity to this one.
Where had he seen a little elderly lady with an expression of timorous
vigilance, and a band of hair as softly white as a dove's wing? The
answer to the question presently came--Where but in a grass-grown corner
of an old Italian town? The lady was the mother of his inconsequent
model, so that this mysterious personage was probably herself not far
off. Before Longueville had time to verify this induction, he found his
eyes resting upon the broad back of a gentleman seated close to the old
lady, and who, turning away from her, was talking to a young girl.
It was nothing but the back of this gentleman that he saw, but
nevertheless, with the instinct of true friendship, he recognized in
this featureless expanse the robust personality of Gordon Wright. In a
moment he had stepped forward and laid his hand upon Wright's shoulder.

His friend looked round, and then sprang up with a joyous exclamation
and grasp of the hand.

"My dear fellow--my dear Bernard! What on earth--when did you arrive?"

While Bernard answered and explained a little, he glanced from his
friend's good, gratified face at the young girl with whom Wright had
been talking, and then at the lady on the other side, who was giving him
a bright little stare. He raised his hat to her and to the young
girl, and he became conscious, as regards the latter, of a certain
disappointment. She was very pretty; she was looking at him; but she was
not the heroine of the little incident of the terrace at Siena.

"It 's just like Longueville, you know," Gordon Wright went on; "he
always comes at you from behind; he 's so awfully fond of surprises." He
was laughing; he was greatly pleased; he introduced Bernard to the two
ladies. "You must know Mrs. Vivian; you must know Miss Blanche Evers."

Bernard took his place in the little circle; he wondered whether he
ought to venture upon a special recognition of Mrs. Vivian. Then it
seemed to him that he should leave the option of this step with the
lady, especially as he had detected recognition in her eye. But Mrs.
Vivian ventured upon nothing special; she contented herself with soft
generalities--with remarking that she always liked to know when people
would arrive; that, for herself, she never enjoyed surprises.

"And yet I imagine you have had your share," said Longueville, with a
smile. He thought this might remind her of the moment when she came out
of the little church at Siena and found her daughter posturing to an
unknown painter.

But Mrs. Vivian, turning her benignant head about, gave but a
superficial reply.

"Oh, I have had my share of everything, good and bad. I don't complain
of anything." And she gave a little deprecating laugh.

Gordon Wright shook hands with Bernard again; he seemed really very glad
to see him. Longueville, remembering that Gordon had written to him
that he had been "making love," began to seek in his countenance for the
ravages of passion. For the moment, however, they were not apparent; the
excellent, honest fellow looked placid and contented. Gordon Wright had
a clear gray eye, short, straight, flaxen hair, and a healthy diffusion
of color. His features were thick and rather irregular; but his
countenance--in addition to the merit of its expression--derived a
certain grace from a powerful yellow moustache, to which its wearer
occasionally gave a martial twist. Gordon Wright was not tall, but he
was strong, and in his whole person there was something well-planted and
sturdy. He almost always dressed in light-colored garments, and he wore
round his neck an eternal blue cravat. When he was agitated he grew very
red. While he questioned Longueville about his journey and his health,
his whereabouts and his intentions, the latter, among his own replies,
endeavored to read in Wright's eyes some account of his present
situation. Was that pretty girl at his side the ambiguous object of his
adoration, and, in that case, what was the function of the elder lady,
and what had become of her argumentative daughter? Perhaps this was
another, a younger daughter, though, indeed, she bore no resemblance to
either of Longueville's friends. Gordon Wright, in spite of Bernard's
interrogative glances, indulged in no optical confidences. He had
too much to tell. He would keep his story till they should be alone
together. It was impossible that they should adjourn just yet to
social solitude; the two ladies were under Gordon's protection. Mrs.
Vivian--Bernard felt a satisfaction in learning her name; it was as if a
curtain, half pulled up and stopped by a hitch, had suddenly been raised
altogether--Mrs. Vivian sat looking up and down the terrace at the
crowd of loungers and talkers with an air of tender expectation. She was
probably looking for her elder daughter, and Longueville could not help
wishing also that this young lady would arrive. Meanwhile, he saw that
the young girl to whom Gordon had been devoting himself was extremely
pretty, and appeared eminently approachable. Longueville had some talk
with her, reflecting that if she were the person concerning whom Gordon
had written him, it behooved him to appear to take an interest in her.
This view of the case was confirmed by Gordon Wright's presently turning
away to talk with Mrs. Vivian, so that his friend might be at liberty to
make acquaintance with their companion.

Though she had not been with the others at Siena, it seemed to
Longueville, with regard to her, too, that this was not the first time
he had seen her. She was simply the American pretty girl, whom he had
seen a thousand times. It was a numerous sisterhood, pervaded by a
strong family likeness. This young lady had charming eyes (of the color
of Gordon's cravats), which looked everywhere at once and yet found time
to linger in some places, where Longueville's own eyes frequently
met them. She had soft brown hair, with a silky-golden thread in it,
beautifully arranged and crowned by a smart little hat that savoured
of Paris. She had also a slender little figure, neatly rounded, and
delicate, narrow hands, prettily gloved. She moved about a great deal
in her place, twisted her little flexible body and tossed her head,
fingered her hair and examined the ornaments of her dress. She had
a great deal of conversation, Longueville speedily learned, and she
expressed herself with extreme frankness and decision. He asked her,
to begin with, if she had been long at Baden, but the impetus of
this question was all she required. Turning her charming, conscious,
coquettish little face upon him, she instantly began to chatter.

"I have been here about four weeks. I don't know whether you call that
long. It does n't seem long to me; I have had such a lovely time. I have
met ever so many people here I know--every day some one turns up. Now
you have turned up to-day."

"Ah, but you don't know me," said Longueville, laughing.

"Well, I have heard a great deal about you!" cried the young girl, with
a pretty little stare of contradiction. "I think you know a great friend
of mine, Miss Ella Maclane, of Baltimore. She 's travelling in Europe
now." Longueville's memory did not instantly respond to this signal, but
he expressed that rapturous assent which the occasion demanded, and
even risked the observation that the young lady from Baltimore was very
pretty. "She 's far too lovely," his companion went on. "I have often
heard her speak of you. I think you know her sister rather better than
you know her. She has not been out very long. She is just as interesting
as she can be. Her hair comes down to her feet. She 's travelling in
Norway. She has been everywhere you can think of, and she 's going to
finish off with Finland. You can't go any further than that, can you?
That 's one comfort; she will have to turn round and come back. I want
her dreadfully to come to Baden-Baden."

"I wish she would," said Longueville. "Is she travelling alone?"

"Oh, no. They 've got some Englishman. They say he 's devoted to Ella.
Every one seems to have an Englishman, now. We 've got one here, Captain
Lovelock, the Honourable Augustus Lovelock. Well, they 're awfully
handsome. Ella Maclane is dying to come to Baden-Baden. I wish you 'd
write to her. Her father and mother have got some idea in their heads;
they think it 's improper--what do you call it?--immoral. I wish you
would write to her and tell her it is n't. I wonder if they think that
Mrs. Vivian would come to a place that 's immoral. Mrs. Vivian says she
would take her in a moment; she does n't seem to care how many she has.
I declare, she 's only too kind. You know I 'm in Mrs. Vivian's care.
My mother 's gone to Marienbad. She would let me go with Mrs. Vivian
anywhere, on account of the influence--she thinks so much of Mrs.
Vivian's influence. I have always heard a great deal about it, have n't
you? I must say it 's lovely; it 's had a wonderful effect upon me. I
don't want to praise myself, but it has. You ask Mrs. Vivian if I have
n't been good. I have been just as good as I can be. I have been so
peaceful, I have just sat here this way. Do you call this immoral? You
're not obliged to gamble if you don't want to. Ella Maclane's father
seems to think you get drawn in. I 'm sure I have n't been drawn in. I
know what you 're going to say--you 're going to say I have been drawn
out. Well, I have, to-night. We just sit here so quietly--there 's
nothing to do but to talk. We make a little party by ourselves--are you
going to belong to our party? Two of us are missing--Miss Vivian and
Captain Lovelock. Captain Lovelock has gone with her into the rooms to
explain the gambling--Miss Vivian always wants everything explained. I
am sure I understood it the first time I looked at the tables. Have you
ever seen Miss Vivian? She 's very much admired, she 's so very unusual.
Black hair 's so uncommon--I see you have got it too--but I mean for
young ladies. I am sure one sees everything here. There 's a woman
that comes to the tables--a Portuguese countess--who has hair that is
positively blue. I can't say I admire it when it comes to that shade.
Blue 's my favorite color, but I prefer it in the eyes," continued
Longueville's companion, resting upon him her own two brilliant little
specimens of the tint.

He listened with that expression of clear amusement which is not always
an indication of high esteem, but which even pretty chatterers, who are
not the reverse of estimable, often prefer to masculine inattention; and
while he listened Bernard, according to his wont, made his reflections.
He said to himself that there were two kinds of pretty girls--the
acutely conscious and the finely unconscious. Mrs. Vivian's protege was
a member of the former category; she belonged to the genus coquette. We
all have our conception of the indispensable, and the indispensable, to
this young lady, was a spectator; almost any male biped would serve
the purpose. To her spectator she addressed, for the moment, the whole
volume of her being--addressed it in her glances, her attitudes, her
exclamations, in a hundred little experiments of tone and gesture and
position. And these rustling artifices were so innocent and obvious
that the directness of her desire to be well with her observer became
in itself a grace; it led Bernard afterward to say to himself that the
natural vocation and metier of little girls for whom existence was but a
shimmering surface, was to prattle and ruffle their plumage; their
view of life and its duties was as simple and superficial as that of
an Oriental bayadere. It surely could not be with regard to this
transparent little flirt that Gordon Wright desired advice; you could
literally see the daylight--or rather the Baden gaslight--on the other
side of her. She sat there for a minute, turning her little empty head
to and fro, and catching Bernard's eye every time she moved; she had for
the instant the air of having exhausted all topics. Just then a young
lady, with a gentleman at her side, drew near to the little group, and
Longueville, perceiving her, instantly got up from his chair.

"There 's a beauty of the unconscious class!" he said to himself. He
knew her face very well; he had spent half an hour in copying it.

"Here comes Miss Vivian!" said Gordon Wright, also getting up, as if to
make room for the daughter near the mother.

She stopped in front of them, smiling slightly, and then she rested her
eyes upon Longueville. Their gaze at first was full and direct, but
it expressed nothing more than civil curiosity. This was immediately
followed, however, by the light of recognition--recognition embarrassed,
and signalling itself by a blush.

Miss Vivian's companion was a powerful, handsome fellow, with a
remarkable auburn beard, who struck the observer immediately as being
uncommonly well dressed. He carried his hands in the pockets of a little
jacket, the button-hole of which was adorned with a blooming rose. He
approached Blanche Evers, smiling and dandling his body a little, and
making her two or three jocular bows.

"Well, I hope you have lost every penny you put on the table!" said the
young girl, by way of response to his obeisances.

He began to laugh and repeat them.

"I don't care what I lose, so long--so long--"

"So long as what, pray?"

"So long as you let me sit down by you!" And he dropped, very gallantly,
into a chair on the other side of her.

"I wish you would lose all your property!" she replied, glancing at
Bernard.

"It would be a very small stake," said Captain Lovelock. "Would you
really like to see me reduced to misery?"

While this graceful dialogue rapidly established itself, Miss Vivian
removed her eyes from Longueville's face and turned toward her
mother. But Gordon Wright checked this movement by laying his hand on
Longueville's shoulder and proceeding to introduce his friend.

"This is the accomplished creature, Mr. Bernard Longueville, of whom you
have heard me speak. One of his accomplishments, as you see, is to drop
down from the moon."

"No, I don't drop from the moon," said Bernard, laughing. "I drop
from--Siena!" He offered his hand to Miss Vivian, who for an appreciable
instant hesitated to extend her own. Then she returned his salutation,
without any response to his allusion to Siena.

She declined to take a seat, and said she was tired and preferred to go
home. With this suggestion her mother immediately complied, and the two
ladies appealed to the indulgence of little Miss Evers, who was obliged
to renounce the society of Captain Lovelock. She enjoyed this luxury,
however, on the way to Mrs. Vivian's lodgings, toward which they all
slowly strolled, in the sociable Baden fashion. Longueville might
naturally have found himself next Miss Vivian, but he received an
impression that she avoided him. She walked in front, and Gordon Wright
strolled beside her, though Longueville noticed that they appeared to
exchange but few words. He himself offered his arm to Mrs. Vivian, who
paced along with a little lightly-wavering step, making observations
upon the beauties of Baden and the respective merits of the hotels.






CHAPTER IV

"Which of them is it?" asked Longueville of his friend, after they had
bidden good-night to the three ladies and to Captain Lovelock, who went
off to begin, as he said, the evening. They stood, when they had turned
away from the door of Mrs. Vivian's lodgings, in the little, rough-paved
German street.

"Which of them is what?" Gordon asked, staring at his companion.

"Oh, come," said Longueville, "you are not going to begin to play at
modesty at this hour! Did n't you write to me that you had been making
violent love?"

"Violent? No."

"The more shame to you! Has your love-making been feeble?"

His friend looked at him a moment rather soberly.

"I suppose you thought it a queer document--that letter I wrote you."

"I thought it characteristic," said Longueville smiling.

"Is n't that the same thing?"

"Not in the least. I have never thought you a man of oddities." Gordon
stood there looking at him with a serious eye, half appealing, half
questioning; but at these last words he glanced away. Even a very modest
man may wince a little at hearing himself denied the distinction of a
few variations from the common type. Longueville made this reflection,
and it struck him, also, that his companion was in a graver mood than he
had expected; though why, after all, should he have been in a state of
exhilaration? "Your letter was a very natural, interesting one," Bernard
added.

"Well, you see," said Gordon, facing his companion again, "I have been a
good deal preoccupied."

"Obviously, my dear fellow!"

"I want very much to marry."

"It 's a capital idea," said Longueville.

"I think almost as well of it," his friend declared, "as if I had
invented it. It has struck me for the first time."

These words were uttered with a mild simplicity which provoked
Longueville to violent laughter.

"My dear fellow," he exclaimed, "you have, after all, your little
oddities."

Singularly enough, however, Gordon Wright failed to appear flattered by
this concession.

"I did n't send for you to laugh at me," he said.

"Ah, but I have n't travelled three hundred miles to cry! Seriously,
solemnly, then, it is one of these young ladies that has put marriage
into your head?"

"Not at all. I had it in my head."

"Having a desire to marry, you proceeded to fall in love."

"I am not in love!" said Gordon Wright, with some energy.

"Ah, then, my dear fellow, why did you send for me?"

Wright looked at him an instant in silence.

"Because I thought you were a good fellow, as well as a clever one."

"A good fellow!" repeated Longueville. "I don't understand your
confounded scientific nomenclature. But excuse me; I won't laugh. I am
not a clever fellow; but I am a good one." He paused a moment, and then
laid his hand on his companion's shoulder. "My dear Gordon, it 's no
use; you are in love."

"Well, I don't want to be," said Wright.

"Heavens, what a horrible sentiment!"

"I want to marry with my eyes open. I want to know my wife. You don't
know people when you are in love with them. Your impressions are
colored."

"They are supposed to be, slightly. And you object to color?"

"Well, as I say, I want to know the woman I marry, as I should know any
one else. I want to see her as clearly."

"Depend upon it, you have too great an appetite for knowledge; you set
too high an esteem upon the dry light of science."

"Ah!" said Gordon promptly; "of course I want to be fond of her."

Bernard, in spite of his protest, began to laugh again.

"My dear Gordon, you are better than your theories. Your passionate
heart contradicts your frigid intellect. I repeat it--you are in love."

"Please don't repeat it again," said Wright.

Bernard took his arm, and they walked along.

"What shall I call it, then? You are engaged in making studies for
matrimony."

"I don't in the least object to your calling it that. My studies are of
extreme interest."

"And one of those young ladies is the fair volume that contains the
precious lesson," said Longueville. "Or perhaps your text-book is in two
volumes?"

"No; there is one of them I am not studying at all. I never could do two
things at once."

"That proves you are in love. One can't be in love with two women
at once, but one may perfectly have two of them--or as many as you
please--up for a competitive examination. However, as I asked you
before, which of these young ladies is it that you have selected?"

Gordon Wright stopped abruptly, eying his friend.

"Which should you say?"

"Ah, that 's not a fair question," Bernard urged. "It would be invidious
for me to name one rather than the other, and if I were to mention the
wrong one, I should feel as if I had been guilty of a rudeness towards
the other. Don't you see?"

Gordon saw, perhaps, but he held to his idea of making his companion
commit himself.

"Never mind the rudeness. I will do the same by you some day, to make it
up. Which of them should you think me likely to have taken a fancy to?
On general grounds, now, from what you know of me?" He proposed this
problem with an animated eye.

"You forget," his friend said, "that though I know, thank heaven, a good
deal of you, I know very little of either of those girls. I have had too
little evidence."

"Yes, but you are a man who notices. That 's why I wanted you to come."

"I spoke only to Miss Evers."

"Yes, I know you have never spoken to Miss Vivian." Gordon Wright stood
looking at Bernard and urging his point as he pronounced these words.
Bernard felt peculiarly conscious of his gaze. The words represented an
illusion, and Longueville asked himself quickly whether it were not his
duty to dispel it. The answer came more slowly than the question,
but still it came, in the shape of a negative. The illusion was but a
trifling one, and it was not for him, after all, to let his friend know
that he had already met Miss Vivian. It was for the young girl
herself, and since she had not done so--although she had the
opportunity--Longueville said to himself that he was bound in honor not
to speak. These reflections were very soon made, but in the midst of
them our young man, thanks to a great agility of mind, found time
to observe, tacitly, that it was odd, just there, to see his "honor"
thrusting in its nose. Miss Vivian, in her own good time, would
doubtless mention to Gordon the little incident of Siena. It was
Bernard's fancy, for a moment, that he already knew it, and that the
remark he had just uttered had an ironical accent; but this impression
was completely dissipated by the tone in which he added--"All the same,
you noticed her."

"Oh, yes; she is very noticeable."

"Well, then," said Gordon, "you will see. I should like you to make
it out. Of course, if I am really giving my attention to one to the
exclusion of the other, it will be easy to discover."

Longueville was half amused, half irritated by his friend's own relish
of his little puzzle. "'The exclusion of the other' has an awkward
sound," he answered, as they walked on. "Am I to notice that you are
very rude to one of the young ladies?"

"Oh dear, no. Do you think there is a danger of that?"

"Well," said Longueville, "I have already guessed."

Gordon Wright remonstrated. "Don't guess yet--wait a few days. I won't
tell you now."

"Let us see if he does n't tell me," said Bernard, privately. And he
meditated a moment. "When I presented myself, you were sitting very
close to Miss Evers and talking very earnestly. Your head was bent
toward her--it was very lover-like. Decidedly, Miss Evers is the
object!"

For a single instant Gordon Wright hesitated, and then--"I hope I have
n't seemed rude to Miss Vivian!" he exclaimed.

Bernard broke into a light laugh. "My dear Gordon, you are very much in
love!" he remarked, as they arrived at their hotel.






CHAPTER V

Life at Baden-Baden proved a very sociable affair, and Bernard
Longueville perceived that he should not lack opportunity for the
exercise of those gifts of intelligence to which Gordon Wright had
appealed. The two friends took long walks through the woods and over the
mountains, and they mingled with human life in the crowded precincts of
the Conversation-house. They engaged in a ramble on the morning after
Bernard's arrival, and wandered far away, over hill and dale. The
Baden forests are superb, and the composition of the landscape is most
effective. There is always a bosky dell in the foreground, and a
purple crag embellished with a ruined tower at a proper angle. A little
timber-and-plaster village peeps out from a tangle of plum-trees, and a
way-side tavern, in comfortable recurrence, solicits concessions to the
national custom of frequent refreshment. Gordon Wright, who was a dogged
pedestrian, always enjoyed doing his ten miles, and Longueville, who was
an incorrigible stroller, felt a keen relish for the picturesqueness
of the country. But it was not, on this occasion, of the charms of the
landscape or the pleasures of locomotion that they chiefly discoursed.
Their talk took a more closely personal turn. It was a year since they
had met, and there were many questions to ask and answer, many arrears
of gossip to make up. As they stretched themselves on the grass on a
sun-warmed hill-side, beneath a great German oak whose arms were quiet
in the blue summer air, there was a lively exchange of impressions,
opinions, speculations, anecdotes. Gordon Wright was surely an excellent
friend. He took an interest in you. He asked no idle questions and made
no vague professions; but he entered into your situation, he examined
it in detail, and what he learned he never forgot. Months afterwards,
he asked you about things which you yourself had forgotten. He was not a
man of whom it would be generally said that he had the gift of
sympathy; but he gave his attention to a friend's circumstances with
a conscientious fixedness which was at least very far removed from
indifference. Bernard had the gift of sympathy--or at least he was
supposed to have it; but even he, familiar as he must therefore have
been with the practice of this charming virtue, was at times so
struck with his friend's fine faculty of taking other people's affairs
seriously that he constantly exclaimed to himself, "The excellent
fellow--the admirable nature!"

Bernard had two or three questions to ask about the three persons who
appeared to have formed for some time his companion's principal society,
but he was indisposed to press them. He felt that he should see for
himself, and at a prospect of entertainment of this kind, his
fancy always kindled. Gordon was, moreover, at first rather shy of
confidences, though after they had lain on the grass ten minutes there
was a good deal said.

"Now what do you think of her face?" Gordon asked, after staring a while
at the sky through the oak-boughs.

"Of course, in future," said Longueville, "whenever you make use of
the personal pronoun feminine, I am to understand that Miss Vivian is
indicated."

"Her name is Angela," said Gordon; "but of course I can scarcely call
her that."

"It 's a beautiful name," Longueville rejoined; "but I may say, in
answer to your question, that I am not struck with the fact that her
face corresponds to it."

"You don't think her face beautiful, then?"

"I don't think it angelic. But how can I tell? I have only had a glimpse
of her."

"Wait till she looks at you and speaks--wait till she smiles," said
Gordon.

"I don't think I saw her smile--at least, not at me, directly. I hope
she will!" Longueville went on. "But who is she--this beautiful girl
with the beautiful name?"

"She is her mother's daughter," said Gordon Wright. "I don't really know
a great deal more about her than that."

"And who is her mother?"

"A delightful little woman, devoted to Miss Vivian. She is a widow, and
Angela is her only child. They have lived a great deal in Europe; they
have but a modest income. Over here, Mrs. Vivian says, they can get a
lot of things for their money that they can't get at home. So they stay,
you see. When they are at home they live in New York. They know some of
my people there. When they are in Europe they live about in different
places. They are fond of Italy. They are extremely nice; it 's
impossible to be nicer. They are very fond of books, fond of music, and
art, and all that. They always read in the morning. They only come out
rather late in the day."

"I see they are very superior people," said Bernard. "And little Miss
Evers--what does she do in the morning? I know what she does in the
evening!"

"I don't know what her regular habits are. I have n't paid much
attention to her. She is very pretty."

"Wunderschon!" said Bernard. "But you were certainly talking to her last
evening."

"Of course I talk to her sometimes. She is totally different from Angela
Vivian--not nearly so cultivated; but she seems very charming."

"A little silly, eh?" Bernard suggested.

"She certainly is not so wise as Miss Vivian."

"That would be too much to ask, eh? But the Vivians, as kind as they are
wise, have taken her under their protection."

"Yes," said Gordon, "they are to keep her another month or two. Her
mother has gone to Marienbad, which I believe is thought a dull place
for a young girl; so that, as they were coming here, they offered to
bring her with them. Mrs. Evers is an old friend of Mrs. Vivian, who, on
leaving Italy, had come up to Dresden to be with her. They spent a month
there together; Mrs. Evers had been there since the winter. I think
Mrs. Vivian really came to Baden-Baden--she would have preferred a less
expensive place--to bring Blanche Evers. Her mother wanted her so much
to come."

"And was it for her sake that Captain Lovelock came, too?" Bernard
asked.

Gordon Wright stared a moment.

"I 'm sure I don't know!"

"Of course you can't be interested in that," said Bernard smiling. "Who
is Captain Lovelock?"

"He is an Englishman. I believe he is what 's called aristocratically
connected--the younger brother of a lord, or something of that sort."

"Is he a clever man?"

"I have n't talked with him much, but I doubt it. He is rather rakish;
he plays a great deal."

"But is that considered here a proof of rakishness?" asked Bernard.
"Have n't you played a little yourself?"

Gordon hesitated a moment.

"Yes, I have played a little. I wanted to try some experiments. I had
made some arithmetical calculations of probabilities, which I wished to
test."

Bernard gave a long laugh.

"I am delighted with the reasons you give for amusing yourself!
Arithmetical calculations!"

"I assure you they are the real reasons!" said Gordon, blushing a
little.

"That 's just the beauty of it. You were not afraid of being 'drawn in,'
as little Miss Evers says?"

"I am never drawn in, whatever the thing may be. I go in, or I stay out;
but I am not drawn," said Gordon Wright.

"You were not drawn into coming with Mrs. Vivian and her daughter from
Dresden to this place?"

"I did n't come with them; I came a week later."

"My dear fellow," said Bernard, "that distinction is unworthy of your
habitual candor."

"Well, I was not fascinated; I was not overmastered. I wanted to come to
Baden."

"I have no doubt you did. Had you become very intimate with your friends
in Dresden?"

"I had only seen them three times."

"After which you followed them to this place? Ah, don't say you were not
fascinated!" cried Bernard, laughing and springing to his feet.






CHAPTER VI

That evening, in the gardens of the Kursaal, he renewed acquaintance
with Angela Vivian. Her mother came, as usual, to sit and listen to the
music, accompanied by Blanche Evers, who was in turn attended by Captain
Lovelock. This little party found privacy in the crowd; they seated
themselves in a quiet corner in an angle of one of the barriers of the
terrace, while the movement of the brilliant Baden world went on around
them. Gordon Wright engaged in conversation with Mrs. Vivian, while
Bernard enjoyed an interview with her daughter. This young lady
continued to ignore the fact of their previous meeting, and our hero
said to himself that all he wished was to know what she preferred--he
would rigidly conform to it. He conformed to her present programme; he
had ventured to pronounce the word Siena the evening before, but he
was careful not to pronounce it again. She had her reasons for her own
reserve; he wondered what they were, and it gave him a certain pleasure
to wonder. He enjoyed the consciousness of their having a secret
together, and it became a kind of entertaining suspense to see how long
she would continue to keep it. For himself, he was in no hurry to let
the daylight in; the little incident at Siena had been, in itself, a
charming affair; but Miss Vivian's present attitude gave it a sort of
mystic consecration. He thought she carried it off very well--the theory
that she had not seen him before; last evening she had been slightly
confused, but now she was as self-possessed as if the line she had taken
were a matter of conscience. Why should it be a matter of conscience?
Was she in love with Gordon Wright, and did she wish, in consequence,
to forget--and wish him not to suspect--that she had ever received an
expression of admiration from another man? This was not likely; it was
not likely, at least, that Miss Vivian wished to pass for a prodigy of
innocence; for if to be admired is to pay a tribute to corruption, it
was perfectly obvious that so handsome a girl must have tasted of the
tree of knowledge. As for her being in love with Gordon Wright, that of
course was another affair, and Bernard did not pretend, as yet, to have
an opinion on this point, beyond hoping very much that she might be.

He was not wrong in the impression of her good looks that he had carried
away from the short interview at Siena. She had a charmingly chiselled
face, with a free, pure outline, a clear, fair complexion, and the eyes
and hair of a dusky beauty. Her features had a firmness which
suggested tranquillity, and yet her expression was light and quick, a
combination--or a contradiction--which gave an original stamp to her
beauty. Bernard remembered that he had thought it a trifle "bold"; but
he now perceived that this had been but a vulgar misreading of her dark,
direct, observant eye. The eye was a charming one; Bernard discovered in
it, little by little, all sorts of things; and Miss Vivian was, for the
present, simply a handsome, intelligent, smiling girl. He gave her an
opportunity to make an allusion to Siena; he said to her that his friend
told him that she and her mother had been spending the winter in Italy.

"Oh yes," said Angela Vivian; "we were in the far south; we were five
months at Sorrento."

"And nowhere else?"

"We spent a few days in Rome. We usually prefer the quiet places; that
is my mother's taste."

"It was not your mother's taste, then," said Bernard, "that brought you
to Baden?"

She looked at him a moment.

"You mean that Baden is not quiet?"

Longueville glanced about at the moving, murmuring crowd, at the lighted
windows of the Conversation-house, at the great orchestra perched up in
its pagoda.

"This is not my idea of absolute tranquillity."

"Nor mine, either," said Miss Vivian. "I am not fond of absolute
tranquillity."

"How do you arrange it, then, with your mother?"

Again she looked at him a moment, with her clever, slightly mocking
smile.

"As you see. By making her come where I wish."

"You have a strong will," said Bernard. "I see that."

"No. I have simply a weak mother. But I make sacrifices too, sometimes."

"What do you call sacrifices?"

"Well, spending the winter at Sorrento."

Bernard began to laugh, and then he told her she must have had a very
happy life--"to call a winter at Sorrento a sacrifice."

"It depends upon what one gives up," said Miss Vivian.

"What did you give up?"

She touched him with her mocking smile again.

"That is not a very civil question, asked in that way."

"You mean that I seem to doubt your abnegation?"

"You seem to insinuate that I had nothing to renounce. I gave up--I
gave up--" and she looked about her, considering a little--"I gave up
society."

"I am glad you remember what it was," said Bernard. "If I have seemed
uncivil, let me make it up. When a woman speaks of giving up society,
what she means is giving up admiration. You can never have given up
that--you can never have escaped from it. You must have found it even at
Sorrento."

"It may have been there, but I never found it. It was very
respectful--it never expressed itself."

"That is the deepest kind," said Bernard.

"I prefer the shallower varieties," the young girl answered.

"Well," said Bernard, "you must remember that although shallow
admiration expresses itself, all the admiration that expresses itself is
not shallow."

Miss Vivian hesitated a moment.

"Some of it is impertinent," she said, looking straight at him, rather
gravely.

Bernard hesitated about as long.

"When it is impertinent it is shallow. That comes to the same thing."

The young girl frowned a little.

"I am not sure that I understand--I am rather stupid. But you see how
right I am in my taste for such places as this. I have to come here to
hear such ingenious remarks."

"You should add that my coming, as well, has something to do with it."

"Everything!" said Miss Vivian.

"Everything? Does no one else make ingenious remarks? Does n't my friend
Wright?"

"Mr. Wright says excellent things, but I should not exactly call them
ingenious remarks."

"It is not what Wright says; it 's what he does. That 's the charm!"
said Bernard.

His companion was silent for a moment. "That 's not usually a charm;
good conduct is not thought pleasing."

"It surely is not thought the reverse!" Bernard exclaimed.

"It does n't rank--in the opinion of most people--among the things that
make men agreeable."

"It depends upon what you call agreeable."

"Exactly so," said Miss Vivian. "It all depends on that."

"But the agreeable," Bernard went on--"it is n't after all, fortunately,
such a subtle idea! The world certainly is agreed to think that virtue
is a beautiful thing."

Miss Vivian dropped her eyes a moment, and then, looking up,

"Is it a charm?" she asked.

"For me there is no charm without it," Bernard declared.

"I am afraid that for me there is," said the young girl.

Bernard was puzzled--he who was not often puzzled. His companion
struck him as altogether too clever to be likely to indulge in a silly
affectation of cynicism. And yet, without this, how could one account
for her sneering at virtue?

"You talk as if you had sounded the depths of vice!" he said, laughing.
"What do you know about other than virtuous charms?"

"I know, of course, nothing about vice; but I have known virtue when it
was very tiresome."

"Ah, then it was a poor affair. It was poor virtue. The best virtue is
never tiresome."

Miss Vivian looked at him a little, with her fine discriminating eye.

"What a dreadful thing to have to think any virtue poor!"

This was a touching reflection, and it might have gone further had not
the conversation been interrupted by Mrs. Vivian's appealing to her
daughter to aid a defective recollection of a story about a Spanish
family they had met at Biarritz, with which she had undertaken to
entertain Gordon Wright. After this, the little circle was joined by
a party of American friends who were spending a week at Baden, and the
conversation became general.






CHAPTER VII

But on the following evening, Bernard again found himself seated in
friendly colloquy with this interesting girl, while Gordon Wright
discoursed with her mother on one side, and little Blanche Evers
chattered to the admiring eyes of Captain Lovelock on the other.

"You and your mother are very kind to that little girl," our hero said;
"you must be a great advantage to her."

Angela Vivian directed her eyes to her neighbors, and let them rest
a while on the young girl's little fidgeting figure and her fresh,
coquettish face. For some moments she said nothing, and to Longueville,
turning over several things in his mind, and watching her, it seemed
that her glance was one of disfavor. He divined, he scarcely knew how,
that her esteem for her pretty companion was small.

"I don't know that I am very kind," said Miss Vivian. "I have done
nothing in particular for her."

"Mr. Wright tells me you came to this place mainly on her account."

"I came for myself," said Miss Vivian. "The consideration you speak of
perhaps had weight with my mother."

"You are not an easy person to say appreciative things to," Bernard
rejoined. "One is tempted to say them; but you don't take them."

The young girl colored as she listened to this observation.

"I don't think you know," she murmured, looking away. Then, "Set it down
to modesty," she added.

"That, of course, is what I have done. To what else could one possibly
attribute an indifference to compliments?"

"There is something else. One might be proud."

"There you are again!" Bernard exclaimed. "You won't even let me praise
your modesty."

"I would rather you should rebuke my pride."

"That is so humble a speech that it leaves no room for rebuke."

For a moment Miss Vivian said nothing.

"Men are singularly base," she declared presently, with a little smile.
"They don't care in the least to say things that might help a person.
They only care to say things that may seem effective and agreeable."

"I see: you think that to say agreeable things is a great misdemeanor."

"It comes from their vanity," Miss Vivian went on, as if she had not
heard him. "They wish to appear agreeable and get credit for cleverness
and tendresse, no matter how silly it would be for another person to
believe them."

Bernard was a good deal amused, and a little nettled.

"Women, then," he said, "have rather a fondness for producing a bad
impression--they like to appear disagreeable?"

His companion bent her eyes upon her fan for a moment as she opened and
closed it.

"They are capable of resigning themselves to it--for a purpose."

Bernard was moved to extreme merriment.

"For what purpose?"

"I don't know that I mean for a purpose," said Miss Vivian; "but for a
necessity."

"Ah, what an odious necessity!"

"Necessities usually are odious. But women meet them. Men evade them and
shirk them."

"I contest your proposition. Women are themselves necessities; but they
are not odious ones!" And Bernard added, in a moment, "One could n't
evade them, if they were!"

"I object to being called a necessity," said Angela Vivian. "It
diminishes one's merit."

"Ah, but it enhances the charm of life!"

"For men, doubtless!"

"The charm of life is very great," Bernard went on, looking up at the
dusky hills and the summer stars, seen through a sort of mist of music
and talk, and of powdery light projected from the softly lurid windows
of the gaming-rooms. "The charm of life is extreme. I am unacquainted
with odious necessities. I object to nothing!"

Angela Vivian looked about her as he had done--looked perhaps a moment
longer at the summer stars; and if she had not already proved herself a
young lady of a contradictory turn, it might have been supposed she was
just then tacitly admitting the charm of life to be considerable.

"Do you suppose Miss Evers often resigns herself to being
disagreeable--for a purpose?" asked Longueville, who had glanced at
Captain Lovelock's companion again.

"She can't be disagreeable; she is too gentle, too soft."

"Do you mean too silly?"

"I don't know that I call her silly. She is not very wise; but she has
no pretensions--absolutely none--so that one is not struck with anything
incongruous."

"What a terrible description! I suppose one ought to have a few
pretensions."

"You see one comes off more easily without them," said Miss Vivian.

"Do you call that coming off easily?"

She looked at him a moment gravely.

"I am very fond of Blanche," she said.

"Captain Lovelock is rather fond of her," Bernard went on.

The girl assented.

"He is completely fascinated--he is very much in love with her."

"And do they mean to make an international match?"

"I hope not; my mother and I are greatly troubled."

"Is n't he a good fellow?"

"He is a good fellow; but he is a mere trifler. He has n't a penny, I
believe, and he has very expensive habits. He gambles a great deal. We
don't know what to do."

"You should send for the young lady's mother."

"We have written to her pressingly. She answers that Blanche can take
care of herself, and that she must stay at Marienbad to finish her cure.
She has just begun a new one."

"Ah well," said Bernard, "doubtless Blanche can take care of herself."

For a moment his companion said nothing; then she exclaimed--

"It 's what a girl ought to be able to do!"

"I am sure you are!" said Bernard.

She met his eyes, and she was going to make some rejoinder; but before
she had time to speak, her mother's little, clear, conciliatory voice
interposed. Mrs. Vivian appealed to her daughter, as she had done the
night before.

"Dear Angela, what was the name of the gentleman who delivered that
delightful course of lectures that we heard in Geneva, on--what was the
title?--'The Redeeming Features of the Pagan Morality.'"

Angela flushed a little.

"I have quite forgotten his name, mamma," she said, without looking
round.

"Come and sit by me, my dear, and we will talk them over. I wish Mr.
Wright to hear about them," Mrs. Vivian went on.

"Do you wish to convert him to paganism?" Bernard asked.

"The lectures were very dull; they had no redeeming features," said
Angela, getting up, but turning away from her mother. She stood
looking at Bernard Longueville; he saw she was annoyed at her mother's
interference. "Every now and then," she said, "I take a turn through
the gaming-rooms. The last time, Captain Lovelock went with me. Will you
come to-night?"

Bernard assented with expressive alacrity; he was charmed with her not
wishing to break off her conversation with him.

"Ah, we 'll all go!" said Mrs. Vivian, who had been listening, and she
invited the others to accompany her to the Kursaal.

They left their places, but Angela went first, with Bernard Longueville
by her side; and the idea of her having publicly braved her mother,
as it were, for the sake of his society, lent for the moment an almost
ecstatic energy to his tread. If he had been tempted to presume upon his
triumph, however, he would have found a check in the fact that the young
girl herself tasted very soberly of the sweets of defiance. She
was silent and grave; she had a manner which took the edge from the
wantonness of filial independence. Yet, for all this, Bernard was
pleased with his position; and, as he walked with her through the
lighted and crowded rooms, where they soon detached themselves from
their companions, he felt that peculiar satisfaction which best
expresses itself in silence. Angela looked a while at the rows of still,
attentive faces, fixed upon the luminous green circle, across which
little heaps of louis d'or were being pushed to and fro, and she
continued to say nothing. Then at last she exclaimed simply, "Come
away!" They turned away and passed into another chamber, in which there
was no gambling. It was an immense apartment, apparently a ball-room;
but at present it was quite unoccupied. There were green velvet benches
all around it, and a great polished floor stretched away, shining in the
light of chandeliers adorned with innumerable glass drops. Miss Vivian
stood a moment on the threshold; then she passed in, and they stopped
in the middle of the place, facing each other, and with their figures
reflected as if they had been standing on a sheet of ice. There was no
one in the room; they were entirely alone.

"Why don't you recognize me?" Bernard murmured quickly.

"Recognize you?"

"Why do you seem to forget our meeting at Siena?"

She might have answered if she had answered immediately; but she
hesitated, and while she did so something happened at the other end of
the room which caused her to shift her glance. A green velvet portiere
suspended in one of the door-ways--not that through which our
friends had passed--was lifted, and Gordon Wright stood there, holding
it up, and looking at them. His companions were behind him.

"Ah, here they are!" cried Gordon, in his loud, clear voice.

This appeared to strike Angela Vivian as an interruption, and Bernard
saw it very much in the same light.






CHAPTER VIII

He forbore to ask her his question again--she might tell him at her
convenience. But the days passed by, and she never told him--she had
her own reasons. Bernard talked with her very often; conversation formed
indeed the chief entertainment of the quiet little circle of which
he was a member. They sat on the terrace and talked in the mingled
starlight and lamplight, and they strolled in the deep green forests and
wound along the side of the gentle Baden hills, under the influence of
colloquial tendencies. The Black Forest is a country of almost unbroken
shade, and in the still days of midsummer the whole place was covered
with a motionless canopy of verdure. Our friends were not extravagant
or audacious people, and they looked at Baden life very much from the
outside--they sat aloof from the brightly lighted drama of professional
revelry. Among themselves as well, however, a little drama went
forward in which each member of the company had a part to play. Bernard
Longueville had been surprised at first at what he would have called
Miss Vivian's approachableness--at the frequency with which he
encountered opportunities for sitting near her and entering into
conversation. He had expected that Gordon Wright would deem himself to
have established an anticipatory claim upon the young lady's attention,
and that, in pursuance of this claim, he would occupy a recognized place
at her side. Gordon was, after all, wooing her; it was very natural
he should seek her society. In fact, he was never very far off; but
Bernard, for three or four days, had the anomalous consciousness of
being still nearer. Presently, however, he perceived that he owed this
privilege simply to his friend's desire that he should become acquainted
with Miss Vivian--should receive a vivid impression of a person in
whom Gordon was so deeply interested. After this result might have been
supposed to be attained, Gordon Wright stepped back into his usual place
and showed her those small civilities which were the only homage that
the quiet conditions of their life rendered possible--walked with her,
talked with her, brought her a book to read, a chair to sit upon, a
couple of flowers to place in the bosom of her gown, treated her, in a
word, with a sober but by no means inexpressive gallantry. He had
not been making violent love, as he told Longueville, and these
demonstrations were certainly not violent. Bernard said to himself
that if he were not in the secret, a spectator would scarcely make the
discovery that Gordon cherished an even very safely tended flame. Angela
Vivian, on her side, was not strikingly responsive. There was nothing
in her deportment to indicate that she was in love with her systematic
suitor. She was perfectly gracious and civil. She smiled in his face
when he shook hands with her; she looked at him and listened when he
talked; she let him stroll beside her in the Lichtenthal Alley; she
read, or appeared to read, the books he lent her, and she decorated
herself with the flowers he offered. She seemed neither bored nor
embarrassed, neither irritated nor oppressed. But it was Bernard's
belief that she took no more pleasure in his attentions than a pretty
girl must always take in any recognition of her charms. "If she 's
not indifferent," he said to himself, "she is, at any rate,
impartial--profoundly impartial."

It was not till the end of a week that Gordon Wright told him exactly
how his business stood with Miss Vivian and what he had reason to expect
and hope--a week during which their relations had been of the happiest
and most comfortable cast, and during which Bernard, rejoicing in
their long walks and talks, in the charming weather, in the beauty and
entertainment of the place, and in other things besides, had not ceased
to congratulate himself on coming to Baden. Bernard, after the first
day, had asked his friend no questions. He had a great respect for
opportunity, coming either to others or to himself, and he left Gordon
to turn his lantern as fitfully as might be upon the subject which was
tacitly open between them, but of which as yet only the mere edges had
emerged into light. Gordon, on his side, seemed content for the moment
with having his clever friend under his hand; he reserved him for final
appeal or for some other mysterious use.

"You can't tell me you don't know her now," he said, one evening as the
two young men strolled along the Lichtenthal Alley--"now that you have
had a whole week's observation of her."

"What is a week's observation of a singularly clever and complicated
woman?" Bernard asked.

"Ah, your week has been of some use. You have found out she is
complicated!" Gordon rejoined.

"My dear Gordon," Longueville exclaimed, "I don't see what it signifies
to you that I should find Miss Vivian out! When a man 's in love, what
need he care what other people think of the loved object?"

"It would certainly be a pity to care too much. But there is some excuse
for him in the loved object being, as you say, complicated."

"Nonsense! That 's no excuse. The loved object is always complicated."

Gordon walked on in silence a moment.

"Well, then, I don't care a button what you think!"

"Bravo! That 's the way a man should talk," cried Longueville.

Gordon indulged in another fit of meditation, and then he said--

"Now that leaves you at liberty to say what you please."

"Ah, my dear fellow, you are ridiculous!" said Bernard.

"That 's precisely what I want you to say. You always think me too
reasonable."

"Well, I go back to my first assertion. I don't know Miss Vivian--I mean
I don't know her to have opinions about her. I don't suppose you wish
me to string you off a dozen mere banalites--'She 's a charming
girl--evidently a superior person--has a great deal of style.'"

"Oh no," said Gordon; "I know all that. But, at any rate," he added,
"you like her, eh?"

"I do more," said Longueville. "I admire her."

"Is that doing more?" asked Gordon, reflectively.

"Well, the greater, whichever it is, includes the less."

"You won't commit yourself," said Gordon. "My dear Bernard," he added,
"I thought you knew such an immense deal about women!"

Gordon Wright was of so kindly and candid a nature that it is hardly
conceivable that this remark should have been framed to make Bernard
commit himself by putting him on his mettle. Such a view would imply
indeed on Gordon's part a greater familiarity with the uses of irony
than he had ever possessed, as well as a livelier conviction of the
irritable nature of his friend's vanity. In fact, however, it may be
confided to the reader that Bernard was pricked in a tender place,
though the resentment of vanity was not visible in his answer.

"You were quite wrong," he simply said. "I am as ignorant of women as a
monk in his cloister."

"You try to prove too much. You don't think her sympathetic!" And as
regards this last remark, Gordon Wright must be credited with a certain
ironical impulse.

Bernard stopped impatiently.

"I ask you again, what does it matter to you what I think of her?"

"It matters in this sense--that she has refused me."

"Refused you? Then it is all over, and nothing matters."

"No, it is n't over," said Gordon, with a positive head-shake. "Don't
you see it is n't over?"

Bernard smiled, laid his hand on his friend's shoulder and patted it a
little.

"Your attitude might almost pass for that of resignation."

"I 'm not resigned!" said Gordon Wright.

"Of course not. But when were you refused?"

Gordon stood a minute with his eyes fixed on the ground. Then, at last
looking up,

"Three weeks ago--a fortnight before you came. But let us walk along,"
he said, "and I will tell you all about it."

"I proposed to her three weeks ago," said Gordon, as they walked along.
"My heart was very much set upon it. I was very hard hit--I was deeply
smitten. She had been very kind to me--she had been charming--I thought
she liked me. Then I thought her mother was pleased, and would have
liked it. Mrs. Vivian, in fact, told me as much; for of course I spoke
to her first. Well, Angela does like me--or at least she did--and I see
no reason to suppose she has changed. Only she did n't like me enough.
She said the friendliest and pleasantest things to me, but she thought
that she knew me too little, and that I knew her even less. She made a
great point of that--that I had no right, as yet, to trust her. I told
her that if she would trust me, I was perfectly willing to trust her;
but she answered that this was poor reasoning. She said that I was
trustworthy and that she was not, and--in short, all sorts of nonsense.
She abused herself roundly--accused herself of no end of defects."

"What defects, for instance?"

"Oh, I have n't remembered them. She said she had a bad temper--that
she led her mother a dreadful life. Now, poor Mrs. Vivian says she is an
angel."

"Ah yes," Bernard observed; "Mrs. Vivian says that, very freely."

"Angela declared that she was jealous, ungenerous, unforgiving--all
sorts of things. I remember she said 'I am very false,' and I think she
remarked that she was cruel."

"But this did n't put you off," said Bernard.

"Not at all. She was making up."

"She makes up very well!" Bernard exclaimed, laughing.

"Do you call that well?"

"I mean it was very clever."

"It was not clever from the point of view of wishing to discourage me."

"Possibly. But I am sure," said Bernard, "that if I had been present at
your interview--excuse the impudence of the hypothesis--I should have
been struck with the young lady's--" and he paused a moment.

"With her what?"

"With her ability."

"Well, her ability was not sufficient to induce me to give up my idea.
She told me that after I had known her six months I should detest her."

"I have no doubt she could make you do it if she should try. That 's
what I mean by her ability."

"She calls herself cruel," said Gordon, "but she has not had the cruelty
to try. She has been very reasonable--she has been perfect. I agreed
with her that I would drop the subject for a while, and that meanwhile
we should be good friends. We should take time to know each other better
and act in accordance with further knowledge. There was no hurry, since
we trusted each other--wrong as my trust might be. She had no wish that
I should go away. I was not in the least disagreeable to her; she liked
me extremely, and I was perfectly free to try and please her. Only I
should drop my proposal, and be free to take it up again or leave it
alone, later, as I should choose. If she felt differently then, I should
have the benefit of it, and if I myself felt differently, I should also
have the benefit of it."

"That 's a very comfortable arrangement. And that 's your present
situation?" asked Bernard.

Gordon hesitated a moment.

"More or less, but not exactly."

"Miss Vivian feels differently?" said Bernard.

"Not that I know of."

Gordon's companion, with a laugh, clapped him on the shoulder again.

"Admirable youth, you are a capital match!"

"Are you alluding to my money?"

"To your money and to your modesty. There is as much of one as of the
other--which is saying a great deal."

"Well," said Gordon, "in spite of that enviable combination, I am not
happy."

"I thought you seemed pensive!" Bernard exclaimed. "It 's you, then, who
feel differently."

Gordon gave a sigh.

"To say that is to say too much."

"What shall we say, then?" his companion asked, kindly.

Gordon stopped again; he stood there looking up at a certain
particularly lustrous star which twinkled--the night was cloudy--in an
open patch of sky, and the vague brightness shone down on his honest and
serious visage.

"I don't understand her," he said.

"Oh, I 'll say that with you any day!" cried Bernard. "I can't help you
there."

"You must help me;" and Gordon Wright deserted his star. "You must keep
me in good humor."

"Please to walk on, then. I don't in the least pity you; she is very
charming with you."

"True enough; but insisting on that is not the way to keep me in good
humor--when I feel as I do."

"How is it you feel?"

"Puzzled to death--bewildered--depressed!"

This was but the beginning of Gordon Wright's list; he went on to say
that though he "thought as highly" of Miss Vivian as he had ever done,
he felt less at his ease with her than in the first weeks of their
acquaintance, and this condition made him uncomfortable and unhappy.

"I don't know what 's the matter," said poor Gordon. "I don't know what
has come between us. It is n't her fault--I don't make her responsible
for it. I began to notice it about a fortnight ago--before you came;
shortly after that talk I had with her that I have just described to
you. Her manner has n't changed and I have no reason to suppose that
she likes me any the less; but she makes a strange impression on me--she
makes me uneasy. It 's only her nature coming out, I suppose--what you
might call her originality. She 's thoroughly original--she 's a kind
of mysterious creature. I suppose that what I feel is a sort of
fascination; but that is just what I don't like. Hang it, I don't want
to be fascinated--I object to being fascinated!"

This little story had taken some time in the telling, so that the two
young men had now reached their hotel.

"Ah, my dear Gordon," said Bernard, "we speak a different language. If
you don't want to be fascinated, what is one to say to you? 'Object to
being fascinated!' There 's a man easy to satisfy! Raffine, va!"

"Well, see here now," said Gordon, stopping in the door-way of the inn;
"when it comes to the point, do you like it yourself?"

"When it comes to the point?" Bernard exclaimed. "I assure you I don't
wait till then. I like the beginning--I delight in the approach of it--I
revel in the prospect."

"That's just what I did. But now that the thing has come--I don't revel.
To be fascinated is to be mystified. Damn it, I like my liberty--I like
my judgment!"

"So do I--like yours," said Bernard, laughing, as they took their
bedroom candles.






CHAPTER IX

Bernard talked of this matter rather theoretically, inasmuch as to
his own sense, he was in a state neither of incipient nor of absorbed
fascination. He got on very easily, however, with Angela Vivian, and
felt none of the mysterious discomfort alluded to by his friend. The
element of mystery attached itself rather to the young lady's mother,
who gave him the impression that for undiscoverable reasons she avoided
his society. He regretted her evasive deportment, for he found something
agreeable in this shy and scrupulous little woman, who struck him as a
curious specimen of a society of which he had once been very fond. He
learned that she was of old New England stock, but he had not needed
this information to perceive that Mrs. Vivian was animated by the genius
of Boston. "She has the Boston temperament," he said, using a
phrase with which he had become familiar and which evoked a train of
associations. But then he immediately added that if Mrs. Vivian was a
daughter of the Puritans, the Puritan strain in her disposition had
been mingled with another element. "It is the Boston temperament
sophisticated," he said; "perverted a little--perhaps even corrupted.
It is the local east-wind with an infusion from climates less tonic." It
seemed to him that Mrs. Vivian was a Puritan grown worldly--a Bostonian
relaxed; and this impression, oddly enough, contributed to his wish to
know more of her. He felt like going up to her very politely and saying,
"Dear lady and most honored compatriot, what in the world have I done
to displease you? You don't approve of me, and I am dying to know the
reason why. I should be so happy to exert myself to be agreeable to you.
It 's no use; you give me the cold shoulder. When I speak to you, you
look the other way; it is only when I speak to your daughter that you
look at me. It is true that at those times you look at me very hard, and
if I am not greatly mistaken, you are not gratified by what you see.
You count the words I address to your beautiful Angela--you time our
harmless little interviews. You interrupt them indeed whenever you can;
you call her away--you appeal to her; you cut across the conversation.
You are always laying plots to keep us apart. Why can't you leave me
alone? I assure you I am the most innocent of men. Your beautiful Angela
can't possibly be injured by my conversation, and I have no designs
whatever upon her peace of mind. What on earth have I done to offend
you?"

These observations Bernard Longueville was disposed to make, and one
afternoon, the opportunity offering, they rose to his lips and came very
near passing them. In fact, however, at the last moment, his eloquence
took another turn. It was the custom of the orchestra at the Kursaal
to play in the afternoon, and as the music was often good, a great many
people assembled under the trees, at three o'clock, to listen to it.
This was not, as a regular thing, an hour of re-union for the little
group in which we are especially interested; Miss Vivian, in particular,
unless an excursion of some sort had been agreed upon the day before,
was usually not to be seen in the precincts of the Conversation-house
until the evening. Bernard, one afternoon, at three o'clock, directed
his steps to this small world-centre of Baden, and, passing along the
terrace, soon encountered little Blanche Evers strolling there under a
pink parasol and accompanied by Captain Lovelock. This young lady was
always extremely sociable; it was quite in accordance with her habitual
geniality that she should stop and say how d' ye do to our hero.

"Mr. Longueville is growing very frivolous," she said, "coming to the
Kursaal at all sorts of hours."

"There is nothing frivolous in coming here with the hope of finding
you," the young man answered. "That is very serious."

"It would be more serious to lose Miss Evers than to find her," remarked
Captain Lovelock, with gallant jocosity.

"I wish you would lose me!" cried the young girl. "I think I should like
to be lost. I might have all kinds of adventures."

"I 'guess' so!" said Captain Lovelock, hilariously.

"Oh, I should find my way. I can take care of myself!" Blanche went on.

"Mrs. Vivian does n't think so," said Bernard, who had just perceived
this lady, seated under a tree with a book, over the top of which she
was observing her pretty protege. Blanche looked toward her and gave her
a little nod and a smile. Then chattering on to the young men--

"She 's awfully careful. I never saw any one so careful. But I
suppose she is right. She promised my mother she would be tremendously
particular; but I don't know what she thinks I would do."

"That is n't flattering to me," said Captain Lovelock. "Mrs. Vivian
does n't approve of me--she wishes me in Jamaica. What does she think me
capable of?"

"And me, now?" Bernard asked. "She likes me least of all, and I, on my
side, think she 's so nice."

"Can't say I 'm very sweet on her," said the Captain. "She strikes me as
feline."

Blanche Evers gave a little cry of horror.

"Stop, sir, this instant! I won't have you talk that way about a lady
who has been so kind to me."

"She is n't so kind to you. She would like to lock you up where I can
never see you."

"I 'm sure I should n't mind that!" cried the young girl, with a
little laugh and a toss of her head. "Mrs. Vivian has the most perfect
character--that 's why my mother wanted me to come with her. And if she
promised my mother she would be careful, is n't she right to keep her
promise? She 's a great deal more careful than mamma ever was, and that
's just what mamma wanted. She would never take the trouble herself. And
then she was always scolding me. Mrs. Vivian never scolds me. She only
watches me, but I don't mind that."

"I wish she would watch you a little less and scold you a little more,"
said Captain Lovelock.

"I have no doubt you wish a great many horrid things," his companion
rejoined, with delightful asperity.

"Ah, unfortunately I never have anything I wish!" sighed Lovelock.

"Your wishes must be comprehensive," said Bernard. "It seems to me you
have a good deal."

The Englishman gave a shrug.

"It 's less than you might think. She is watching us more furiously than
ever," he added, in a moment, looking at Mrs. Vivian. "Mr. Gordon Wright
is the only man she likes. She is awfully fond of Mr. Gordon Wright."

"Ah, Mrs. Vivian shows her wisdom!" said Bernard.

"He is certainly very handsome," murmured Blanche Evers, glancing
several times, with a very pretty aggressiveness, at Captain Lovelock.
"I must say I like Mr. Gordon Wright. Why in the world did you come here
without him?" she went on, addressing herself to Bernard. "You two are
so awfully inseparable. I don't think I ever saw you alone before."

"Oh, I have often seen Mr. Gordon Wright alone," said Captain
Lovelock--"that is, alone with Miss Vivian. That 's what the old lady
likes; she can't have too much of that."

The young girl, poised for an instant in one of her pretty attitudes,
looked at him from head to foot.

"Well, I call that scandalous! Do you mean that she wants to make a
match?"

"I mean that the young man has six thousand a year."

"It 's no matter what he has--six thousand a year is n't much! And we
don't do things in that way in our country. We have n't those horrid
match-making arrangements that you have in your dreadful country.
American mothers are not like English mothers."

"Oh, any one can see, of course," said Captain Lovelock, "that Mr.
Gordon Wright is dying of love for Miss Vivian."

"I can't see it!" cried Blanche.

"He dies easier than I, eh?"

"I wish you would die!" said Blanche. "At any rate, Angela is not dying
of love for Mr. Wright."

"Well, she will marry him all the same," Lovelock declared.

Blanche Evers glanced at Bernard.

"Why don't you contradict that?" she asked. "Why don't you speak up for
your friend?"

"I am quite ready to speak for my friend," said Bernard, "but I am not
ready to speak for Miss Vivian."

"Well, I am," Blanche declared. "She won't marry him."

"If she does n't, I 'll eat my hat!" said Captain Lovelock. "What do
you mean," he went on, "by saying that in America a pretty girl's mother
does n't care for a young fellow's property?"

"Well, they don't--we consider that dreadful. Why don't you say so,
Mr. Longueville?" Blanche demanded. "I never saw any one take things so
quietly. Have n't you got any patriotism?"

"My patriotism is modified by an indisposition to generalize," said
Bernard, laughing. "On this point permit me not to generalize. I am
interested in the particular case--in ascertaining whether Mrs. Vivian
thinks very often of Gordon Wright's income."

Miss Evers gave a little toss of disgust.

"If you are so awfully impartial, you had better go and ask her."

"That 's a good idea--I think I will go and ask her," said Bernard.

Captain Lovelock returned to his argument.

"Do you mean to say that your mother would be indifferent to the fact
that I have n't a shilling in the world?"

"Indifferent?" Blanche demanded. "Oh no, she would be sorry for you. She
is very charitable--she would give you a shilling!"

"She would n't let you marry me," said Lovelock.

"She would n't have much trouble to prevent it!" cried the young girl.

Bernard had had enough of this intellectual fencing.

"Yes, I will go and ask Mrs. Vivian," he repeated. And he left his
companions to resume their walk.






CHAPTER X

It had seemed to him a good idea to interrogate Mrs. Vivian; but there
are a great many good ideas that are never put into execution. As he
approached her with a smile and a salutation, and, with the air of
asking leave to take a liberty, seated himself in the empty chair beside
her, he felt a humorous relish of her own probable dismay which relaxed
the investigating impulse. His impulse was now simply to prove to her
that he was the most unobjectionable fellow in the world--a proposition
which resolved itself into several ingenious observations upon the
weather, the music, the charms and the drawbacks of Baden, the merits of
the volume that she held in her lap. If Mrs. Vivian should be annoyed,
should be fluttered, Bernard would feel very sorry for her; there was
nothing in the world that he respected more than the moral consciousness
of a little Boston woman whose view of life was serious and whose
imagination was subject to alarms. He held it to be a temple of
delicacy, where one should walk on tiptoe, and he wished to exhibit
to Mrs. Vivian the possible lightness of his own step. She herself
was incapable of being rude or ungracious, and now that she was fairly
confronted with the plausible object of her mistrust, she composed
herself to her usual attitude of refined liberality. Her book was a
volume of Victor Cousin.

"You must have an extraordinary power of abstracting your mind," Bernard
said to her, observing it. "Studying philosophy at the Baden Kursaal
strikes me as a real intellectual feat."

"Don't you think we need a little philosophy here?"

"By all means--what we bring with us. But I should n't attempt the use
of the text-book on the spot."

"You should n't speak of yourself as if you were not clever," said Mrs.
Vivian. "Every one says you are so very clever."

Longueville stared; there was an unexpectedness in the speech and an
incongruity in Mrs. Vivian's beginning to flatter him. He needed
to remind himself that if she was a Bostonian, she was a Bostonian
perverted.

"Ah, my dear madam, every one is no one," he said, laughing.

"It was Mr. Wright, in particular," she rejoined. "He has always told us
that."

"He is blinded by friendship."

"Ah yes, we know about your friendship," said Mrs. Vivian. "He has told
us about that."

"You are making him out a terrible talker!"

"We think he talks so well--we are so very fond of his conversation."

"It 's usually excellent," said Bernard. "But it depends a good deal on
the subject."

"Oh," rejoined Mrs. Vivian, "we always let him choose his subjects." And
dropping her eyes as if in sudden reflection, she began to smooth down
the crumpled corner of her volume.

It occurred to Bernard that--by some mysterious impulse--she was
suddenly presenting him with a chance to ask her the question that
Blanche Evers had just suggested. Two or three other things as well
occurred to him. Captain Lovelock had been struck with the fact that she
favored Gordon Wright's addresses to her daughter, and Captain Lovelock
had a grotesque theory that she had set her heart upon seeing this young
lady come into six thousand a year. Miss Evers's devoted swain had never
struck Bernard as a brilliant reasoner, but our friend suddenly found
himself regarding him as one of the inspired. The form of depravity into
which the New England conscience had lapsed on Mrs. Vivian's part was
an undue appreciation of a possible son-in-law's income! In this
illuminating discovery everything else became clear. Mrs. Vivian
disliked her humble servant because he had not thirty thousand dollars
a year, and because at a moment when it was Angela's prime duty to
concentrate her thoughts upon Gordon Wright's great advantages, a clever
young man of paltry fortune was a superfluous diversion.

"When you say clever, everything is relative," he presently observed.
"Now, there is Captain Lovelock; he has a certain kind of cleverness; he
is very observant."

Mrs. Vivian glanced up with a preoccupied air.

"We don't like Captain Lovelock," she said.

"I have heard him say capital things," Bernard answered.

"We think him brutal," said Mrs. Vivian. "Please don't praise Captain
Lovelock."

"Oh, I only want to be just."

Mrs. Vivian for a moment said nothing.

"Do you want very much to be just?" she presently asked.

"It 's my most ardent desire."

"I 'm glad to hear that--and I can easily believe it," said Mrs. Vivian.

Bernard gave her a grateful smile, but while he smiled, he asked himself
a serious question. "Why the deuce does she go on flattering me?--You
have always been very kind to me," he said aloud.

"It 's on Mr. Wright's account," she answered demurely.

In speaking the words I have just quoted, Bernard Longueville had felt
himself, with a certain compunction, to be skirting the edge of clever
impudence; but Mrs. Vivian's quiet little reply suggested to him that
her cleverness, if not her impudence, was almost equal to his own. He
remarked to himself that he had not yet done her justice.

"You bring everything back to Gordon Wright," he said, continuing to
smile.

Mrs. Vivian blushed a little.

"It is because he is really at the foundation of everything that is
pleasant for us here. When we first came we had some very disagreeable
rooms, and as soon as he arrived he found us some excellent ones--that
were less expensive. And then, Mr. Longueville," she added, with a
soft, sweet emphasis which should properly have contradicted the idea
of audacity, but which, to Bernard's awakened sense, seemed really to
impart a vivid color to it, "he was also the cause of your joining our
little party."

"Oh, among his services that should never be forgotten. You should set
up a tablet to commemorate it, in the wall of the Kursaal!--The wicked
little woman!" Bernard mentally subjoined.

Mrs. Vivian appeared quite unruffled by his sportive sarcasm, and she
continued to enumerate her obligations to Gordon Wright.

"There are so many ways in which a gentleman can be of assistance to
three poor lonely women, especially when he is at the same time so
friendly and so delicate as Mr. Wright. I don't know what we should have
done without him, and I feel as if every one ought to know it. He seems
like a very old friend. My daughter and I quite worship him. I will not
conceal from you that when I saw you coming through the grounds a short
time ago without him I was very much disappointed. I hope he is not
ill."

Bernard sat listening, with his eyes on the ground.

"Oh no, he is simply at home writing letters."

Mrs. Vivian was silent a moment.

"I suppose he has a very large correspondence."

"I really don't know. Just now that I am with him he has a smaller one
than usual."

"Ah yes. When you are separated I suppose you write volumes to each
other. But he must have a great many business letters."

"It is very likely," said Bernard. "And if he has, you may be sure he
writes them."

"Order and method!" Mrs. Vivian exclaimed. "With his immense property
those virtues are necessary."

Bernard glanced at her a moment.

"My dear Lovelock," he said to himself, "you are not such a fool as you
seem.--Gordon's virtues are always necessary, doubtless," he went on.
"But should you say his property was immense?"

Mrs. Vivian made a delicate little movement of deprecation. "Oh, don't
ask me to say! I know nothing about it; I only supposed he was rich."

"He is rich; but he is not a Croesus."

"Oh, you fashionable young men have a standard of luxury!" said Mrs.
Vivian, with a little laugh. "To a poverty-stricken widow such a fortune
as Mr. Wright's seems magnificent."

"Don't call me such horrible names!" exclaimed Bernard. "Our friend has
certainly money enough and to spare."

"That was all I meant. He once had occasion to allude to his property,
but he was so modest, so reserved in the tone he took about it, that one
hardly knew what to think."

"He is ashamed of being rich," said Bernard. "He would be sure to
represent everything unfavorably."

"That 's just what I thought!" This ejaculation was more eager than Mrs.
Vivian might have intended, but even had it been less so, Bernard was in
a mood to appreciate it. "I felt that we should make allowances for his
modesty. But it was in very good taste," Mrs. Vivian added.

"He 's a fortunate man," said Bernard. "He gets credit for his good
taste--and he gets credit for the full figure of his income as well!"

"Ah," murmured Mrs. Vivian, rising lightly, as if to make her words
appear more casual, "I don't know the full figure of his income."

She was turning away, and Bernard, as he raised his hat and separated
from her, felt that it was rather cruel that he should let her go
without enlightening her ignorance. But he said to himself that she knew
quite enough. Indeed, he took a walk along the Lichtenthal Alley and
carried out this line of reflection. Whether or no Miss Vivian were in
love with Gordon Wright, her mother was enamored of Gordon's fortune,
and it had suddenly occurred to her that instead of treating the friend
of her daughter's suitor with civil mistrust, she would help her case
better by giving him a hint of her state of mind and appealing to his
sense of propriety. Nothing could be more natural than that Mrs. Vivian
should suppose that Bernard desired his friend's success; for, as our
thoughtful hero said to himself, what she had hitherto taken it into her
head to fear was not that Bernard should fall in love with her daughter,
but that her daughter should fall in love with him. Watering-place life
is notoriously conducive to idleness of mind, and Bernard strolled for
half an hour along the overarched avenue, glancing alternately at these
two insupposable cases.

A few days afterward, late in the evening, Gordon Wright came to his
room at the hotel.

"I have just received a letter from my sister," he said. "I am afraid I
shall have to go away."

"Ah, I 'm sorry for that," said Bernard, who was so well pleased with
the actual that he desired no mutation.

"I mean only for a short time," Gordon explained. "My poor sister writes
from England, telling me that my brother-in-law is suddenly obliged to
go home. She has decided not to remain behind, and they are to sail a
fortnight hence. She wants very much to see me before she goes, and as I
don't know when I shall see her again, I feel as if I ought to join
her immediately and spend the interval with her. That will take about a
fortnight."

"I appreciate the sanctity of family ties and I project myself into
your situation," said Bernard. "On the other hand, I don't envy you a
breathless journey from Baden to Folkestone."

"It 's the coming back that will be breathless," exclaimed Gordon,
smiling.

"You will certainly come back, then?"

"Most certainly. Mrs. Vivian is to be here another month."

"I understand. Well, we shall miss you very much."

Gordon Wright looked for a moment at his companion.

"You will stay here, then? I am so glad of that."

"I was taking it for granted; but on reflection--what do you recommend?"

"I recommend you to stay."

"My dear fellow, your word is law," said Bernard.

"I want you to take care of those ladies," his friend went on. "I don't
like to leave them alone."

"You are joking!" cried Bernard. "When did you ever hear of my 'taking
care' of any one? It 's as much as I can do to take care of myself."

"This is very easy," said Gordon. "I simply want to feel that they have
a man about them."

"They will have a man at any rate--they have the devoted Lovelock."

"That 's just why I want them to have another. He has only an eye to
Miss Evers, who, by the way, is extremely bored with him. You look after
the others. You have made yourself very agreeable to them, and they like
you extremely."

"Ah," said Bernard, laughing, "if you are going to be coarse and
flattering, I collapse. If you are going to titillate my vanity, I
succumb."

"It won't be so disagreeable," Gordon observed, with an intention
vaguely humorous.

"Oh no, it won't be disagreeable. I will go to Mrs. Vivian every
morning, hat in hand, for my orders."

Gordon Wright, with his hands in his pockets and a meditative
expression, took several turns about the room.

"It will be a capital chance," he said, at last, stopping in front of
his companion.

"A chance for what?"

"A chance to arrive at a conclusion about my young friend."

Bernard gave a gentle groan.

"Are you coming back to that? Did n't I arrive at a conclusion long ago?
Did n't I tell you she was a delightful girl?"

"Do you call that a conclusion? The first comer could tell me that at
the end of an hour."

"Do you want me to invent something different?" Bernard asked. "I can't
invent anything better."

"I don't want you to invent anything. I only want you to observe her--to
study her in complete independence. You will have her to yourself--my
absence will leave you at liberty. Hang it, sir," Gordon declared, "I
should think you would like it!"

"Damn it, sir, you 're delicious!" Bernard answered; and he broke into
an irrepressible laugh. "I don't suppose it 's for my pleasure that you
suggest the arrangement."

Gordon took a turn about the room again.

"No, it 's for mine. At least, it 's for my benefit."

"For your benefit?"

"I have got all sorts of ideas--I told you the other day. They are all
mixed up together and I want a fresh impression."

"My impressions are never fresh," Bernard replied.

"They would be if you had a little good-will--if you entered a little
into my dilemma." The note of reproach was so distinct in these words
that Bernard stood staring. "You never take anything seriously," his
companion went on.

Bernard tried to answer as seriously as possible.

"Your dilemma seems to me of all dilemmas the strangest."

"That may be; but different people take things differently. Don't you
see," Gordon went on with a sudden outbreak of passion--"don't you
see that I am horribly divided in mind? I care immensely for Angela
Vivian--and yet--and yet--I am afraid of her."

"Afraid of her?"

"I am afraid she 's cleverer than I--that she would be a difficult wife;
that she might do strange things."

"What sort of things?"

"Well, that she might flirt, for instance."

"That 's not a thing for a man to fear."

"Not when he supposes his wife to be fond of him--no. But I don't
suppose that--I have given that up. If I should induce Angela Vivian to
accept me she would do it on grounds purely reasonable. She would think
it best, simply. That would give her a chance to repent."

Bernard sat for some time looking at his friend.

"You say she is cleverer than you. It 's impossible to be cleverer than
you."

"Oh, come, Longueville!" said Gordon, angrily.

"I am speaking very seriously. You have done a remarkably clever thing.
You have impressed me with the reality, and with--what shall I term
it?--the estimable character of what you call your dilemma. Now this
fresh impression of mine--what do you propose to do with it when you get
it?"

"Such things are always useful. It will be a good thing to have."

"I am much obliged to you; but do you propose to let anything depend
upon it? Do you propose to take or to leave Miss Vivian--that is, to
return to the charge or to give up trying--in consequence of my fresh
impression?"

Gordon seemed perfectly unembarrassed by this question, in spite of the
ironical light which it projected upon his sentimental perplexity.

"I propose to do what I choose!" he said.

"That 's a relief to me," Bernard rejoined. "This idea of yours is,
after all, only the play of the scientific mind."

"I shall contradict you flat if I choose," Gordon went on.

"Ah, it 's well to warn me of that," said Bernard, laughing. "Even the
most sincere judgment in the world likes to be notified a little of the
danger of being contradicted."

"Is yours the most sincere judgment in the world?" Gordon demanded.

"That 's a very pertinent question. Does n't it occur to you that you
may have reason to be jealous--leaving me alone, with an open field,
with the woman of your choice?"

"I wish to heaven I could be jealous!" Gordon exclaimed. "That would
simplify the thing--that would give me a lift."

And the next day, after some more talk, it seemed really with a hope of
this contingency--though, indeed, he laughed about it--that he started
for England.






CHAPTER XI

For the three or four days that followed Gordon Wright's departure,
Bernard saw nothing of the ladies who had been committed to his charge.
They chose to remain in seclusion, and he was at liberty to interpret
this fact as an expression of regret at the loss of Gordon's good
offices. He knew other people at Baden, and he went to see them and
endeavored, by cultivating their society, to await in patience the
re-appearance of Mrs. Vivian and her companions. But on the fourth day
he became conscious that other people were much less interesting than
the trio of American ladies who had lodgings above the confectioner's,
and he made bold to go and knock at their door. He had been asked to
take care of them, and this function presupposed contact. He had
met Captain Lovelock the day before, wandering about with a rather
crest-fallen aspect, and the young Englishman had questioned him eagerly
as to the whereabouts of Mrs. Vivian.

"Gad, I believe they 've left the place--left the place without giving a
fellow warning!" cried Lovelock.

"Oh no, I think they are here still," said Bernard. "My friend Wright
has gone away for a week or two, but I suspect the ladies are simply
staying at home."

"Gad, I was afraid your friend Wright had taken them away with him; he
seems to keep them all in his pocket. I was afraid he had given them
marching orders; they 'd have been sure to go--they 're so awfully fond
of his pocket! I went to look them up yesterday--upon my word I did.
They live at a baker's in a little back-street; people do live in rum
places when they come abroad! But I assure you, when I got there, I 'm
damned if I could make out whether they were there or not. I don't speak
a word of German, and there was no one there but the baker's wife. She
was a low brute of a woman--she could n't understand a word I said,
though she gave me plenty of her own tongue. I had to give it up. They
were not at home, but whether they had left Baden or not--that was
beyond my finding out. If they are here, why the deuce don't they show?
Fancy coming to Baden-Baden to sit moping at a pastry-cook's!"

Captain Lovelock was evidently irritated, and it was Bernard's
impression that the turn of luck over yonder where the gold-pieces were
chinking had something to do with the state of his temper. But more
fortunate himself, he ascertained from the baker's wife that though Mrs.
Vivian and her daughter had gone out, their companion, "the youngest
lady--the little young lady"--was above in the sitting-room.

Blanche Evers was sitting at the window with a book, but she
relinquished the volume with an alacrity that showed it had not been
absorbing, and began to chatter with her customary frankness.

"Well, I must say I am glad to see some one!" cried the young girl,
passing before the mirror and giving a touch to her charming tresses.

"Even if it 's only me," Bernard exclaimed, laughing.

"I did n't mean that. I am sure I am very glad to see you--I should
think you would have found out that by this time. I mean I 'm glad to
see any one--especially a man. I suppose it 's improper for me to say
that--especially to you! There--you see I do think more of you than of
some gentlemen. Why especially to you? Well, because you always seem to
me to want to take advantage. I did n't say a base advantage; I did n't
accuse you of anything dreadful. I 'm sure I want to take advantage,
too--I take it whenever I can. You see I take advantage of your being
here--I 've got so many things to say. I have n't spoken a word in three
days, and I 'm sure it is a pleasant change--a gentleman's visit. All of
a sudden we have gone into mourning; I 'm sure I don't know who 's dead.
Is it Mr. Gordon Wright? It 's some idea of Mrs. Vivian's--I 'm sure
it is n't mine. She thinks we have been often enough to the Kursaal. I
don't know whether she thinks it 's wicked, or what. If it 's wicked the
harm 's already done; I can't be any worse than I am now. I have seen
all the improper people and I have learnt all their names; Captain
Lovelock has told me their names, plenty of times. I don't see what good
it does me to be shut up here with all those names running in my ears.
I must say I do prefer society. We have n't been to the Kursaal for
four days--we have only gone out for a drive. We have taken the most
interminable drives. I do believe we have seen every old ruin in
the whole country. Mrs. Vivian and Angela are so awfully fond of
scenery--they talk about it by the half-hour. They talk about the
mountains and trees as if they were people they knew--as if they were
gentlemen! I mean as if the mountains and trees were gentlemen. Of
course scenery 's lovely, but you can't walk about with a tree. At any
rate, that has been all our society--foliage! Foliage and women; but I
suppose women are a sort of foliage. They are always rustling about and
dropping off. That 's why I could n't make up my mind to go out
with them this afternoon. They 've gone to see the Waterworths--the
Waterworths arrived yesterday and are staying at some hotel. Five
daughters--all unmarried! I don't know what kind of foliage they are;
some peculiar kind--they don't drop off. I thought I had had about
enough ladies' society--three women all sticking together! I don't think
it 's good for a young girl to have nothing but ladies' society--it 's
so awfully limited. I suppose I ought to stand up for my own sex and
tell you that when we are alone together we want for nothing. But we
want for everything, as it happens! Women's talk is limited--every one
knows that. That 's just what mamma did n't want when she asked Mrs.
Vivian to take charge of me. Now, Mr. Longueville, what are you laughing
at?--you are always laughing at me. She wanted me to be unlimited--is
that what you say? Well, she did n't want me to be narrowed down; she
wanted me to have plenty of conversation. She wanted me to be fitted
for society--that 's what mamma wanted. She wanted me to have ease of
manner; she thinks that if you don't acquire it when you are young you
never have it at all. She was so happy to think I should come to Baden;
but she would n't approve of the life I 've been leading the last four
days. That 's no way to acquire ease of manner--sitting all day in a
small parlor with two persons of one's own sex! Of course Mrs. Vivian's
influence--that 's the great thing. Mamma said it was like the odor of
a flower. But you don't want to keep smelling a flower all day, even
the sweetest; that 's the shortest way to get a headache. Apropos of
flowers, do you happen to have heard whether Captain Lovelock is alive
or dead? Do I call him a flower? No; I call him a flower-pot. He always
has some fine young plant in his button-hole. He has n't been near me
these ten years--I never heard of anything so rude!"

Captain Lovelock came on the morrow, Bernard finding him in Mrs.
Vivian's little sitting-room on paying a second visit. On this occasion
the two other ladies were at home and Bernard was not exclusively
indebted to Miss Evers for entertainment. It was to this source of
hospitality, however, that Lovelock mainly appealed, following the
young girl out upon the little balcony that was suspended above the
confectioner's window. Mrs. Vivian sat writing at one of the windows of
the sitting-room, and Bernard addressed his conversation to Angela.

"Wright requested me to keep an eye on you," he said; "but you seem very
much inclined to keep out of my jurisdiction."

"I supposed you had gone away," she answered--"now that your friend is
gone."

"By no means. Gordon is a charming fellow, but he is by no means the
only attraction of Baden. Besides, I have promised him to look after
you--to take care of you."

The girl looked at him a moment in silence--a little askance.

"I thought you had probably undertaken something of that sort," she
presently said.

"It was of course a very natural request for Gordon to make."

Angela got up and turned away; she wandered about the room and went and
stood at one of the windows. Bernard found the movement abrupt and
not particularly gracious; but the young man was not easy to snub. He
followed her, and they stood at the second window--the long window that
opened upon the balcony. Miss Evers and Captain Lovelock were leaning on
the railing, looking into the street and apparently amusing themselves
highly with what they saw.

"I am not sure it was a natural request for him to make," said Angela.

"What could have been more so--devoted as he is to you?"

She hesitated a moment; then with a little laugh--

"He ought to have locked us up and said nothing about it."

"It 's not so easy to lock you up," said Bernard. "I know Wright has
great influence with you, but you are after all independent beings."

"I am not an independent being. If my mother and Mr. Wright were to
agree together to put me out of harm's way they could easily manage it."

"You seem to have been trying something of that sort," said Bernard.
"You have been so terribly invisible."

"It was because I thought you had designs upon us; that you were
watching for us--to take care of us."

"You contradict yourself! You said just now that you believed I had left
Baden."

"That was an artificial--a conventional speech. Is n't a lady always
supposed to say something of that sort to a visitor by way of pretending
to have noticed that she has not seen him?"

"You know I would never have left Baden without coming to bid you
good-bye," said Bernard.

The girl made no rejoinder; she stood looking out at the little sunny,
slanting, rough-paved German street.

"Are you taking care of us now?" she asked in a moment. "Has the
operation begun? Have you heard the news, mamma?" she went on. "Do you
know that Mr. Wright has made us over to Mr. Longueville, to be kept
till called for? Suppose Mr. Wright should never call for us!"

Mrs. Vivian left her writing-table and came toward Bernard, smiling at
him and pressing her hands together.

"There is no fear of that, I think," she said. "I am sure I am very glad
we have a gentleman near us. I think you will be a very good care-taker,
Mr. Longueville, and I recommend my daughter to put great faith in
your judgment." And Mrs. Vivian gave him an intense--a pleading, almost
affecting--little smile.

"I am greatly touched by your confidence and I shall do everything I can
think of to merit it," said the young man.

"Ah, mamma's confidence is wonderful!" Angela exclaimed. "There was
never anything like mamma's confidence. I am very different; I have no
confidence. And then I don't like being deposited, like a parcel, or
being watched, like a curious animal. I am too fond of my liberty."

"That is the second time you have contradicted yourself," said Bernard.
"You said just now that you were not an independent being."

Angela turned toward him quickly, smiling and frowning at once.

"You do watch one, certainly! I see it has already begun." Mrs. Vivian
laid her hand upon her daughter's with a little murmur of tender
deprecation, and the girl bent over and kissed her. "Mamma will tell you
it 's the effect of agitation," she said--"that I am nervous, and don't
know what I say. I am supposed to be agitated by Mr. Wright's departure;
is n't that it, mamma?"

Mrs. Vivian turned away, with a certain soft severity.

"I don't know, my daughter. I don't understand you."

A charming pink flush had come into Angela's cheek and a noticeable
light into her eye. She looked admirably handsome, and Bernard frankly
gazed at her. She met his gaze an instant, and then she went on.

"Mr. Longueville does n't understand me either. You must know that I am
agitated," she continued. "Every now and then I have moments of talking
nonsense. It 's the air of Baden, I think; it 's too exciting. It
's only lately I have been so. When you go away I shall be horribly
ashamed."

"If the air of Baden has such an effect upon you," said Bernard, "it
is only a proof the more that you need the solicitous attention of your
friends."

"That may be; but, as I told you just now, I have no confidence--none
whatever, in any one or anything. Therefore, for the present, I shall
withdraw from the world--I shall seclude myself. Let us go on being
quiet, mamma. Three or four days of it have been so charming. Let the
parcel lie till it 's called for. It is much safer it should n't be
touched at all. I shall assume that, metaphorically speaking, Mr.
Wright, who, as you have intimated, is our earthly providence, has
turned the key upon us. I am locked up. I shall not go out, except upon
the balcony!" And with this, Angela stepped out of the long window and
went and stood beside Miss Evers.

Bernard was extremely amused, but he was also a good deal puzzled, and
it came over him that it was not a wonder that poor Wright should not
have found this young lady's disposition a perfectly decipherable page.
He remained in the room with Mrs. Vivian--he stood there looking at
her with his agreeably mystified smile. She had turned away, but on
perceiving that her daughter had gone outside she came toward
Bernard again, with her habitual little air of eagerness mitigated by
discretion. There instantly rose before his mind the vision of that
moment when he had stood face to face with this same apologetic mamma,
after Angela had turned her back, on the grass-grown terrace at Siena.
To make the vision complete, Mrs. Vivian took it into her head to utter
the same words.

"I am sure you think she is a strange girl."

Bernard recognized them, and he gave a light laugh.

"You told me that the first time you ever saw me--in that quiet little
corner of an Italian town."

Mrs. Vivian gave a little faded, elderly blush.

"Don't speak of that," she murmured, glancing at the open window. "It
was a little accident of travel."

"I am dying to speak of it," said Bernard. "It was such a charming
accident for me! Tell me this, at least--have you kept my sketch?"

Mrs. Vivian colored more deeply and glanced at the window again.

"No," she just whispered.

Bernard looked out of the window too. Angela was leaning against the
railing of the balcony, in profile, just as she had stood while he
painted her, against the polished parapet at Siena. The young man's eyes
rested on her a moment, then, as he glanced back at her mother:

"Has she kept it?" he asked.

"I don't know," said Mrs. Vivian, with decision.

The decision was excessive--it expressed the poor lady's distress at
having her veracity tested. "Dear little daughter of the Puritans--she
can't tell a fib!" Bernard exclaimed to himself. And with this
flattering conclusion he took leave of her.






CHAPTER XII

It was affirmed at an early stage of this narrative that he was a young
man of a contemplative and speculative turn, and he had perhaps never
been more true to his character than during an hour or two that
evening as he sat by himself on the terrace of the Conversation-house,
surrounded by the crowd of its frequenters, but lost in his meditations.
The place was full of movement and sound, but he had tilted back his
chair against the great green box of an orange-tree, and in this easy
attitude, vaguely and agreeably conscious of the music, he directed his
gaze to the star-sprinkled vault of the night. There were people coming
and going whom he knew, but he said nothing to any one--he preferred to
be alone; he found his own company quite absorbing. He felt very happy,
very much amused, very curiously preoccupied. The feeling was a singular
one. It partook of the nature of intellectual excitement. He had a
sense of having received carte blanche for the expenditure of his wits.
Bernard liked to feel his intelligence at play; this is, perhaps, the
highest luxury of a clever man. It played at present over the whole
field of Angela Vivian's oddities of conduct--for, since his visit in
the afternoon, Bernard had felt that the spectacle was considerably
enlarged. He had come to feel, also, that poor Gordon's predicament was
by no means an unnatural one. Longueville had begun to take his friend's
dilemma very seriously indeed. The girl was certainly a curious study.

The evening drew to a close and the crowd of Bernard's fellow-loungers
dispersed. The lighted windows of the Kursaal still glittered in
the bosky darkness, and the lamps along the terrace had not been
extinguished; but the great promenade was almost deserted; here and
there only a lingering couple--the red tip of a cigar and the vague
radiance of a light dress--gave animation to the place. But Bernard
sat there still in his tilted chair, beneath his orange-tree; his
imagination had wandered very far and he was awaiting its return to the
fold. He was on the point of rising, however, when he saw three figures
come down the empty vista of the terrace--figures which even at a
distance had a familiar air. He immediately left his seat and, taking
a dozen steps, recognized Angela Vivian, Blanche Evers and Captain
Lovelock. In a moment he met them in the middle of the terrace.

Blanche immediately announced that they had come for a midnight walk.

"And if you think it 's improper," she exclaimed, "it 's not my
invention--it 's Miss Vivian's."

"I beg pardon--it 's mine," said Captain Lovelock. "I desire the credit
of it. I started the idea; you never would have come without me."

"I think it would have been more proper to come without you than with
you," Blanche declared. "You know you 're a dreadful character."

"I 'm much worse when I 'm away from you than when I 'm with you," said
Lovelock. "You keep me in order."

The young girl gave a little cry.

"I don't know what you call order! You can't be worse than you have been
to-night."

Angela was not listening to this; she turned away a little, looking
about at the empty garden.

"This is the third time to-day that you have contradicted yourself," he
said. Though he spoke softly he went nearer to her; but she appeared not
to hear him--she looked away.

"You ought to have been there, Mr. Longueville," Blanche went on. "We
have had a most lovely night; we sat all the evening on Mrs. Vivian's
balcony, eating ices. To sit on a balcony, eating ices--that 's my idea
of heaven."

"With an angel by your side," said Captain Lovelock.

"You are not my idea of an angel," retorted Blanche.

"I 'm afraid you 'll never learn what the angels are really like," said
the Captain. "That 's why Miss Evers got Mrs. Vivian to take rooms over
the baker's--so that she could have ices sent up several times a day.
Well, I 'm bound to say the baker's ices are not bad."

"Considering that they have been baked! But they affect the mind,"
Blanche went on. "They would have affected Captain Lovelock's--only he
has n't any. They certainly affected Angela's--putting it into her head,
at eleven o'clock, to come out to walk."

Angela did nothing whatever to defend herself against this ingenious
sally; she simply stood there in graceful abstraction. Bernard was
vaguely vexed at her neither looking at him nor speaking to him; her
indifference seemed a contravention of that right of criticism which
Gordon had bequeathed to him.

"I supposed people went to bed at eleven o'clock," he said.

Angela glanced about her, without meeting his eye.

"They seem to have gone."

Miss Evers strolled on, and her Captain of course kept pace with her; so
that Bernard and Miss Vivian were left standing together. He looked at
her a moment in silence, but her eye still avoided his own.

"You are remarkably inconsistent," Bernard presently said. "You take a
solemn vow of seclusion this afternoon, and no sooner have you taken it
than you proceed to break it in this outrageous manner."

She looked at him now--a long time--longer than she had ever done
before.

"This is part of the examination, I suppose," she said.

Bernard hesitated an instant.

"What examination?"

"The one you have undertaken--on Mr. Wright's behalf."

"What do you know about that?"

"Ah, you admit it then?" the girl exclaimed, with an eager laugh.

"I don't in the least admit it," said Bernard, conscious only for the
moment of the duty of loyalty to his friend and feeling that negation
here was simply a point of honor.

"I trust more to my own conviction than to your denial. You have engaged
to bring your superior wisdom and your immense experience to bear upon
me! That 's the understanding."

"You must think us a pretty pair of wiseacres," said Bernard.

"There it is--you already begin to answer for what I think. When Mr.
Wright comes back you will be able to tell him that I am 'outrageous'!"
And she turned away and walked on, slowly following her companions.

"What do you care what I tell him?" Bernard asked. "You don't care a
straw."

She said nothing for a moment, then, suddenly, she stopped again,
dropping her eyes.

"I beg your pardon," she said, very gently; "I care a great deal. It 's
as well that you should know that."

Bernard stood looking at her; her eyes were still lowered.

"Do you know what I shall tell him? I shall tell him that about eleven
o'clock at night you become peculiarly attractive."

She went on again a few steps; Miss Evers and Captain Lovelock had
turned round and were coming toward her.

"It is very true that I am outrageous," she said; "it was extremely
silly and in very bad taste to come out at this hour. Mamma was not at
all pleased, and I was very unkind to her. I only wanted to take a turn,
and now we will go back." On the others coming up she announced this
resolution, and though Captain Lovelock and his companion made a
great outcry, she carried her point. Bernard offered no opposition. He
contented himself with walking back to her mother's lodging with her
almost in silence. The little winding streets were still and empty;
there was no sound but the chatter and laughter of Blanche and her
attendant swain. Angela said nothing.

This incident presented itself at first to Bernard's mind as a sort
of declaration of war. The girl had guessed that she was to be made
a subject of speculative scrutiny. The idea was not agreeable to her
independent spirit, and she placed herself boldly on the defensive. She
took her stand upon her right to defeat his purpose by every possible
means--to perplex, elude, deceive him--in plain English, to make a fool
of him. This was the construction which for several days Bernard put
upon her deportment, at the same time that he thought it immensely
clever of her to have guessed what had been going on in his mind. She
made him feel very much ashamed of his critical attitude, and he did
everything he could think of to put her off her guard and persuade her
that for the moment he had ceased to be an observer. His position at
moments seemed to him an odious one, for he was firmly resolved that
between him and the woman to whom his friend had proposed there should
be nothing in the way of a vulgar flirtation. Under the circumstances,
it savoured both of flirtation and of vulgarity that they should even
fall out with each other--a consummation which appeared to be more or
less definitely impending. Bernard remarked to himself that his own only
reasonable line of conduct would be instantly to leave Baden, but I
am almost ashamed to mention the fact which led him to modify this
decision. It was simply that he was induced to make the reflection that
he had really succeeded in putting Miss Vivian off her guard. How he had
done so he would have found it difficult to explain, inasmuch as in one
way or another, for a week, he had spent several hours in talk with her.
The most effective way of putting her off her guard would have been to
leave her alone, to forswear the privilege of conversation with her, to
pass the days in other society. This course would have had the drawback
of not enabling him to measure the operation of so ingenious a policy,
and Bernard liked, of all the things in the world, to know when he was
successful. He believed, at all events, that he was successful now, and
that the virtue of his conversation itself had persuaded this keen
and brilliant girl that he was thinking of anything in the world but
herself. He flattered himself that the civil indifference of his manner,
the abstract character of the topics he selected, the irrelevancy of
his allusions and the laxity of his attention, all contributed to this
result.

Such a result was certainly a remarkable one, for it is almost
superfluous to intimate that Miss Vivian was, in fact, perpetually in
his thoughts. He made it a point of conscience not to think of her, but
he was thinking of her most when his conscience was most lively. Bernard
had a conscience--a conscience which, though a little irregular in
its motions, gave itself in the long run a great deal of exercise; but
nothing could have been more natural than that, curious, imaginative,
audacious as he was, and delighting, as I have said, in the play of his
singularly nimble intelligence, he should have given himself up to a
sort of unconscious experimentation. "I will leave her alone--I will be
hanged if I attempt to draw her out!" he said to himself; and meanwhile
he was roaming afield and plucking personal impressions in great
fragrant handfuls. All this, as I say, was natural, given the man and
the situation; the only oddity is that he should have fancied himself
able to persuade the person most interested that he had renounced his
advantage.

He remembered her telling him that she cared very much what he should
say of her on Gordon Wright's return, and he felt that this declaration
had a particular significance. After this, of her own movement, she
never spoke of Gordon, and Bernard made up his mind that she had
promised her mother to accept him if he should repeat his proposal, and
that as her heart was not in the matter she preferred to drop a veil
over the prospect. "She is going to marry him for his money," he said,
"because her mother has brought out the advantages of the thing. Mrs.
Vivian's persuasive powers have carried the day, and the girl has made
herself believe that it does n't matter that she does n't love him.
Perhaps it does n't--to her; it 's hard, in such a case, to put one's
self in the woman's point of view. But I should think it would matter,
some day or other, to poor Gordon. She herself can't help suspecting it
may make a difference in his happiness, and she therefore does n't wish
to seem any worse to him than is necessary. She wants me to speak well
of her; if she intends to deceive him she expects me to back her up.
The wish is doubtless natural, but for a proud girl it is rather an odd
favor to ask. Oh yes, she 's a proud girl, even though she has been
able to arrange it with her conscience to make a mercenary marriage. To
expect me to help her is perhaps to treat me as a friend; but she ought
to remember--or at least I ought to remember--that Gordon is an older
friend than she. Inviting me to help her as against my oldest friend--is
n't there a grain of impudence in that?"

It will be gathered that Bernard's meditations were not on the whole
favorable to this young lady, and it must be affirmed that he was
forcibly struck with an element of cynicism in her conduct. On the
evening of her so-called midnight visit to the Kursaal she had suddenly
sounded a note of sweet submissiveness which re-appeared again at
frequent intervals. She was gentle, accessible, tenderly gracious,
expressive, demonstrative, almost flattering. From his own personal
point of view Bernard had no complaint to make of this maidenly
urbanity, but he kept reminding himself that he was not in question and
that everything must be looked at in the light of Gordon's requirements.
There was all this time an absurd logical twist in his view of things.
In the first place he was not to judge at all; and in the second he was
to judge strictly on Gordon's behalf. This latter clause always served
as a justification when the former had failed to serve as a deterrent.
When Bernard reproached himself for thinking too much of the girl, he
drew comfort from the reflection that he was not thinking well. To let
it gradually filter into one's mind, through a superficial complexity
of more reverent preconceptions, that she was an extremely clever
coquette--this, surely, was not to think well! Bernard had luminous
glimpses of another situation, in which Angela Vivian's coquetry should
meet with a different appreciation; but just now it was not an item to
be entered on the credit side of Wright's account. Bernard wiped his
pen, mentally speaking, as he made this reflection, and felt like a
grizzled old book-keeper, of incorruptible probity. He saw her, as
I have said, very often; she continued to break her vow of shutting
herself up, and at the end of a fortnight she had reduced it to
imperceptible particles. On four different occasions, presenting himself
at Mrs. Vivian's lodgings, Bernard found Angela there alone. She made
him welcome, receiving him as an American girl, in such circumstances,
is free to receive the most gallant of visitors. She smiled and talked
and gave herself up to charming gayety, so that there was nothing
for Bernard to say but that now at least she was off her guard with
a vengeance. Happily he was on his own! He flattered himself that he
remained so on occasions that were even more insidiously relaxing--when,
in the evening, she strolled away with him to parts of the grounds of
the Conversation-house, where the music sank to sweeter softness and
the murmur of the tree-tops of the Black Forest, stirred by the warm
night-air, became almost audible; or when, in the long afternoons, they
wandered in the woods apart from the others--from Mrs. Vivian and the
amiable object of her more avowed solicitude, the object of the sportive
adoration of the irrepressible, the ever-present Lovelock. They were
constantly having parties in the woods at this time--driving over
the hills to points of interest which Bernard had looked out in
the guide-book. Bernard, in such matters, was extremely alert and
considerate; he developed an unexpected talent for arranging excursions,
and he had taken regularly into his service the red-waistcoated
proprietor of a big Teutonic landau, which had a courier's seat behind
and was always at the service of the ladies. The functionary in the
red waistcoat was a capital charioteer; he was constantly proposing
new drives, and he introduced our little party to treasures of romantic
scenery.






CHAPTER XIII

More than a fortnight had elapsed, but Gordon Wright had not
re-appeared, and Bernard suddenly decided that he would leave Baden. He
found Mrs. Vivian and her daughter, very opportunely, in the garden
of the pleasant, homely Schloss which forms the residence of the Grand
Dukes of Baden during their visits to the scene of our narrative, and
which, perched upon the hill-side directly above the little town, is
surrounded with charming old shrubberies and terraces. To this garden a
portion of the public is admitted, and Bernard, who liked the place,
had been there more than once. One of the terraces had a high parapet,
against which Angela was leaning, looking across the valley. Mrs. Vivian
was not at first in sight, but Bernard presently perceived her seated
under a tree with Victor Cousin in her hand. As Bernard approached the
young girl, Angela, who had not seen him, turned round.

"Don't move," he said. "You were just in the position in which I painted
your portrait at Siena."

"Don't speak of that," she answered.

"I have never understood," said Bernard, "why you insist upon ignoring
that charming incident."

She resumed for a moment her former position, and stood looking at the
opposite hills.

"That 's just how you were--in profile--with your head a little thrown
back."

"It was an odious incident!" Angela exclaimed, rapidly changing her
attitude.

Bernard was on the point of making a rejoinder, but he thought of Gordon
Wright and held his tongue. He presently told her that he intended to
leave Baden on the morrow.

They were walking toward her mother. She looked round at him quickly.

"Where are you going?"

"To Paris," he said, quite at hazard; for he had not in the least
determined where to go.

"To Paris--in the month of August?" And she gave a little laugh. "What a
happy inspiration!"

She gave a little laugh, but she said nothing more, and Bernard gave no
further account of his plan. They went and sat down near Mrs. Vivian for
ten minutes, and then they got up again and strolled to another part of
the garden. They had it all to themselves, and it was filled with things
that Bernard liked--inequalities of level, with mossy steps connecting
them, rose-trees trained upon old brick walls, horizontal trellises
arranged like Italian pergolas, and here and there a towering poplar,
looking as if it had survived from some more primitive stage of culture,
with its stiff boughs motionless and its leaves forever trembling. They
made almost the whole circuit of the garden, and then Angela mentioned
very quietly that she had heard that morning from Mr. Wright, and that
he would not return for another week.

"You had better stay," she presently added, as if Gordon's continued
absence were an added reason.

"I don't know," said Bernard. "It is sometimes difficult to say what one
had better do."

I hesitate to bring against him that most inglorious of all charges,
an accusation of sentimental fatuity, of the disposition to invent
obstacles to enjoyment so that he might have the pleasure of seeing
a pretty girl attempt to remove them. But it must be admitted that if
Bernard really thought at present that he had better leave Baden, the
observation I have just quoted was not so much a sign of this conviction
as of the hope that his companion would proceed to gainsay it. The
hope was not disappointed, though I must add that no sooner had it been
gratified than Bernard began to feel ashamed of it.

"This certainly is not one of those cases," said Angela. "The thing is
surely very simple now."

"What makes it so simple?"

She hesitated a moment.

"The fact that I ask you to stay."

"You ask me?" he repeated, softly.

"Ah," she exclaimed, "one does n't say those things twice!"

She turned away, and they went back to her mother, who gave Bernard a
wonderful little look of half urgent, half remonstrant inquiry. As they
left the garden he walked beside Mrs. Vivian, Angela going in front of
them at a distance. The elder lady began immediately to talk to him of
Gordon Wright.

"He 's not coming back for another week, you know," she said. "I am
sorry he stays away so long."

"Ah yes," Bernard answered, "it seems very long indeed."

And it had, in fact, seemed to him very long.

"I suppose he is always likely to have business," said Mrs. Vivian.

"You may be very sure it is not for his pleasure that he stays away."

"I know he is faithful to old friends," said Mrs. Vivian. "I am sure he
has not forgotten us."

"I certainly count upon that," Bernard exclaimed--"remembering him as we
do!"

Mrs. Vivian glanced at him gratefully.

"Oh yes, we remember him--we remember him daily, hourly. At least, I
can speak for my daughter and myself. He has been so very kind to us."
Bernard said nothing, and she went on. "And you have been so very kind
to us, too, Mr. Longueville. I want so much to thank you."

"Oh no, don't!" said Bernard, frowning. "I would rather you should n't."

"Of course," Mrs. Vivian added, "I know it 's all on his account;
but that makes me wish to thank you all the more. Let me express my
gratitude, in advance, for the rest of the time, till he comes back.
That 's more responsibility than you bargained for," she said, with a
little nervous laugh.

"Yes, it 's more than I bargained for. I am thinking of going away."

Mrs. Vivian almost gave a little jump, and then she paused on the Baden
cobble-stones, looking up at him.

"If you must go, Mr. Longueville--don't sacrifice yourself!"

The exclamation fell upon Bernard's ear with a certain softly mocking
cadence which was sufficient, however, to make this organ tingle.

"Oh, after all, you know," he said, as they walked on--"after all, you
know, I am not like Wright--I have no business."

He walked with the ladies to the door of their lodging. Angela kept
always in front. She stood there, however, at the little confectioner's
window until the others came up. She let her mother pass in, and then
she said to Bernard, looking at him--

"Shall I see you again?"

"Some time, I hope."

"I mean--are you going away?"

Bernard looked for a moment at a little pink sugar cherub--a species
of Cupid, with a gilded bow--which figured among the pastry-cook's
enticements. Then he said--

"I will come and tell you this evening."

And in the evening he went to tell her; she had mentioned during the
walk in the garden of the Schloss that they should not go out. As he
approached Mrs. Vivian's door he saw a figure in a light dress standing
in the little balcony. He stopped and looked up, and then the person in
the light dress, leaning her hands on the railing, with her shoulders a
little raised, bent over and looked down at him. It was very dark,
but even through the thick dusk he thought he perceived the finest
brilliancy of Angela Vivian's smile.

"I shall not go away," he said, lifting his voice a little.

She made no answer; she only stood looking down at him through the warm
dusk and smiling. He went into the house, and he remained at Baden-Baden
till Gordon came back.






CHAPTER XIV

Gordon asked him no questions for twenty-four hours after his return,
then suddenly he began:

"Well, have n't you something to say to me?"

It was at the hotel, in Gordon's apartment, late in the afternoon.
A heavy thunder-storm had broken over the place an hour before, and
Bernard had been standing at one of his friend's windows, rather idly,
with his hands in his pockets, watching the rain-torrents dance upon
the empty pavements. At last the deluge abated, the clouds began to
break--there was a promise of a fine evening. Gordon Wright, while the
storm was at its climax, sat down to write letters, and wrote half a
dozen. It was after he had sealed, directed and affixed a postage-stamp
to the last of the series that he addressed to his companion the
question I have just quoted.

"Do you mean about Miss Vivian?" Bernard asked, without turning round
from the window.

"About Miss Vivian, of course." Bernard said nothing and his companion
went on. "Have you nothing to tell me about Miss Vivian?"

Bernard presently turned round looking at Gordon and smiling a little.

"She 's a delightful creature!"

"That won't do--you have tried that before," said Gordon. "No," he added
in a moment, "that won't do." Bernard turned back to the window, and
Gordon continued, as he remained silent. "I shall have a right to
consider your saying nothing a proof of an unfavorable judgment. You
don't like her!"

Bernard faced quickly about again, and for an instant the two men looked
at each other.

"Ah, my dear Gordon," Longueville murmured.

"Do you like her then?" asked Wright, getting up.

"No!" said Longueville.

"That 's just what I wanted to know, and I am much obliged to you for
telling me."

"I am not obliged to you for asking me. I was in hopes you would n't."

"You dislike her very much then?" Gordon exclaimed, gravely.

"Won't disliking her, simply, do?" said Bernard.

"It will do very well. But it will do a little better if you will tell
me why. Give me a reason or two."

"Well," said Bernard, "I tried to make love to her and she boxed my
ears."

"The devil!" cried Gordon.

"I mean morally, you know."

Gordon stared; he seemed a little puzzled.

"You tried to make love to her morally?"

"She boxed my ears morally," said Bernard, laughing out.

"Why did you try to make love to her?"

This inquiry was made in a tone so expressive of an unbiassed
truth-seeking habit that Bernard's mirth was not immediately quenched.
Nevertheless, he replied with sufficient gravity--

"To test her fidelity to you. Could you have expected anything else? You
told me you were afraid she was a latent coquette. You gave me a chance,
and I tried to ascertain."

"And you found she was not. Is that what you mean?"

"She 's as firm as a rock. My dear Gordon, Miss Vivian is as firm as the
firmest of your geological formations."

Gordon shook his head with a strange positive persistence.

"You are talking nonsense. You are not serious. You are not telling me
the truth. I don't believe that you attempted to make love to her.
You would n't have played such a game as that. It would n't have been
honorable."

Bernard flushed a little; he was irritated.

"Oh come, don't make too much of a point of that! Did n't you tell me
before that it was a great opportunity?"

"An opportunity to be wise--not to be foolish!"

"Ah, there is only one sort of opportunity," cried Bernard. "You
exaggerate the reach of human wisdom."

"Suppose she had let you make love to her," said Gordon. "That would
have been a beautiful result of your experiment."

"I should have seemed to you a rascal, perhaps, but I should have saved
you from a latent coquette. You would owe some thanks for that."

"And now you have n't saved me," said Gordon, with a simple air of
noting a fact.

"You assume--in spite of what I say--that she is a coquette!"

"I assume something because you evidently conceal something. I want the
whole truth."

Bernard turned back to the window with increasing irritation.

"If he wants the whole truth he shall have it," he said to himself.

He stood a moment in thought and then he looked at his companion again.

"I think she would marry you--but I don't think she cares for you."

Gordon turned a little pale, but he clapped his hands together.

"Very good," he exclaimed. "That 's exactly how I want you to speak."

"Her mother has taken a great fancy to your fortune and it has rubbed
off on the girl, who has made up her mind that it would be a pleasant
thing to have thirty thousand a year, and that her not caring for you is
an unimportant detail."

"I see--I see," said Gordon, looking at his friend with an air of
admiration for his frank and lucid way of putting things.

Now that he had begun to be frank and lucid, Bernard found a charm in
it, and the impulse under which he had spoken urged him almost violently
forward.

"The mother and daughter have agreed together to bag you, and Angela, I
am sure, has made a vow to be as nice to you after marriage as possible.
Mrs. Vivian has insisted upon the importance of that; Mrs. Vivian is a
great moralist."

Gordon kept gazing at his friend; he seemed positively fascinated.

"Yes, I have noticed that in Mrs. Vivian," he said.

"Ah, she 's a very nice woman!"

"It 's not true, then," said Gordon, "that you tried to make love to
Angela?"

Bernard hesitated a single instant.



"No, it is n't true. I calumniated myself, to save her reputation. You
insisted on my giving you a reason for my not liking her--I gave you
that one."

"And your real reason--"

"My real reason is that I believe she would do you what I can't help
regarding as an injury."

"Of course!" and Gordon, dropping his interested eyes, stared for some
moments at the carpet. "But it is n't true, then, that you discovered
her to be a coquette?"

"Ah, that 's another matter."

"You did discover it all the same?"

"Since you want the whole truth--I did!"

"How did you discover it?" Gordon asked, clinging to his right of
interrogation.

Bernard hesitated.

"You must remember that I saw a great deal of her."

"You mean that she encouraged you?"

"If I had not been a very faithful friend I might have thought so."

Gordon laid his hand appreciatively, gratefully, on Bernard's shoulder.

"And even that did n't make you like her?"

"Confound it, you make me blush!" cried Bernard, blushing a little in
fact. "I have said quite enough; excuse me from drawing the portrait of
too insensible a man. It was my point of view; I kept thinking of you."

Gordon, with his hand still on his friend's arm, patted it an instant in
response to this declaration; then he turned away.

"I am much obliged to you. That 's my notion of friendship. You have
spoken out like a man."

"Like a man, yes. Remember that. Not in the least like an oracle."

"I prefer an honest man to all the oracles," said Gordon.

"An honest man has his impressions! I have given you mine--they pretend
to be nothing more. I hope they have n't offended you."

"Not in the least."

"Nor distressed, nor depressed, nor in any way discomposed you?"



"For what do you take me? I asked you a favor--a service; I imposed it
on you. You have done the thing, and my part is simple gratitude."

"Thank you for nothing," said Bernard, smiling. "You have asked me a
great many questions; there is one that in turn I have a right to ask
you. What do you propose to do in consequence of what I have told you?"

"I propose to do nothing."

This declaration closed the colloquy, and the young men separated.
Bernard saw Gordon no more that evening; he took for granted he had gone
to Mrs. Vivian's. The burden of Longueville's confidences was a heavy
load to carry there, but Bernard ventured to hope that he would deposit
it at the door. He had given Gordon his impressions, and the latter
might do with them what he chose--toss them out of the window, or let
them grow stale with heedless keeping. So Bernard meditated, as he
wandered about alone for the rest of the evening. It was useless to
look for Mrs. Vivian's little circle, on the terrace of the
Conversation-house, for the storm in the afternoon had made the place so
damp that it was almost forsaken of its frequenters. Bernard spent the
evening in the gaming-rooms, in the thick of the crowd that pressed
about the tables, and by way of a change--he had hitherto been almost
nothing of a gambler--he laid down a couple of pieces at roulette. He
had played but two or three times, without winning a penny; but now he
had the agreeable sensation of drawing in a small handful of gold.
He continued to play, and he continued to win. His luck surprised and
excited him--so much so that after it had repeated itself half a dozen
times he left the place and walked about for half an hour in the outer
darkness. He felt amused and exhilarated, but the feeling amounted
almost to agitation. He, nevertheless, returned to the tables, where he
again found success awaiting him. Again and again he put his money on
a happy number, and so steady a run of luck began at last to attract
attention. The rumor of it spread through the rooms, and the crowd about
the roulette received a large contingent of spectators. Bernard felt
that they were looking more or less eagerly for a turn of the tide; but
he was in the humor for disappointing them, and he left the place, while
his luck was still running high, with ten thousand francs in his pocket.
It was very late when he returned to the inn--so late that he forbore
to knock at Gordon's door. But though he betook himself to his own
quarters, he was far from finding, or even seeking, immediate rest. He
knocked about, as he would have said, for half the night--not because he
was delighted at having won ten thousand francs, but rather because all
of a sudden he found himself disgusted at the manner in which he
had spent the evening. It was extremely characteristic of Bernard
Longueville that his pleasure should suddenly transform itself into
flatness. What he felt was not regret or repentance. He had it not
in the least on his conscience that he had given countenance to the
reprehensible practice of gaming. It was annoyance that he had passed
out of his own control--that he had obeyed a force which he was unable
to measure at the time. He had been drunk and he was turning sober. In
spite of a great momentary appearance of frankness and a lively relish
of any conjunction of agreeable circumstances exerting a pressure to
which one could respond, Bernard had really little taste for giving
himself up, and he never did so without very soon wishing to take
himself back. He had now given himself to something that was not
himself, and the fact that he had gained ten thousand francs by it was
an insufficient salve to an aching sense of having ceased to be his own
master. He had not been playing--he had been played with. He had been
the sport of a blind, brutal chance, and he felt humiliated by having
been favored by so rudely-operating a divinity. Good luck and bad luck?
Bernard felt very scornful of the distinction, save that good luck
seemed to him rather the more vulgar. As the night went on his disgust
deepened, and at last the weariness it brought with it sent him to
sleep. He slept very late, and woke up to a disagreeable consciousness.
At first, before collecting his thoughts, he could not imagine what
he had on his mind--was it that he had spoken ill of Angela Vivian? It
brought him extraordinary relief to remember that he had gone to bed in
extreme ill-humor with his exploits at roulette. After he had dressed
himself and just as he was leaving his room, a servant brought him a
note superscribed in Gordon's hand--a note of which the following proved
to be the contents.

"Seven o'clock, A.M.

"My dear Bernard: Circumstances have determined me to leave Baden
immediately, and I shall take the train that starts an hour hence. I am
told that you came in very late last night, so I won't disturb you for
a painful parting at this unnatural hour. I came to this decision last
evening, and I put up my things; so I have nothing to do but to take
myself off. I shall go to Basel, but after that I don't know where, and
in so comfortless an uncertainty I don't ask you to follow me. Perhaps
I shall go to America; but in any case I shall see you sooner or later.
Meanwhile, my dear Bernard, be as happy as your brilliant talents should
properly make you, and believe me yours ever,

"G.W.

"P.S. It is perhaps as well that I should say that I am leaving in
consequence of something that happened last evening, but not--by any
traceable process--in consequence of the talk we had together. I may
also add that I am in very good health and spirits."

Bernard lost no time in learning that his friend had in fact departed
by the eight o'clock train--the morning was now well advanced; and then,
over his breakfast, he gave himself up to meditative surprise. What had
happened during the evening--what had happened after their conversation
in Gordon's room? He had gone to Mrs. Vivian's--what had happened there?
Bernard found it difficult to believe that he had gone there simply to
notify her that, having talked it over with an intimate friend, he gave
up her daughter, or to mention to the young lady herself that he had
ceased to desire the honor of her hand. Gordon alluded to some definite
occurrence, yet it was inconceivable that he should have allowed himself
to be determined by Bernard's words--his diffident and irresponsible
impression. Bernard resented this idea as an injury to himself, yet
it was difficult to imagine what else could have happened. There was
Gordon's word for it, however, that there was no "traceable" connection
between the circumstances which led to his sudden departure and the
information he had succeeded in extracting from his friend. What did he
mean by a "traceable" connection? Gordon never used words idly, and he
meant to make of this point an intelligible distinction. It was this
sense of his usual accuracy of expression that assisted Bernard in
fitting a meaning to his late companion's letter. He intended to
intimate that he had come back to Baden with his mind made up to
relinquish his suit, and that he had questioned Bernard simply from
moral curiosity--for the sake of intellectual satisfaction. Nothing was
altered by the fact that Bernard had told him a sorry tale; it had not
modified his behavior--that effect would have been traceable. It
had simply affected his imagination, which was a consequence of the
imponderable sort. This view of the case was supported by Gordon's
mention of his good spirits. A man always had good spirits when he had
acted in harmony with a conviction. Of course, after renouncing the
attempt to make himself acceptable to Miss Vivian, the only possible
thing for Gordon had been to leave Baden. Bernard, continuing to
meditate, at last convinced himself that there had been no explicit
rupture, that Gordon's last visit had simply been a visit of farewell,
that its character had sufficiently signified his withdrawal, and that
he had now gone away because, after giving the girl up, he wished
very naturally not to meet her again. This was, on Bernard's part,
a sufficiently coherent view of the case; but nevertheless, an hour
afterward, as he strolled along the Lichtenthal Alley, he found himself
stopping suddenly and exclaiming under his breath--"Have I done her
an injury? Have I affected her prospects?" Later in the day he said to
himself half a dozen times that he had simply warned Gordon against an
incongruous union.






CHAPTER XV

Now that Gordon was gone, at any rate, gone for good, and not to return,
he felt a sudden and singular sense of freedom. It was a feeling of
unbounded expansion, quite out of proportion, as he said to himself, to
any assignable cause. Everything suddenly appeared to have become very
optional; but he was quite at a loss what to do with his liberty. It
seemed a harmless use to make of it, in the afternoon, to go and pay
another visit to the ladies who lived at the confectioner's. Here,
however, he met a reception which introduced a fresh element of
perplexity into the situation that Gordon had left behind him. The door
was opened to him by Mrs. Vivian's maid-servant, a sturdy daughter
of the Schwartzwald, who informed him that the ladies--with much
regret--were unable to receive any one.

"They are very busy--and they are ill," said the young woman, by way of
explanation.

Bernard was disappointed, and he felt like arguing the case.

"Surely," he said, "they are not both ill and busy! When you make
excuses, you should make them agree with each other."

The Teutonic soubrette fixed her round blue eyes a minute upon the patch
of blue sky revealed to her by her open door.

"I say what I can, lieber Herr. It 's not my fault if I 'm not so clever
as a French mamsell. One of the ladies is busy, the other is ill. There
you have it."

"Not quite," said Bernard. "You must remember that there are three of
them."

"Oh, the little one--the little one weeps."

"Miss Evers weeps!" exclaimed Bernard, to whom the vision of this young
lady in tears had never presented itself.

"That happens to young ladies when they are unhappy," said the girl; and
with an artless yet significant smile she carried a big red hand to the
left side of a broad bosom.

"I am sorry she is unhappy; but which of the other ladies is ill?"

"The mother is very busy."

"And the daughter is ill?"

The young woman looked at him an instant, smiling again, and the light
in her little blue eyes indicated confusion, but not perversity.

"No, the mamma is ill," she exclaimed, "and the daughter is very busy.
They are preparing to leave Baden."

"To leave Baden? When do they go?"

"I don't quite know, lieber Herr; but very soon."

With this information Bernard turned away. He was rather surprised, but
he reflected that Mrs. Vivian had not proposed to spend her life on the
banks of the Oos, and that people were leaving Baden every day in the
year. In the evening, at the Kursaal, he met Captain Lovelock, who was
wandering about with an air of explosive sadness.

"Damn it, they 're going--yes, they 're going," said the Captain, after
the two young men had exchanged a few allusions to current events.
"Fancy their leaving us in that heartless manner! It 's not the time to
run away--it 's the time to keep your rooms, if you 're so lucky as to
have any. The races begin next week and there 'll be a tremendous crowd.
All the grand-ducal people are coming. Miss Evers wanted awfully to see
the Grand Duke, and I promised her an introduction. I can't make out
what Mrs. Vivian is up to. I bet you a ten-pound note she 's giving
chase. Our friend Wright has come back and gone off again, and Mrs.
Vivian means to strike camp and follow. She 'll pot him yet; you see if
she does n't!"

"She is running away from you, dangerous man!" said Bernard.

"Do you mean on account of Miss Evers? Well, I admire Miss Evers--I
don't mind admitting that; but I ain't dangerous," said Captain
Lovelock, with a lustreless eye. "How can a fellow be dangerous when he
has n't ten shillings in his pocket? Desperation, do you call it? But
Miss Evers has n't money, so far as I have heard. I don't ask you,"
Lovelock continued--"I don't care a damn whether she has or not. She 's
a devilish charming girl, and I don't mind telling you I 'm hit. I stand
no chance--I know I stand no chance. Mrs. Vivian 's down on me, and, by
Jove, Mrs. Vivian 's right. I 'm not the husband to pick out for a young
woman of expensive habits and no expectations. Gordon Wright's the sort
of young man that 's wanted, and, hang me, if Mrs. Vivian did n't want
him so much for her own daughter, I believe she 'd try and bag him for
the little one. Gad, I believe that to keep me off she would like to
cut him in two and give half to each of them! I 'm afraid of that little
woman. She has got a little voice like a screw-driver. But for all that,
if I could get away from this cursed place, I would keep the girl in
sight--hang me if I would n't! I 'd cut the races--dash me if I would
n't! But I 'm in pawn, if you know what that means. I owe a beastly lot
of money at the inn, and that impudent little beggar of a landlord won't
let me out of his sight. The luck 's dead against me at those filthy
tables; I have n't won a farthing in three weeks. I wrote to my brother
the other day, and this morning I got an answer from him--a cursed,
canting letter of good advice, remarking that he had already paid my
debts seven times. It does n't happen to be seven; it 's only six, or
six and a half! Does he expect me to spend the rest of my life at the
Hotel de Hollande? Perhaps he would like me to engage as a waiter there
and pay it off by serving at the table d'hote. It would be convenient
for him the next time he comes abroad with his seven daughters and two
governesses. I hate the smell of their beastly table d'hote! You 're
sorry I 'm hard up? I 'm sure I 'm much obliged to you. Can you be of
any service? My dear fellow, if you are bent on throwing your money
about the place I 'm not the man to stop you." Bernard's winnings of the
previous night were burning a hole, as the phrase is, in his pocket. Ten
thousand francs had never before seemed to him so heavy a load to carry,
and to lighten the weight of his good luck by lending fifty pounds to
a less fortunate fellow-player was an operation that not only gratified
his good-nature but strongly commended itself to his conscience.
His conscience, however, made its conditions. "My dear Longueville,"
Lovelock went on, "I have always gone in for family feeling, early
associations, and all that sort of thing. That 's what made me confide
my difficulties to Dovedale. But, upon my honor, you remind me of the
good Samaritan, or that sort of person; you are fonder of me than my own
brother! I 'll take fifty pounds with pleasure, thank you, and you
shall have them again--at the earliest opportunity. My earliest
convenience--will that do? Damn it, it is a convenience, is n't it? You
make your conditions. My dear fellow, I accept them in advance. That
I 'm not to follow up Miss Evers--is that what you mean? Have you been
commissioned by the family to buy me off? It 's devilish cruel to take
advantage of my poverty! Though I 'm poor, I 'm honest. But I am honest,
my dear Longueville; that 's the point. I 'll give you my word, and I
'll keep it. I won't go near that girl again--I won't think of her till
I 've got rid of your fifty pounds. It 's a dreadful encouragement to
extravagance, but that 's your lookout. I 'll stop for their beastly
races and the young lady shall be sacred."

Longueville called the next morning at Mrs. Vivian's, and learned that
the three ladies had left Baden by the early train, a couple of hours
before. This fact produced in his mind a variety of emotions--surprise,
annoyance, embarrassment. In spite of his effort to think it natural
they should go, he found something precipitate and inexplicable in the
manner of their going, and he declared to himself that one of the party,
at least, had been unkind and ungracious in not giving him a chance
to say good-bye. He took refuge by anticipation, as it were, in this
reflection, whenever, for the next three or four days, he foresaw
himself stopping short, as he had done before, and asking himself
whether he had done an injury to Angela Vivian. This was an idle and
unpractical question, inasmuch as the answer was not forthcoming;
whereas it was quite simple and conclusive to say, without the note
of interrogation, that she was, in spite of many attractive points,
an abrupt and capricious young woman. During the three or four days in
question, Bernard lingered on at Baden, uncertain what to do or where
to go, feeling as if he had received a sudden check--a sort of spiritual
snub--which arrested the accumulation of motive. Lovelock, also, whom
Bernard saw every day, appeared to think that destiny had given him
a slap in the face, for he had not enjoyed the satisfaction of a last
interview with Miss Evers.

"I thought she might have written me a note," said the Captain; "but it
appears she does n't write. Some girls don't write, you know."

Bernard remarked that it was possible Lovelock would still have news of
Miss Blanche; and before he left Baden he learned that she had addressed
her forsaken swain a charming little note from Lausanne, where the three
ladies had paused in their flight from Baden, and where Mrs. Vivian had
decreed that for the present they should remain.

"I 'm devilish glad she writes," said Captain Lovelock; "some girls do
write, you know."

Blanche found Lausanne most horrid after Baden, for whose delights she
languished. The delights of Baden, however, were not obvious just now to
her correspondent, who had taken Bernard's fifty pounds into the Kursaal
and left them there. Bernard, on learning his misfortune, lent him
another fifty, with which he performed a second series of unsuccessful
experiments; and our hero was not at his ease until he had passed over
to his luckless friend the whole amount of his own winnings, every penny
of which found its way through Captain Lovelock's fingers back into the
bank. When this operation was completed, Bernard left Baden, the Captain
gloomily accompanying him to the station.

I have said that there had come over Bernard a singular sense of
freedom. One of the uses he made of his freedom was to undertake a long
journey. He went to the East and remained absent from Europe for upward
of two years--a period of his life of which it is not proposed to
offer a complete history. The East is a wonderful region, and Bernard,
investigating the mysteries of Asia, saw a great many curious and
beautiful things. He had moments of keen enjoyment; he laid up a great
store of impressions and even a considerable sum of knowledge. But,
nevertheless, he was not destined to look back upon this episode with
any particular complacency. It was less delightful than it was supposed
to be; it was less successful than it might have been. By what unnatural
element the cup of pleasure was adulterated, he would have been very
much at a loss to say; but it was an incontestable fact that at times he
sipped it as a medicine, rather than quaffed it as a nectar. When people
congratulated him on his opportunity of seeing the world, and said they
envied him the privilege of seeing it so well, he felt even more than
the usual degree of irritation produced by an insinuation that fortune
thinks so poorly of us as to give us easy terms. Misplaced sympathy is
the least available of superfluities, and Bernard at this time found
himself thinking that there was a good deal of impertinence in the
world. He would, however, readily have confessed that, in so far as he
failed to enjoy his Oriental wanderings, the fault was his own; though
he would have made mentally the gratifying reflection that never was
a fault less deliberate. If, during the period of which I speak, his
natural gayety had sunk to a minor key, a partial explanation may
be found in the fact that he was deprived of the society of his late
companion. It was an odd circumstance that the two young men had not met
since Gordon's abrupt departure from Baden. Gordon went to Berlin, and
shortly afterward to America, so that they were on opposite sides of the
globe. Before he returned to his own country, Bernard made by letter two
or three offers to join him in Europe, anywhere that was agreeable to
him. Gordon answered that his movements were very uncertain, and that he
should be sorry to trouble Bernard to follow him about. He had put him
to this inconvenience in making him travel from Venice to Baden, and
one such favor at a time was enough to ask, even of the most obliging of
men. Bernard was, of course, afraid that what he had told Gordon about
Angela Vivian was really the cause of a state of things which, as
between two such good friends, wore a perceptible resemblance to
alienation. Gordon had given her up; but he bore Bernard a grudge for
speaking ill of her, and so long as this disagreeable impression should
last, he preferred not to see him. Bernard was frank enough to charge
the poor fellow with a lingering rancor, of which he made, indeed, no
great crime. But Gordon denied the allegation, and assured him that,
to his own perception, there was no decline in their intimacy. He only
requested, as a favor and as a tribute to "just susceptibilities,"
that Bernard would allude no more either to Miss Vivian or to what had
happened at Baden. This request was easy to comply with, and Bernard, in
writing, strictly conformed to it; but it seemed to him that the act of
doing so was in itself a cooling-off. What would be a better proof of
what is called a "tension" than an agreement to avoid a natural topic?
Bernard moralized a little over Gordon's "just susceptibilities," and
felt that the existence of a perverse resentment in so honest a nature
was a fact gained to his acquaintance with psychological science. It
cannot be said, however, that he suffered this fact to occupy at all
times the foreground of his consciousness. Bernard was like some great
painters; his foregrounds were very happily arranged. He heard nothing
of Mrs. Vivian and her daughter, beyond a rumor that they had gone to
Italy; and he learned, on apparently good authority, that Blanche Evers
had returned to New York with her mother. He wondered whether Captain
Lovelock was still in pawn at the Hotel de Hollande. If he did not allow
himself to wonder too curiously whether he had done a harm to Gordon,
it may be affirmed that he was haunted by the recurrence of that other
question, of which mention has already been made. Had he done a harm to
Angela Vivian, and did she know that he had done it? This inquiry by no
means made him miserable, and it was far from awaiting him regularly
on his pillow. But it visited him at intervals, and sometimes in the
strangest places--suddenly, abruptly, in the stillness of an Indian
temple, or amid the shrillness of an Oriental crowd. He became familiar
with it at last; he called it his Jack-in-the-box. Some invisible touch
of circumstance would press the spring, and the little image would
pop up, staring him in the face and grinning an interrogation. Bernard
always clapped down the lid, for he regarded this phenomenon as
strikingly inane. But if it was more frequent than any pang of
conscience connected with the remembrance of Gordon himself, this last
sentiment was certainly lively enough to make it a great relief to hear
at last a rumor that the excellent fellow was about to be married. The
rumor reached him at Athens; it was vague and indirect, and it omitted
the name of his betrothed. But Bernard made the most of it, and took
comfort in the thought that his friend had recovered his spirits and his
appetite for matrimony.






CHAPTER XVI

It was not till our hero reached Paris, on his return from the distant
East, that the rumor I have just mentioned acquired an appreciable
consistency. Here, indeed, it took the shape of authentic information.
Among a number of delayed letters which had been awaiting him at
his banker's he found a communication from Gordon Wright. During
the previous year or two his correspondence with this trusted--and
trusting--friend had not been frequent, and Bernard had received little
direct news of him. Three or four short letters had overtaken him in his
wanderings--letters as cordial, to all appearance, if not as voluminous,
as the punctual missives of an earlier time. Bernard made a point of
satisfying himself that they were as cordial; he weighed them in the
scales of impartial suspicion. It seemed to him on the whole that there
was no relaxation of Gordon's epistolary tone. If he wrote less often
than he used to do, that was a thing that very commonly happened as men
grew older. The closest intimacies, moreover, had phases and seasons,
intermissions and revivals, and even if his friend had, in fact, averted
his countenance from him, this was simply the accomplishment of a
periodical revolution which would bring them in due order face to face
again. Bernard made a point, himself, of writing tolerably often
and writing always in the friendliest tone. He made it a matter of
conscience--he liked to feel that he was treating Gordon generously,
and not demanding an eye for an eye. The letter he found in Paris was so
short that I may give it entire.

"My dear Bernard (it ran), I must write to you before I write to any
one else, though unfortunately you are so far away that you can't be the
first to congratulate me. Try and not be the last, however. I am going
to be married--as soon as possible. You know the young lady, so you can
appreciate the situation. Do you remember little Blanche Evers, whom we
used to see three years ago at Baden-Baden? Of course you remember
her, for I know you used often to talk with her. You will be rather
surprised, perhaps, at my having selected her as the partner of a
life-time; but we manage these matters according to our lights. I am
very much in love with her, and I hold that an excellent reason. I have
been ready any time this year or two to fall in love with some simple,
trusting, child-like nature. I find this in perfection in this charming
young girl. I find her so natural and fresh. I remember telling you
once that I did n't wish to be fascinated--that I wanted to estimate
scientifically the woman I should marry. I have altogether got over
that, and I don't know how I ever came to talk such nonsense. I am
fascinated now, and I assure you I like it! The best of it is that I
find it does n't in the least prevent my estimating Blanche. I judge her
very fairly--I see just what she is. She 's simple--that 's what I want;
she 's tender--that 's what I long for. You will remember how pretty she
is; I need n't remind you of that. She was much younger then, and she
has greatly developed and improved in these two or three years. But she
will always be young and innocent--I don't want her to improve too much.
She came back to America with her mother the winter after we met her at
Baden, but I never saw her again till three months ago. Then I saw her
with new eyes, and I wondered I could have been so blind. But I was n't
ready for her till then, and what makes me so happy now is to know that
I have come to my present way of feeling by experience. That gives me
confidence--you see I am a reasoner still. But I am under the charm, for
all my reason. We are to be married in a month--try and come back to the
wedding. Blanche sends you a message, which I will give you verbatim.
'Tell him I am not such a silly little chatterbox as I used to be at
Baden. I am a great deal wiser; I am almost as clever as Angela Vivian.'
She has an idea you thought Miss Vivian very clever--but it is not true
that she is equally so. I am very happy; come home and see."

Bernard went home, but he was not able to reach the United States in
time for Gordon's wedding, which took place at midsummer. Bernard,
arriving late in the autumn, found his friend a married man of some
months' standing, and was able to judge, according to his invitation,
whether he appeared happy. The first effect of the letter I have just
quoted had been an immense surprise; the second had been a series
of reflections which were quite the negative of surprise; and these
operations of Bernard's mind had finally merged themselves in a simple
sentiment of jollity. He was delighted that Gordon should be married; he
felt jovial about it; he was almost indifferent to the question of whom
he had chosen. Certainly, at first, the choice of Blanche Evers seemed
highly incongruous; it was difficult to imagine a young woman less
shaped to minister to Gordon's strenuous needs than the light-hearted
and empty-headed little flirt whose inconsequent prattle had remained
for Bernard one of the least importunate memories of a charming time.
Blanche Evers was a pretty little goose--the prettiest of little geese,
perhaps, and doubtless the most amiable; but she was not a companion for
a peculiarly serious man, who would like his wife to share his view
of human responsibilities. What a singular selection--what a queer
infatuation! Bernard had no sooner committed himself to this line of
criticism than he stopped short, with the sudden consciousness of error
carried almost to the point of naivetae. He exclaimed that Blanche Evers
was exactly the sort of girl that men of Gordon Wright's stamp always
ended by falling in love with, and that poor Gordon knew very much
better what he was about in this case than he had done in trying to
solve the deep problem of a comfortable life with Angela Vivian. This
was what your strong, solid, sensible fellows always came to; they paid,
in this particular, a larger tribute to pure fancy than the people who
were supposed habitually to cultivate that muse. Blanche Evers was what
the French call an article of fantasy, and Gordon had taken a pleasure
in finding her deliciously useless. He cultivated utility in other ways,
and it pleased and flattered him to feel that he could afford, morally
speaking, to have a kittenish wife. He had within himself a fund of
common sense to draw upon, so that to espouse a paragon of wisdom would
be but to carry water to the fountain. He could easily make up for the
deficiencies of a wife who was a little silly, and if she charmed and
amused him, he could treat himself to the luxury of these sensations for
themselves. He was not in the least afraid of being ruined by it, and if
Blanche's birdlike chatter and turns of the head had made a fool of him,
he knew it perfectly well, and simply took his stand upon his rights.
Every man has a right to a little flower-bed, and life is not all mere
kitchen-gardening. Bernard rapidly extemporized this rough explanation
of the surprise his friend had offered him, and he found it
all-sufficient for his immediate needs. He wrote Blanche a charming
note, to which she replied with a great deal of spirit and grace. Her
little letter was very prettily turned, and Bernard, reading it over two
or three times, said to himself that, to do her justice, she might very
well have polished her intellect a trifle during these two or three
years. As she was older, she could hardly help being wiser. It even
occurred to Bernard that she might have profited by the sort of
experience that is known as the discipline of suffering. What had become
of Captain Lovelock and that tender passion which was apparently none
the less genuine for having been expressed in the slang of a humorous
period? Had they been permanently separated by judicious guardians, and
had she been obliged to obliterate his image from her lightly-beating
little heart? Bernard had felt sure at Baden that, beneath her
contemptuous airs and that impertinent consciousness of the difficulties
of conquest by which a pretty American girl attests her allegiance to a
civilization in which young women occupy the highest place--he had felt
sure that Blanche had a high appreciation of her handsome Englishman,
and that if Lovelock should continue to relish her charms, he might
count upon the advantages of reciprocity. But it occurred to Bernard
that Captain Lovelock had perhaps been faithless; that, at least, the
discourtesy of chance and the inhumanity of an elder brother might have
kept him an eternal prisoner at the Hotel de Hollande (where, for
all Bernard knew to the contrary, he had been obliged to work out his
destiny in the arduous character of a polyglot waiter); so that the poor
young girl, casting backward glances along the path of Mrs. Vivian's
retreat, and failing to detect the onward rush of a rescuing cavalier,
had perforce believed herself forsaken, and had been obliged to summon
philosophy to her aid. It was very possible that her philosophic studies
had taught her the art of reflection; and that, as she would have said
herself, she was tremendously toned down. Once, at Baden, when Gordon
Wright happened to take upon himself to remark that little Miss Evers
was bored by her English gallant, Bernard had ventured to observe,
in petto, that Gordon knew nothing about it. But all this was of no
consequence now, and Bernard steered further and further away from the
liability to detect fallacies in his friend. Gordon had engaged himself
to marry, and our critical hero had not a grain of fault to find with
this resolution. It was a capital thing; it was just what he wanted; it
would do him a world of good. Bernard rejoiced with him sincerely, and
regretted extremely that a series of solemn engagements to pay visits in
England should prevent his being present at the nuptials.

They were well over, as I have said, when he reached New York. The
honeymoon had waned, and the business of married life had begun.
Bernard, at the end, had sailed from England rather abruptly. A friend
who had a remarkably good cabin on one of the steamers was obliged by a
sudden detention to give it up, and on his offering it to Longueville,
the latter availed himself gratefully of this opportunity of being a
little less discomposed than usual by the Atlantic billows. He therefore
embarked at two days' notice, a fortnight earlier than he had intended
and than he had written to Gordon to expect him. Gordon, of course, had
written that he was to seek no hospitality but that which Blanche was
now prepared--they had a charming house--so graciously to dispense;
but Bernard, nevertheless, leaving the ship early in the morning, had
betaken himself to an hotel. He wished not to anticipate his welcome,
and he determined to report himself to Gordon first and to come back
with his luggage later in the day. After purifying himself of his
sea-stains, he left his hotel and walked up the Fifth Avenue with all
a newly-landed voyager's enjoyment of terrestrial locomotion. It was a
charming autumn day; there was a golden haze in the air; he supposed
it was the Indian summer. The broad sidewalk of the Fifth Avenue was
scattered over with dry leaves--crimson and orange and amber. He tossed
them with his stick as he passed; they rustled and murmured with the
motion, and it reminded him of the way he used to kick them in front of
him over these same pavements in his riotous infancy. It was a pleasure,
after many wanderings, to find himself in his native land again,
and Bernard Longueville, as he went, paid his compliments to his
mother-city. The brightness and gayety of the place seemed a greeting to
a returning son, and he felt a throb of affection for the freshest,
the youngest, the easiest and most good-natured of great capitals. On
presenting himself at Gordon's door, Bernard was told that the master of
the house was not at home; he went in, however, to see the mistress.
She was in her drawing-room, alone; she had on her bonnet, as if she had
been going out. She gave him a joyous, demonstrative little welcome; she
was evidently very glad to see him. Bernard had thought it possible she
had "improved," and she was certainly prettier than ever. He instantly
perceived that she was still a chatterbox; it remained to be seen
whether the quality of her discourse were finer.

"Well, Mr. Longueville," she exclaimed, "where in the world did you drop
from, and how long did it take you to cross the Atlantic? Three days,
eh? It could n't have taken you many more, for it was only the other day
that Gordon told me you were not to sail till the 20th. You changed
your mind, eh? I did n't know you ever changed your mind. Gordon never
changes his. That 's not a reason, eh, because you are not a bit like
Gordon. Well, I never thought you were, except that you are a man. Now
what are you laughing at? What should you like me call you? You are a
man, I suppose; you are not a god. That 's what you would like me
to call you, I have no doubt. I must keep that for Gordon? I shall
certainly keep it a good while. I know a good deal more about gentlemen
than I did when I last saw you, and I assure you I don't think they
are a bit god-like. I suppose that 's why you always drop down from the
sky--you think it 's more divine. I remember that 's the way you arrived
at Baden when we were there together; the first thing we knew, you
were standing in the midst of us. Do you remember that evening when you
presented yourself? You came up and touched Gordon on the shoulder, and
he gave a little jump. He will give another little jump when he sees you
to-day. He gives a great many little jumps; I keep him skipping about!
I remember perfectly the way we were sitting that evening at Baden, and
the way you looked at me when you came up. I saw you before Gordon--I
see a good many things before Gordon. What did you look at me that way
for? I always meant to ask you. I was dying to know."

"For the simplest reason in the world," said Bernard. "Because you were
so pretty."

"Ah no, it was n't that! I know all about that look. It was something
else--as if you knew something about me. I don't know what you can
have known. There was very little to know about me, except that I was
intensely silly. Really, I was awfully silly that summer at Baden--you
would n't believe how silly I was. But I don't see how you could
have known that--before you had spoken to me. It came out in
my conversation--it came out awfully. My mother was a good deal
disappointed in Mrs. Vivian's influence; she had expected so much from
it. But it was not poor Mrs. Vivian's fault, it was some one's else.
Have you ever seen the Vivians again? They are always in Europe; they
have gone to live in Paris. That evening when you came up and spoke to
Gordon, I never thought that three years afterward I should be married
to him, and I don't suppose you did either. Is that what you meant by
looking at me? Perhaps you can tell the future. I wish you would tell my
future!"

"Oh, I can tell that easily," said Bernard.

"What will happen to me?"

"Nothing particular; it will be a little dull--the perfect happiness of
a charming woman married to the best fellow in the world."

"Ah, what a horrid future!" cried Blanche, with a little petulant cry.
"I want to be happy, but I certainly don't want to be dull. If you say
that again you will make me repent of having married the best fellow in
the world. I mean to be happy, but I certainly shall not be dull if I
can help it."

"I was wrong to say that," said Bernard, "because, after all, my dear
young lady, there must be an excitement in having so kind a husband
as you have got. Gordon's devotion is quite capable of taking a new
form--of inventing a new kindness--every day in the year."

Blanche looked at him an instant, with less than her usual consciousness
of her momentary pose.

"My husband is very kind," she said gently.

She had hardly spoken the words when Gordon came in. He stopped a moment
on seeing Bernard, glanced at his wife, blushed, flushed, and with a
loud, frank exclamation of pleasure, grasped his friend by both hands.
It was so long since he had seen Bernard that he seemed a good deal
moved; he stood there smiling, clasping his hands, looking him in
the eyes, unable for some moments to speak. Bernard, on his side, was
greatly pleased; it was delightful to him to look into Gordon's honest
face again and to return his manly grasp. And he looked well--he looked
happy; to see that was more delightful yet. During these few instants,
while they exchanged a silent pledge of renewed friendship, Bernard's
elastic perception embraced several things besides the consciousness of
his own pleasure. He saw that Gordon looked well and happy, but that he
looked older, too, and more serious, more marked by life. He looked as
if something had happened to him--as, in fact, something had. Bernard
saw a latent spark in his friend's eye that seemed to question his
own for an impression of Blanche--to question it eagerly, and yet
to deprecate judgment. He saw, too--with the fact made more vivid by
Gordon's standing there beside her in his manly sincerity and throwing
it into contrast--that Blanche was the same little posturing coquette of
a Blanche whom, at Baden, he would have treated it as a broad joke that
Gordon Wright should dream of marrying. He saw, in a word, that it was
what it had first struck him as being--an incongruous union. All this
was a good deal for Bernard to see in the course of half a minute,
especially through the rather opaque medium of a feeling of irreflective
joy; and his impressions at this moment have a value only in so far as
they were destined to be confirmed by larger opportunity.

"You have come a little sooner than we expected," said Gordon; "but you
are all the more welcome."

"It was rather a risk," Blanche observed. "One should be notified, when
one wishes to make a good impression."

"Ah, my dear lady," said Bernard, "you made your impression--as far as I
am concerned--a long time ago, and I doubt whether it would have gained
anything to-day by your having prepared an effect."

They were standing before the fire-place, on the great hearth-rug, and
Blanche, while she listened to this speech, was feeling, with uplifted
arm, for a curl that had strayed from her chignon.

"She prepares her effects very quickly," said Gordon, laughing gently.
"They follow each other very fast!"

Blanche kept her hand behind her head, which was bent slightly forward;
her bare arm emerged from her hanging sleeve, and, with her eyes
glancing upward from under her lowered brows, she smiled at her two
spectators. Her husband laid his hand on Bernard's arm.

"Is n't she pretty?" he cried; and he spoke with a sort of tender
delight in being sure at least of this point.

"Tremendously pretty!" said Bernard. "I told her so half an hour before
you came in."

"Ah, it was time I should arrive!" Gordon exclaimed.

Blanche was manifestly not in the least discomposed by this frank
discussion of her charms, for the air of distinguished esteem adopted by
both of her companions diminished the crudity of their remarks. But
she gave a little pout of irritated modesty--it was more becoming than
anything she had done yet--and declared that if they wished to talk her
over, they were very welcome; but she should prefer their waiting till
she got out of the room. So she left them, reminding Bernard that he
was to send for his luggage and remain, and promising to give immediate
orders for the preparation of his apartment. Bernard opened the door for
her to pass out; she gave him a charming nod as he stood there, and
he turned back to Gordon with the reflection of her smile in his face.
Gordon was watching him; Gordon was dying to know what he thought of
her. It was a curious mania of Gordon's, this wanting to know what one
thought of the women he loved; but Bernard just now felt abundantly able
to humor it. He was so pleased at seeing him tightly married.

"She 's a delightful creature," Bernard said, with cordial vagueness,
shaking hands with his friend again.

Gordon glanced at him a moment, and then, coloring a little, looked
straight out of the window; whereupon Bernard remembered that these were
just the terms in which, at Baden, after his companion's absence, he
had attempted to qualify Angela Vivian. Gordon was conscious--he was
conscious of the oddity of his situation.

"Of course it surprised you," he said, in a moment, still looking out of
the window.

"What, my dear fellow?"

"My marriage."

"Well, you know," said Bernard, "everything surprises me. I am of a very
conjectural habit of mind. All sorts of ideas come into my head, and yet
when the simplest things happen I am always rather startled. I live in a
reverie, and I am perpetually waked up by people doing things."

Gordon transferred his eyes from the window to Bernard's face--to his
whole person.

"You are waked up? But you fall asleep again!"

"I fall asleep very easily," said Bernard.

Gordon looked at him from head to foot, smiling and shaking his head.

"You are not changed," he said. "You have travelled in unknown lands;
you have had, I suppose, all sorts of adventures; but you are the same
man I used to know."

"I am sorry for that!"

"You have the same way of representing--of misrepresenting, yourself."

"Well, if I am not changed," said Bernard, "I can ill afford to lose so
valuable an art."

"Taking you altogether, I am glad you are the same," Gordon answered,
simply; "but you must come into my part of the house."






CHAPTER XVII

Yes, he was conscious--he was very conscious; so Bernard reflected
during the two or three first days of his visit to his friend. Gordon
knew it must seem strange to so irreverent a critic that a man who had
once aspired to the hand of so intelligent a girl--putting other things
aside--as Angela Vivian should, as the Ghost in "Hamlet" says, have
"declined upon" a young lady who, in force of understanding, was so very
much Miss Vivian's inferior; and this knowledge kept him ill at his
ease and gave him a certain pitiable awkwardness. Bernard's sense of
the anomaly grew rapidly less acute; he made various observations which
helped it to seem natural. Blanche was wonderfully pretty; she was very
graceful, innocent, amusing. Since Gordon had determined to marry a
little goose, he had chosen the animal with extreme discernment. It had
quite the plumage of a swan, and it sailed along the stream of life with
an extraordinary lightness of motion. He asked himself indeed at times
whether Blanche were really so silly as she seemed; he doubted whether
any woman could be so silly as Blanche seemed. He had a suspicion at
times that, for ends of her own, she was playing a part--the suspicion
arising from the fact that, as usually happens in such cases, she
over-played it. Her empty chatter, her futility, her childish coquetry
and frivolity--such light wares could hardly be the whole substance of
any woman's being; there was something beneath them which Blanche was
keeping out of sight. She had a scrap of a mind somewhere, and even a
little particle of a heart. If one looked long enough one might catch a
glimpse of these possessions. But why should she keep them out of sight,
and what were the ends that she proposed to serve by this uncomfortable
perversity? Bernard wondered whether she were fond of her husband, and
he heard it intimated by several good people in New York who had had
some observation of the courtship, that she had married him for his
money. He was very sorry to find that this was taken for granted, and he
determined, on the whole, not to believe it. He was disgusted with the
idea of such a want of gratitude; for, if Gordon Wright had loved Miss
Evers for herself, the young lady might certainly have discovered the
intrinsic value of so disinterested a suitor. Her mother had the credit
of having made the match. Gordon was known to be looking for a wife;
Mrs. Evers had put her little feather-head of a daughter very much
forward, and Gordon was as easily captivated as a child by the sound of
a rattle. Blanche had an affection for him now, however; Bernard saw no
reason to doubt that, and certainly she would have been a very flimsy
creature indeed if she had not been touched by his inexhaustible
kindness. She had every conceivable indulgence, and if she married him
for his money, at least she had got what she wanted. She led the most
agreeable life conceivable, and she ought to be in high good-humor.
It was impossible to have a prettier house, a prettier carriage, more
jewels and laces for the adornment of a plump little person. It was
impossible to go to more parties, to give better dinners, to have fewer
privations or annoyances. Bernard was so much struck with all this that,
advancing rapidly in the intimacy of his gracious hostess, he ventured
to call her attention to her blessings. She answered that she was
perfectly aware of them, and there was no pretty speech she was not
prepared to make about Gordon.

"I know what you want to say," she went on; "you want to say that he
spoils me, and I don't see why you should hesitate. You generally say
everything you want, and you need n't be afraid of me. He does n't spoil
me, simply because I am so bad I can't be spoiled; but that 's of no
consequence. I was spoiled ages ago; every one spoiled me--every one
except Mrs. Vivian. I was always fond of having everything I want, and I
generally managed to get it. I always had lovely clothes; mamma thought
that was a kind of a duty. If it was a duty, I don't suppose it counts
as a part of the spoiling. But I was very much indulged, and I know I
have everything now. Gordon is a perfect husband; I believe if I were
to ask him for a present of his nose, he would cut it off and give it
to me. I think I will ask him for a small piece of it some day; it
will rather improve him to have an inch or two less. I don't say he 's
handsome; but he 's just as good as he can be. Some people say that
if you are very fond of a person you always think them handsome; but I
don't agree with that at all. I am very fond of Gordon, and yet I am
not blinded by affection, as regards his personal appearance. He 's too
light for my taste, and too red. And because you think people handsome,
it does n't follow that you are fond of them. I used to have a friend
who was awfully handsome--the handsomest man I ever saw--and I was
perfectly conscious of his defects. But I 'm not conscious of Gordon's,
and I don't believe he has got any. He 's so intensely kind; it 's quite
pathetic. One would think he had done me an injury in marrying me, and
that he wanted to make up for it. If he has done me an injury I have n't
discovered it yet, and I don't believe I ever shall. I certainly shall
not as long as he lets me order all the clothes I want. I have ordered
five dresses this week, and I mean to order two more. When I told
Gordon, what do you think he did? He simply kissed me. Well, if that 's
not expressive, I don't know what he could have done. He kisses me about
seventeen times a day. I suppose it 's very improper for a woman to tell
any one how often her husband kisses her; but, as you happen to have
seen him do it, I don't suppose you will be scandalized. I know you are
not easily scandalized; I am not afraid of you. You are scandalized at
my getting so many dresses? Well, I told you I was spoiled--I freely
acknowledge it. That 's why I was afraid to tell Gordon--because when I
was married I had such a lot of things; I was supposed to have dresses
enough to last for a year. But Gordon had n't to pay for them, so there
was no harm in my letting him feel that he has a wife. If he thinks I am
extravagant, he can easily stop kissing me. You don't think it would be
easy to stop? It 's very well, then, for those that have never begun!"

Bernard had a good deal of conversation with Blanche, of which, so far
as she was concerned, the foregoing remarks may serve as a specimen.
Gordon was away from home during much of the day; he had a chemical
laboratory in which he was greatly interested, and which he took Bernard
to see; it was fitted up with the latest contrivances for the pursuit
of experimental science, and was the resort of needy young students,
who enjoyed, at Gordon's expense, the opportunity for pushing their
researches. The place did great honor to Gordon's liberality and to his
ingenuity; but Blanche, who had also paid it a visit, could never speak
of it without a pretty little shudder.

"Nothing would induce me to go there again," she declared, "and I
consider myself very fortunate to have escaped from it with my life. It
's filled with all sorts of horrible things, that fizzle up and go off,
or that make you turn some dreadful color if you look at them. I expect
to hear a great clap some day, and half an hour afterward to see Gordon
brought home in several hundred small pieces, put up in a dozen little
bottles. I got a horrid little stain in the middle of my dress that one
of the young men--the young savants--was so good as to drop there. Did
you see the young savants who work under Gordon's orders? I thought they
were too forlorn; there is n't one of them you would look at. If you can
believe it, there was n't one of them that looked at me; they took no
more notice of me than if I had been the charwoman. They might have
shown me some attention, at least, as the wife of the proprietor. What
is it that Gordon 's called--is n't there some other name? If you say
'proprietor,' it sounds as if he kept an hotel. I certainly don't want
to pass for the wife of an hotel-keeper. What does he call himself? He
must have some name. I hate telling people he 's a chemist; it sounds
just as if he kept a shop. That 's what they call the druggists in
England, and I formed the habit while I was there. It makes me feel
as if he were some dreadful little man, with big green bottles in
the window and 'night-bell' painted outside. He does n't call himself
anything? Well, that 's exactly like Gordon! I wonder he consents to
have a name at all. When I was telling some one about the young men who
work under his orders--the young savants--he said I must not say that--I
must not speak of their working 'under his orders.' I don't know what he
would like me to say! Under his inspiration!"

During the hours of Gordon's absence, Bernard had frequent colloquies
with his friend's wife, whose irresponsible prattle amused him, and in
whom he tried to discover some faculty, some quality, which might be a
positive guarantee of Gordon's future felicity. But often, of course,
Gordon was an auditor as well; I say an auditor, because it seemed
to Bernard that he had grown to be less of a talker than of yore.
Doubtless, when a man finds himself united to a garrulous wife, he
naturally learns to hold his tongue; but sometimes, at the close of one
of Blanche's discursive monologues, on glancing at her husband just to
see how he took it, and seeing him sit perfectly silent, with a fixed,
inexpressive smile, Bernard said to himself that Gordon found the lesson
of listening attended with some embarrassments. Gordon, as the years
went by, was growing a little inscrutable; but this, too, in certain
circumstances, was a usual tendency. The operations of the mind, with
deepening experience, became more complex, and people were less apt to
emit immature reflections at forty than they had been in their earlier
days. Bernard felt a great kindness in these days for his old friend; he
never yet had seemed to him such a good fellow, nor appealed so strongly
to the benevolence of his disposition. Sometimes, of old, Gordon used to
irritate him; but this danger appeared completely to have passed away.
Bernard prolonged his visit; it gave him pleasure to be able to testify
in this manner to his good will. Gordon was the kindest of hosts, and
if in conversation, when his wife was present, he gave precedence to
her superior powers, he had at other times a good deal of pleasant
bachelor-talk with his guest. He seemed very happy; he had plenty of
occupation and plenty of practical intentions. The season went on, and
Bernard enjoyed his life. He enjoyed the keen and brilliant American
winter, and he found it very pleasant to be treated as a distinguished
stranger in his own land--a situation to which his long and repeated
absences had relegated him. The hospitality of New York was profuse;
the charm of its daughters extreme; the radiance of its skies superb.
Bernard was the restless and professionless mortal that we know,
wandering in life from one vague experiment to another, constantly
gratified and never satisfied, to whom no imperious finality had as yet
presented itself; and, nevertheless, for a time he contrived to limit
his horizon to the passing hour, and to make a good many hours pass in
the drawing-room of a demonstrative flirt.

For Mrs. Gordon was a flirt; that had become tolerably obvious. Bernard
had known of old that Blanche Evers was one, and two or three months'
observation of his friend's wife assured him that she did not judge
a certain ethereal coquetry to be inconsistent with the conjugal
character. Blanche flirted, in fact, more or less with all men, but
her opportunity for playing her harmless batteries upon Bernard were of
course exceptionally large. The poor fellow was perpetually under fire,
and it was inevitable that he should reply with some precision of aim.
It seemed to him all child's play, and it is certain that when his back
was turned to his pretty hostess he never found himself thinking of
her. He had not the least reason to suppose that she thought of
him--excessive concentration of mind was the last vice of which he
accused her. But before the winter was over, he discovered that Mrs.
Gordon Wright was being talked about, and that his own name was, as the
newspapers say, mentioned in connection with that of his friend's wife.
The discovery greatly disgusted him; Bernard Longueville's chronicler
must do him the justice to say that it failed to yield him an even
transient thrill of pleasure. He thought it very improbable that this
vulgar rumor had reached Gordon's ears; but he nevertheless--very
naturally--instantly made up his mind to leave the house. He lost
no time in saying to Gordon that he had suddenly determined to go to
California, and that he was sure he must be glad to get rid of him.
Gordon expressed no surprise and no regret. He simply laid his hand on
his shoulder and said, very quietly, looking at him in the eyes--

"Very well; the pleasantest things must come to an end."

It was not till an hour afterwards that Bernard said to himself that his
friend's manner of receiving the announcement of his departure had been
rather odd. He had neither said a word about his staying longer nor
urged him to come back again, and there had been (it now seemed to
Bernard) an audible undertone of relief in the single sentence with
which he assented to his visitor's withdrawal. Could it be possible that
poor Gordon was jealous of him, that he had heard this loathsome gossip,
or that his own observation had given him an alarm? He had certainly
never betrayed the smallest sense of injury; but it was to be remembered
that even if he were uneasy, Gordon was quite capable, with his
characteristic habit of weighing everything, his own honor included, in
scrupulously adjusted scales, of denying himself the luxury of active
suspicion. He would never have let a half suspicion make a difference
in his conduct, and he would not have dissimulated; he would simply have
resisted belief. His hospitality had been without a flaw, and if he
had really been wishing Bernard out of his house, he had behaved with
admirable self-control. Bernard, however, followed this train of thought
a very short distance. It was odious to him to believe that he could
have appeared to Gordon, however guiltlessly, to have invaded even in
imagination the mystic line of the marital monopoly; not to say that,
moreover, if one came to that, he really cared about as much for poor
little Blanche as for the weather-cock on the nearest steeple. He simply
hurried his preparations for departure, and he told Blanche that he
should have to bid her farewell on the following day. He had found her
in the drawing-room, waiting for dinner. She was expecting company to
dine, and Gordon had not yet come down.

She was sitting in the vague glow of the fire-light, in a wonderful blue
dress, with two little blue feet crossed on the rug and pointed at the
hearth. She received Bernard's announcement with small satisfaction, and
expended a great deal of familiar ridicule on his project of a journey
to California. Then, suddenly getting up and looking at him a moment--

"I know why you are going," she said.

"I am glad to hear my explanations have not been lost."

"Your explanations are all nonsense. You are going for another reason."

"Well," said Bernard, "if you insist upon it, it 's because you are too
sharp with me."

"It 's because of me. So much as that is true." Bernard wondered what
she was going to say--if she were going to be silly enough to allude to
the most impudent of fictions; then, as she stood opening and closing
her blue fan and smiling at him in the fire-light, he felt that she was
silly enough for anything. "It 's because of all the talk--it 's because
of Gordon. You need n't be afraid of Gordon."

"Afraid of him? I don't know what you mean," said Bernard, gravely.

Blanche gave a little laugh.

"You have discovered that people are talking about us--about you and
me. I must say I wonder you care. I don't care, and if it 's because
of Gordon, you might as well know that he does n't care. If he does
n't care, I don't see why I should; and if I don't, I don't see why you
should!"

"You pay too much attention to such insipid drivel in even mentioning
it."

"Well, if I have the credit of saying what I should n't--to you or
to any one else--I don't see why I should n't have the advantage too.
Gordon does n't care--he does n't care what I do or say. He does n't
care a pin for me!"

She spoke in her usual rattling, rambling voice, and brought out this
declaration with a curious absence of resentment.

"You talk about advantage," said Bernard. "I don't see what advantage it
is to you to say that."

"I want to--I must--I will! That 's the advantage!" This came out with a
sudden sharpness of tone; she spoke more excitedly. "He does n't care a
button for me, and he never did! I don't know what he married me for. He
cares for something else--he thinks of something else. I don't know what
it is--I suppose it 's chemistry!"

These words gave Bernard a certain shock, but he had his intelligence
sufficiently in hand to contradict them with energy.

"You labor under a monstrous delusion," he exclaimed. "Your husband
thinks you fascinating."

This epithet, pronounced with a fine distinctness, was ringing in the
air when the door opened and Gordon came in. He looked for a moment from
Bernard to his wife, and then, approaching the latter, he said, softly--

"Do you know that he leaves us to-morrow?"






CHAPTER XVIII

Bernard left then and went to California; but when he arrived there
he asked himself why he had come, and was unable to mention any other
reason than that he had announced it. He began to feel restless again,
and to drift back to that chronic chagrin which had accompanied him
through his long journey in the East. He succeeded, however, in keeping
these unreasonable feelings at bay for some time, and he strove to
occupy himself, to take an interest in Californian problems. Bernard,
however, was neither an economist nor a cattle-fancier, and he found
that, as the phrase is, there was not a great deal to take hold of. He
wandered about, admired the climate and the big peaches, thought a while
of going to Japan, and ended by going to Mexico. In this way he passed
several months, and justified, in the eyes of other people at least,
his long journey across the Continent. At last he made it again, in the
opposite sense. He went back to New York, where the summer had already
begun, and here he invented a solution for the difficulty presented by
life to a culpably unoccupied and ill-regulated man. The solution was
not in the least original, and I am almost ashamed to mention so stale
and conventional a device. Bernard simply hit upon the plan of returning
to Europe. Such as it was, however, he carried it out with an audacity
worthy of a better cause, and was sensibly happier since he had made up
his mind to it. Gordon Wright and his wife were out of town, but Bernard
went into the country, as boldly as you please, to inform them of
his little project and take a long leave of them. He had made his
arrangements to sail immediately, and, as at such short notice it was
impossible to find good quarters on one of the English vessels, he had
engaged a berth on a French steamer, which would convey him to Havre. On
going down to Gordon's house in the country, he was conscious of a good
deal of eagerness to know what had become of that latent irritation
of which Blanche had given him a specimen. Apparently it had quite
subsided; Blanche was wreathed in smiles; she was living in a bower of
roses. Bernard, indeed, had no opportunity for investigating her state
of mind, for he found several people in the house, and Blanche, who had
an exalted standard of the duties of a hostess, was occupied in making
life agreeable to her guests, most of whom were gentlemen. She had
in this way that great remedy for dissatisfaction which Bernard
lacked--something interesting to do. Bernard felt a good deal of genuine
sadness in taking leave of Gordon, to whom he contrived to feel even
more kindly than in earlier days. He had quite forgotten that Gordon
was jealous of him--which he was not, as Bernard said. Certainly, Gordon
showed nothing of it now, and nothing could have been more friendly than
their parting. Gordon, also, for a man who was never boisterous, seemed
very contented. He was fond of exercising hospitality, and he confessed
to Bernard that he was just now in the humor for having his house full
of people. Fortune continued to gratify this generous taste; for just as
Bernard was coming away another guest made his appearance. The new-comer
was none other than the Honourable Augustus Lovelock, who had just
arrived in New York, and who, as he added, had long desired to visit the
United States. Bernard merely witnessed his arrival, and was struck
with the fact that as he presented himself--it seemed quite a
surprise--Blanche really stopped chattering.






CHAPTER XIX

I have called it a stale expedient on Bernard Longueville's part to "go
to Europe" again, like the most commonplace American; and it is certain
that, as our young man stood and looked out of the window of his inn at
Havre, an hour after his arrival at that sea-port, his adventure did
not strike him as having any great freshness. He had no plans nor
intentions; he had not even any very definite desires. He had felt the
impulse to come back to Europe, and he had obeyed it; but now that he
had arrived, his impulse seemed to have little more to say to him. He
perceived it, indeed--mentally--in the attitude of a small street-boy
playing upon his nose with that vulgar gesture which is supposed to
represent the elation of successful fraud. There was a large blank wall
before his window, painted a dirty yellow and much discolored by the
weather; a broad patch of summer sunlight rested upon it and brought
out the full vulgarity of its complexion. Bernard stared a while at
this blank wall, which struck him in some degree as a symbol of his
own present moral prospect. Then suddenly he turned away, with the
declaration that, whatever truth there might be in symbolism, he, at any
rate, had not come to Europe to spend the precious remnant of his youth
in a malodorous Norman sea-port. The weather was very hot, and neither
the hotel nor the town at large appeared to form an attractive sejour
for persons of an irritable nostril. To go to Paris, however, was hardly
more attractive than to remain at Havre, for Bernard had a lively vision
of the heated bitumen and the glaring frontages of the French capital.
But if a Norman town was close and dull, the Norman country was
notoriously fresh and entertaining, and the next morning Bernard got
into a caleche, with his luggage, and bade its proprietor drive him
along the coast. Once he had begun to rumble through this charming
landscape, he was in much better humor with his situation; the air was
freshened by a breeze from the sea; the blooming country, without walls
or fences, lay open to the traveller's eye; the grain-fields and copses
were shimmering in the summer wind; the pink-faced cottages peeped
through the ripening orchard-boughs, and the gray towers of the old
churches were silvered by the morning-light of France.

At the end of some three hours, Bernard arrived at a little
watering-place which lay close upon the shore, in the embrace of a
pair of white-armed cliffs. It had a quaint and primitive aspect and a
natural picturesqueness which commended it to Bernard's taste. There was
evidently a great deal of nature about it, and at this moment, nature,
embodied in the clear, gay sunshine, in the blue and quiet sea, in the
daisied grass of the high-shouldered downs, had an air of inviting the
intelligent observer to postpone his difficulties. Blanquais-les-Galets,
as Bernard learned the name of this unfashionable resort to be, was
twenty miles from a railway, and the place wore an expression of
unaffected rusticity. Bernard stopped at an inn for his noonday
breakfast, and then, with his appreciation quickened by the homely
felicity of this repast, determined to go no further. He engaged a
room at the inn, dismissed his vehicle, and gave himself up to the
contemplation of French sea-side manners. These were chiefly to be
observed upon a pebbly strand which lay along the front of the village
and served as the gathering-point of its idler inhabitants. Bathing in
the sea was the chief occupation of these good people, including, as it
did, prolonged spectatorship of the process and infinite conversation
upon its mysteries. The little world of Blanquais appeared to form a
large family party, of highly developed amphibious habits, which sat
gossiping all day upon the warm pebbles, occasionally dipping into the
sea and drying itself in the sun, without any relaxation of personal
intimacy. All this was very amusing to Bernard, who in the course of the
day took a bath with the rest. The ocean was, after all, very large, and
when one took one's plunge one seemed to have it quite to one's self.
When he had dressed himself again, Bernard stretched himself on the
beach, feeling happier than he had done in a long time, and pulled his
hat over his eyes. The feeling of happiness was an odd one; it had come
over him suddenly, without visible cause; but, such as it was, our hero
made the most of it. As he lay there it seemed to deepen; his immersion
and his exercise in the salt water had given him an agreeable languor.
This presently became a drowsiness which was not less agreeable, and
Bernard felt himself going to sleep. There were sounds in the air above
his head--sounds of the crunching and rattling of the loose, smooth
stones as his neighbors moved about on them; of high-pitched French
voices exchanging colloquial cries; of the plash of the bathers in the
distant water, and the short, soft breaking of the waves. But these
things came to his ears more vaguely and remotely, and at last they
faded away. Bernard enjoyed half an hour of that light and easy slumber
which is apt to overtake idle people in recumbent attitudes in the open
air on August afternoons. It brought with it an exquisite sense of
rest, and the rest was not spoiled by the fact that it was animated by a
charming dream. Dreams are vague things, and this one had the defects of
its species; but it was somehow concerned with the image of a young
lady whom Bernard had formerly known, and who had beautiful eyes, into
which--in the dream--he found himself looking. He waked up to find
himself looking into the crown of his hat, which had been resting on the
bridge of his nose. He removed it, and half raised himself, resting on
his elbow and preparing to taste, in another position, of a little more
of that exquisite rest of which mention has just been made. The world
about him was still amusing and charming; the chatter of his companions,
losing itself in the large sea-presence, the plash of the divers and
swimmers, the deep blue of the ocean and the silvery white of the cliff,
had that striking air of indifference to the fact that his mind had been
absent from them which we are apt to find in mundane things on emerging
from a nap. The same people were sitting near him on the beach--the
same, and yet not quite the same. He found himself noticing a person
whom he had not noticed before--a young lady, who was seated in a low
portable chair, some dozen yards off, with her eyes bent upon a book.
Her head was in shade; her large parasol made, indeed, an awning for
her whole person, which in this way, in the quiet attitude of perusal,
seemed to abstract itself from the glare and murmur of the beach. The
clear shadow of her umbrella--it was lined with blue--was deep upon her
face; but it was not deep enough to prevent Bernard from recognizing
a profile that he knew. He suddenly sat upright, with an intensely
quickened vision. Was he dreaming still, or had he waked? In a moment he
felt that he was acutely awake; he heard her, across the interval, turn
the page of her book. For a single instant, as she did so, she looked
with level brows at the glittering ocean; then, lowering her eyes, she
went on with her reading. In this barely perceptible movement he saw
Angela Vivian; it was wonderful how well he remembered her. She was
evidently reading very seriously; she was much interested in her book.
She was alone; Bernard looked about for her mother, but Mrs. Vivian
was not in sight. By this time Bernard had become aware that he was
agitated; the exquisite rest of a few moments before had passed away.
His agitation struck him as unreasonable; in a few minutes he made up
his mind that it was absurd. He had done her an injury--yes; but as she
sat there losing herself in a French novel--Bernard could see it was a
French novel--he could not make out that she was the worse for it. It
had not affected her appearance; Miss Vivian was still a handsome girl.
Bernard hoped she would not look toward him or recognize him; he wished
to look at her at his ease; to think it over; to make up his mind. The
idea of meeting Angela Vivian again had often come into his thoughts;
I may, indeed, say that it was a tolerably familiar presence there; but
the fact, nevertheless, now presented itself with all the violence of an
accident for which he was totally unprepared. He had often asked himself
what he should say to her, how he should carry himself, and how he
should probably find the young lady; but, with whatever ingenuity he
might at the moment have answered these questions, his intelligence at
present felt decidedly overtaxed. She was a very pretty girl to whom he
had done a wrong; this was the final attitude into which, with a good
deal of preliminary shifting and wavering, she had settled in his
recollection. The wrong was a right, doubtless, from certain points of
view; but from the girl's own it could only seem an injury to which its
having been inflicted by a clever young man with whom she had been on
agreeable terms, necessarily added a touch of baseness.

In every disadvantage that a woman suffers at the hands of a man, there
is inevitably, in what concerns the man, an element of cowardice. When I
say "inevitably," I mean that this is what the woman sees in it. This is
what Bernard believed that Angela Vivian saw in the fact that by giving
his friend a bad account of her he had prevented her making an opulent
marriage. At first he had said to himself that, whether he had held
his tongue or spoken, she had already lost her chance; but with time,
somehow, this reflection had lost its weight in the scale. It conveyed
little re-assurance to his irritated conscience--it had become
imponderable and impertinent. At the moment of which I speak it entirely
failed to present itself, even for form's sake; and as he sat looking
at this superior creature who came back to him out of an episode of his
past, he thought of her simply as an unprotected woman toward whom he
had been indelicate. It is not an agreeable thing for a delicate man
like Bernard Longueville to have to accommodate himself to such an
accident, but this is nevertheless what it seemed needful that he should
do. If she bore him a grudge he must think it natural; if she had vowed
him a hatred he must allow her the comfort of it. He had done the only
thing possible, but that made it no better for her. He had wronged her.
The circumstances mattered nothing, and as he could not make it up
to her, the only reasonable thing was to keep out of her way. He had
stepped into her path now, and the proper thing was to step out of it.
If it could give her no pleasure to see him again, it could certainly do
him no good to see her. He had seen her by this time pretty well--as far
as mere seeing went, and as yet, apparently, he was none the worse for
that; but his hope that he should himself escape unperceived had now
become acute. It is singular that this hope should not have led him
instantly to turn his back and move away; but the explanation of his
imprudent delay is simply that he wished to see a little more of Miss
Vivian. He was unable to bring himself to the point. Those clever things
that he might have said to her quite faded away. The only good taste was
to take himself off, and spare her the trouble of inventing civilities
that she could not feel. And yet he continued to sit there from moment
to moment, arrested, detained, fascinated, by the accident of her not
looking round--of her having let him watch her so long. She turned
another page, and another, and her reading absorbed her still. He was
so near her that he could have touched her dress with the point of his
umbrella. At last she raised her eyes and rested them a while on the
blue horizon, straight in front of her, but as yet without turning them
aside. This, however, augmented the danger of her doing so, and Bernard,
with a good deal of an effort, rose to his feet. The effort, doubtless,
kept the movement from being either as light or as swift as it might
have been, and it vaguely attracted his neighbor's attention. She turned
her head and glanced at him, with a glance that evidently expected
but to touch him and pass. It touched him, and it was on the point of
passing; then it suddenly checked itself; she had recognized him. She
looked at him, straight and open-eyed, out of the shadow of her parasol,
and Bernard stood there--motionless now--receiving her gaze. How long it
lasted need not be narrated. It was probably a matter of a few seconds,
but to Bernard it seemed a little eternity. He met her eyes, he looked
straight into her face; now that she had seen him he could do nothing
else. Bernard's little eternity, however, came to an end; Miss Vivian
dropped her eyes upon her book again. She let them rest upon it only a
moment; then she closed it and slowly rose from her chair, turning
away from Bernard. He still stood looking at her--stupidly, foolishly,
helplessly enough, as it seemed to him; no sign of recognition had been
exchanged. Angela Vivian hesitated a minute; she now had her back turned
to him, and he fancied her light, flexible figure was agitated by her
indecision. She looked along the sunny beach which stretched its shallow
curve to where the little bay ended and the white wall of the cliffs
began. She looked down toward the sea, and up toward the little Casino
which was perched on a low embankment, communicating with the beach at
two or three points by a short flight of steps. Bernard saw--or supposed
he saw--that she was asking herself whither she had best turn to avoid
him. He had not blushed when she looked at him--he had rather turned
a little pale; but he blushed now, for it really seemed odious to have
literally driven the poor girl to bay. Miss Vivian decided to take
refuge in the Casino, and she passed along one of the little pathways
of planks that were laid here and there across the beach, and directed
herself to the nearest flight of steps. Before she had gone two paces
a complete change came over Bernard's feeling; his only wish now was
to speak to her--to explain--to tell her he would go away. There was
another row of steps at a short distance behind him; he rapidly ascended
them and reached the little terrace of the Casino. Miss Vivian stood
there; she was apparently hesitating again which way to turn. Bernard
came straight up to her, with a gallant smile and a greeting. The
comparison is a coarse one, but he felt that he was taking the bull by
the horns. Angela Vivian stood watching him arrive.

"You did n't recognize me," he said, "and your not recognizing me made
me--made me hesitate."

For a moment she said nothing, and then--

"You are more timid than you used to be!" she answered.

He could hardly have said what expression he had expected to find in her
face; his apprehension had, perhaps, not painted her obtrusively pale
and haughty, aggressively cold and stern; but it had figured something
different from the look he encountered. Miss Vivian was simply
blushing--that was what Bernard mainly perceived; he saw that her
surprise had been extreme--complete. Her blush was re-assuring; it
contradicted the idea of impatient resentment, and Bernard took some
satisfaction in noting that it was prolonged.

"Yes, I am more timid than I used to be," he said.

In spite of her blush, she continued to look at him very directly; but
she had always done that--she always met one's eye; and Bernard now
instantly found all the beauty that he had ever found before in her
pure, unevasive glance.

"I don't know whether I am more brave," she said; "but I must tell the
truth--I instantly recognized you."

"You gave no sign!"

"I supposed I gave a striking one--in getting up and going away."

"Ah!" said Bernard, "as I say, I am more timid than I was, and I did n't
venture to interpret that as a sign of recognition."

"It was a sign of surprise."

"Not of pleasure!" said Bernard. He felt this to be a venturesome, and
from the point of view of taste perhaps a reprehensible, remark; but he
made it because he was now feeling his ground, and it seemed better to
make it gravely than with assumed jocosity.

"Great surprises are to me never pleasures," Angela answered; "I am not
fond of shocks of any kind. The pleasure is another matter. I have not
yet got over my surprise."

"If I had known you were here, I would have written to you beforehand,"
said Bernard, laughing.

Miss Vivian, beneath her expanded parasol, gave a little shrug of her
shoulders.

"Even that would have been a surprise."

"You mean a shock, eh? Did you suppose I was dead?"

Now, at last, she lowered her eyes, and her blush slowly died away.

"I knew nothing about it."

"Of course you could n't know, and we are all mortal. It was natural
that you should n't expect--simply on turning your head--to find me
lying on the pebbles at Blanquais-les-Galets. You were a great surprise
to me, as well; but I differ from you--I like surprises."

"It is rather refreshing to hear that one is a surprise," said the girl.

"Especially when in that capacity one is liked!" Bernard exclaimed.

"I don't say that--because such sensations pass away. I am now beginning
to get over mine."

The light mockery of her tone struck him as the echo of an unforgotten
air. He looked at her a moment, and then he said--

"You are not changed; I find you quite the same."

"I am sorry for that!" And she turned away.

"What are you doing?" he asked. "Where are you going?"

She looked about her, without answering, up and down the little terrace.
The Casino at Blanquais was a much more modest place of reunion than
the Conversation-house at Baden-Baden. It was a small, low structure of
brightly painted wood, containing but three or four rooms, and furnished
all along its front with a narrow covered gallery, which offered a
delusive shelter from the rougher moods of the fine, fresh weather.
It was somewhat rude and shabby--the subscription for the season was
low--but it had a simple picturesqueness. Its little terrace was a very
convenient place for a stroll, and the great view of the ocean and of
the marble-white crags that formed the broad gate-way of the shallow
bay, was a sufficient compensation for the absence of luxuries. There
were a few people sitting in the gallery, and a few others scattered
upon the terrace; but the pleasure-seekers of Blanquais were, for the
most part, immersed in the salt water or disseminated on the grassy
downs.

"I am looking for my mother," said Angela Vivian.

"I hope your mother is well."

"Very well, thank you."

"May I help you to look for her?" Bernard asked.

Her eyes paused in their quest, and rested a moment upon her companion.

"She is not here," she said presently. "She has gone home."

"What do you call home?" Bernard demanded.

"The sort of place that we always call home; a bad little house that we
have taken for a month."

"Will you let me come and see it?"

"It 's nothing to see."

Bernard hesitated a moment.

"Is that a refusal?"

"I should never think of giving it so fine a name."

"There would be nothing fine in forbidding me your door. Don't think
that!" said Bernard, with rather a forced laugh.

It was difficult to know what the girl thought; but she said, in a
moment--

"We shall be very happy to see you. I am going home."

"May I walk with you so far?" asked Bernard.

"It is not far; it 's only three minutes." And Angela moved slowly to
the gate of the Casino.






CHAPTER XX

Bernard walked beside her, and for some moments nothing was said between
them. As the silence continued, he became aware of it, and it vexed
him that she should leave certain things unsaid. She had asked him no
question--neither whence he had come, nor how long he would stay, nor
what had happened to him since they parted. He wished to see whether
this was intention or accident. He was already complaining to himself
that she expressed no interest in him, and he was perfectly aware that
this was a ridiculous feeling. He had come to speak to her in order to
tell her that he was going away, and yet, at the end of five minutes,
he had asked leave to come and see her. This sudden gyration of mind
was grotesque, and Bernard knew it; but, nevertheless, he had an immense
expectation that, if he should give her time, she would manifest some
curiosity as to his own situation. He tried to give her time; he held
his tongue; but she continued to say nothing. They passed along a sort
of winding lane, where two or three fishermen's cottages, with old brown
nets suspended on the walls and drying in the sun, stood open to the
road, on the other side of which was a patch of salt-looking grass,
browsed by a donkey that was not fastidious.

"It 's so long since we parted, and we have so much to say to each
other!" Bernard exclaimed at last, and he accompanied this declaration
with a laugh much more spontaneous than the one he had given a few
moments before.

It might have gratified him, however, to observe that his companion
appeared to see no ground for joking in the idea that they should have a
good deal to say to each other.

"Yes, it 's a long time since we spent those pleasant weeks at Baden,"
she rejoined. "Have you been there again?"

This was a question, and though it was a very simple one, Bernard was
charmed with it.

"I would n't go back for the world!" he said. "And you?"

"Would I go back? Oh yes; I thought it so agreeable."

With this he was less pleased; he had expected the traces of resentment,
and he was actually disappointed at not finding them. But here was the
little house of which his companion had spoken, and it seemed, indeed, a
rather bad one. That is, it was one of those diminutive structures which
are known at French watering-places as "chalets," and, with an exiguity
of furniture, are let for the season to families that pride themselves
upon their powers of contraction. This one was a very humble specimen of
its class, though it was doubtless a not inadequate abode for two quiet
and frugal women. It had a few inches of garden, and there were flowers
in pots in the open windows, where some extremely fresh white curtains
were gently fluttering in the breath of the neighboring ocean. The
little door stood wide open.

"This is where we live," said Angela; and she stopped and laid her hand
upon the little garden-gate.

"It 's very fair," said Bernard. "I think it 's better than the
pastry-cook's at Baden."

They stood there, and she looked over the gate at the geraniums. She did
not ask him to come in; but, on the other hand, keeping the gate closed,
she made no movement to leave him. The Casino was now quite out of
sight, and the whole place was perfectly still. Suddenly, turning her
eyes upon Bernard with a certain strange inconsequence--

"I have not seen you here before," she observed.

He gave a little laugh.

"I suppose it 's because I only arrived this morning. I think that if I
had been here you would have noticed me."

"You arrived this morning?"

"Three or four hours ago. So, if the remark were not in questionable
taste, I should say we had not lost time."

"You may say what you please," said Angela, simply. "Where did you come
from?"

Interrogation, now it had come, was most satisfactory, and Bernard
was glad to believe that there was an element of the unexpected in his
answer.

"From California."

"You came straight from California to this place?"

"I arrived at Havre only yesterday."

"And why did you come here?"

"It would be graceful of me to be able to answer--'Because I knew you
were here.' But unfortunately I did not know it. It was a mere chance;
or rather, I feel like saying it was an inspiration."

Angela looked at the geraniums again.

"It was very singular," she said. "We might have been in so many places
besides this one. And you might have come to so many places besides this
one."

"It is all the more singular, that one of the last persons I saw in
America was your charming friend Blanche, who married Gordon Wright. She
did n't tell me you were here."

"She had no reason to know it," said the girl. "She is not my friend--as
you are her husband's friend."

"Ah no, I don't suppose that. But she might have heard from you."

"She does n't hear from us. My mother used to write to her for a while
after she left Europe, but she has given it up." She paused a moment,
and then she added--"Blanche is too silly!"

Bernard noted this, wondering how it bore upon his theory of a spiteful
element in his companion. Of course Blanche was silly; but, equally of
course, this young lady's perception of it was quickened by Blanche's
having married a rich man whom she herself might have married.

"Gordon does n't think so," Bernard said.

Angela looked at him a moment.

"I am very glad to hear it," she rejoined, gently.

"Yes, it is very fortunate."

"Is he well?" the girl asked. "Is he happy?"

"He has all the air of it."

"I am very glad to hear it," she repeated. And then she moved the latch
of the gate and passed in. At the same moment her mother appeared in the
open door-way. Mrs. Vivian had apparently been summoned by the sound
of her daughter's colloquy with an unrecognized voice, and when she saw
Bernard she gave a sharp little cry of surprise. Then she stood gazing
at him.

Since the dispersion of the little party at Baden-Baden he had not
devoted much meditation to this conscientious gentlewoman who had been
so tenderly anxious to establish her daughter properly in life; but
there had been in his mind a tacit assumption that if Angela deemed that
he had played her a trick Mrs. Vivian's view of his conduct was not more
charitable. He felt that he must have seemed to her very unkind, and
that in so far as a well-regulated conscience permitted the exercise of
unpractical passions, she honored him with a superior detestation.
The instant he beheld her on her threshold this conviction rose to the
surface of his consciousness and made him feel that now, at least, his
hour had come.

"It is Mr. Longueville, whom we met at Baden," said Angela to her
mother, gravely.

Mrs. Vivian began to smile, and stepped down quickly toward the gate.

"Ah, Mr. Longueville," she murmured, "it 's so long--it 's so
pleasant--it 's so strange--"

And suddenly she stopped, still smiling. Her smile had an odd intensity;
she was trembling a little, and Bernard, who was prepared for hissing
scorn, perceived with a deep, an almost violent, surprise, a touching
agitation, an eager friendliness.

"Yes, it 's very long," he said; "it 's very pleasant. I have only just
arrived; I met Miss Vivian."

"And you are not coming in?" asked Angela's mother, very graciously.

"Your daughter has not asked me!" said Bernard.

"Ah, my dearest," murmured Mrs. Vivian, looking at the girl.

Her daughter returned her glance, and then the elder lady paused again,
and simply began to smile at Bernard, who recognized in her glance that
queer little intimation--shy and cautious, yet perfectly discernible--of
a desire to have a private understanding with what he felt that she
mentally termed his better nature, which he had more than once perceived
at Baden-Baden.

"Ah no, she has not asked me," Bernard repeated, laughing gently.

Then Angela turned her eyes upon him, and the expression of those fine
organs was strikingly agreeable. It had, moreover, the merit of being
easily interpreted; it said very plainly, "Please don't insist, but
leave me alone." And it said it not at all sharply--very gently and
pleadingly. Bernard found himself understanding it so well that he
literally blushed with intelligence.

"Don't you come to the Casino in the evening, as you used to come to the
Kursaal?" he asked.

Mrs. Vivian looked again at her daughter, who had passed into the
door-way of the cottage; then she said--

"We will go this evening."

"I shall look for you eagerly," Bernard rejoined. "Auf wiedersehen, as
we used to say at Baden!"

Mrs. Vivian waved him a response over the gate, her daughter gave him a
glance from the threshold, and he took his way back to his inn.

He awaited the evening with great impatience; he fancied he had made a
discovery, and he wished to confirm it. The discovery was that his idea
that she bore him a grudge, that she was conscious of an injury, that he
was associated in her mind with a wrong, had all been a morbid illusion.
She had forgiven, she had forgotten, she did n't care, she had possibly
never cared! This, at least, was his theory now, and he longed for a
little more light upon it. His old sense of her being a complex and
intricate girl had, in that quarter of an hour of talk with her, again
become lively, so that he was not absolutely sure his apprehensions
had been vain. But, with his quick vision of things, he had got the
impression, at any rate, that she had no vulgar resentment of any slight
he might have put upon her, or any disadvantage he might have caused
her. Her feeling about such a matter would be large and original.
Bernard desired to see more of that, and in the evening, in fact, it
seemed to him that he did so.

The terrace of the Casino was far from offering the brilliant spectacle
of the promenade in front of the gaming-rooms at Baden. It had neither
the liberal illumination, the distinguished frequenters, nor the
superior music which formed the attraction of that celebrated spot; but
it had a modest animation of its own, in which the starlight on the open
sea took the place of clustered lamps, and the mighty resonance of
the waves performed the function of an orchestra. Mrs. Vivian made her
appearance with her daughter, and Bernard, as he used to do at Baden,
chose a corner to place some chairs for them. The crowd was small, for
most of the visitors had compressed themselves into one of the rooms,
where a shrill operetta was being performed by a strolling troupe. Mrs.
Vivian's visit was a short one; she remained at the Casino less than
half an hour. But Bernard had some talk with Angela. He sat beside
her--her mother was on the other side, talking with an old French lady
whose acquaintance she had made on the beach. Between Bernard and Angela
several things were said. When his friends went away Bernard walked home
with them. He bade them good-night at the door of their chalet, and then
slowly strolled back to the Casino. The terrace was nearly empty; every
one had gone to listen to the operetta, the sound of whose contemporary
gayety came through the open, hot-looking windows in little thin quavers
and catches. The ocean was rumbling just beneath; it made a ruder but
richer music. Bernard stood looking at it a moment; then he went down
the steps to the beach. The tide was rather low; he walked slowly down
to the line of the breaking waves. The sea looked huge and black and
simple; everything was vague in the unassisted darkness. Bernard stood
there some time; there was nothing but the sound and the sharp, fresh
smell. Suddenly he put his hand to his heart; it was beating very fast.
An immense conviction had come over him--abruptly, then and there--and
for a moment he held his breath. It was like a word spoken in the
darkness--he held his breath to listen. He was in love with Angela
Vivian, and his love was a throbbing passion! He sat down on the stones
where he stood--it filled him with a kind of awe.






CHAPTER XXI

It filled him with a kind of awe, and the feeling was by no means
agreeable. It was not a feeling to which even a man of Bernard
Longueville's easy power of extracting the savour from a sensation could
rapidly habituate himself, and for the rest of that night it was far
from making of our hero the happy man that a lover just coming
to self-consciousness is supposed to be. It was wrong--it was
dishonorable--it was impossible--and yet it was; it was, as nothing in
his own personal experience had ever been. He seemed hitherto to have
been living by proxy, in a vision, in reflection--to have been an echo,
a shadow, a futile attempt; but this at last was life itself, this was
a fact, this was reality. For these things one lived; these were
the things that people had died for. Love had been a fable before
this--doubtless a very pretty one; and passion had been a literary
phrase--employed obviously with considerable effect. But now he stood in
a personal relation to these familiar ideas, which gave them a very much
keener import; they had laid their hand upon him in the darkness, he
felt it upon his shoulder, and he knew by its pressure that it was the
hand of destiny. What made this sensation a shock was the element that
was mixed with it; the fact that it came not simply and singly, but with
an attendant shadow in which it immediately merged and lost itself. It
was forbidden fruit--he knew it the instant he had touched it. He felt
that he had pledged himself not to do just this thing which was gleaming
before him so divinely--not to widen the crevice, not to open the door
that would flood him with light. Friendship and honor were at stake;
they stood at his left hand, as his new-born passion stood already at
his right; they claimed him as well, and their grasp had a pressure
which might become acutely painful. The soul is a still more tender
organism than the body, and it shrinks from the prospect of being
subjected to violence. Violence--spiritual violence--was what our
luxurious hero feared; and it is not too much to say that as he lingered
there by the sea, late into the night, while the gurgitation of the
waves grew deeper to his ear, the prospect came to have an element of
positive terror. The two faces of his situation stood confronting each
other; it was a rigid, brutal opposition, and Bernard held his breath
for a while with the wonder of what would come of it. He sat a long time
upon the beach; the night grew very cold, but he had no sense of it.
Then he went away and passed before the Casino again, and wandered
through the village. The Casino was shrouded in darkness and silence,
and there was nothing in the streets of the little town but the salt
smell of the sea, a vague aroma of fish and the distant sound of the
breakers. Little by little, Bernard lost the feeling of having been
startled, and began to perceive that he could reason about his trouble.
Trouble it was, though this seems an odd name for the consciousness of
a bright enchantment; and the first thing that reason, definitely
consulted, told him about the matter was that he had been in love with
Angela Vivian any time these three years. This sapient faculty supplied
him with further information; only two or three of the items of which,
however, it is necessary to reproduce. He had been a great fool--an
incredible fool--not to have discovered before this what was the matter
with him! Bernard's sense of his own shrewdness--always tolerably
acute--had never received such a bruise as this present perception that
a great many things had been taking place in his clever mind without his
clever mind suspecting them. But it little mattered, his reason went on
to declare, what he had suspected or what he might now feel about it;
his present business was to leave Blanquais-les-Galets at sunrise the
next morning and never rest his eyes upon Angela Vivian again. This was
his duty; it had the merit of being perfectly plain and definite, easily
apprehended, and unattended, as far as he could discover, with the
smallest material difficulties. Not only this, reason continued to
remark; but the moral difficulties were equally inconsiderable. He had
never breathed a word of his passion to Miss Vivian--quite the contrary;
he had never committed himself nor given her the smallest reason to
suspect his hidden flame; and he was therefore perfectly free to turn
his back upon her--he could never incur the reproach of trifling
with her affections. Bernard was in that state of mind when it is the
greatest of blessings to be saved the distress of choice--to see a
straight path before you and to feel that you have only to follow it.
Upon the straight path I have indicated, he fixed his eyes very hard; of
course he would take his departure at the earliest possible hour on the
morrow. There was a streak of morning in the eastern sky by the time he
knocked for re-admittance at the door of the inn, which was opened to
him by a mysterious old woman in a nightcap and meagre accessories,
whose identity he failed to ascertain; and he laid himself down to
rest--he was very tired--with his attention fastened, as I say, on the
idea--on the very image--of departure.

On waking up the next morning, rather late, he found, however, that it
had attached itself to a very different object. His vision was filled
with the brightness of the delightful fact itself, which seemed to
impregnate the sweet morning air and to flutter in the light, fresh
breeze that came through his open window from the sea. He saw a great
patch of the sea between a couple of red-tiled roofs; it was bluer than
any sea had ever been before. He had not slept long--only three or four
hours; but he had quite slept off his dread. The shadow had dropped away
and nothing was left but the beauty of his love, which seemed to shine
in the freshness of the early day. He felt absurdly happy--as if he had
discovered El Dorado; quite apart from consequences--he was not thinking
of consequences, which of course were another affair--the feeling was
intrinsically the finest one he had ever had, and--as a mere feeling--he
had not done with it yet. The consideration of consequences could easily
be deferred, and there would, meanwhile, be no injury to any one in his
extracting, very quietly, a little subjective joy from the state of his
heart. He would let the flower bloom for a day before plucking it up
by the roots. Upon this latter course he was perfectly resolved, and in
view of such an heroic resolution the subjective interlude appeared
no more than his just privilege. The project of leaving
Blanquais-les-Galets at nine o'clock in the morning dropped lightly from
his mind, making no noise as it fell; but another took its place, which
had an air of being still more excellent and which consisted of starting
off on a long walk and absenting himself for the day. Bernard grasped
his stick and wandered away; he climbed the great shoulder of the
further cliff and found himself on the level downs. Here there was
apparently no obstacle whatever to his walking as far as his fancy
should carry him. The summer was still in a splendid mood, and the hot
and quiet day--it was a Sunday--seemed to constitute a deep, silent
smile on the face of nature. The sea glistened on one side, and the
crops ripened on the other; the larks, losing themselves in the dense
sunshine, made it ring here and there in undiscoverable spots; this
was the only sound save when Bernard, pausing now and then in his walk,
found himself hearing far below him, at the base of the cliff, the
drawling murmur of a wave. He walked a great many miles and passed
through half a dozen of those rude fishing-hamlets, lodged in some
sloping hollow of the cliffs, so many of which, of late years, all along
the Norman coast, have adorned themselves with a couple of hotels and a
row of bathing-machines. He walked so far that the shadows had begun to
lengthen before he bethought himself of stopping; the afternoon had
come on and had already begun to wane. The grassy downs still stretched
before him, shaded here and there with shallow but windless dells. He
looked for the softest place and then flung himself down on the grass;
he lay there for a long time, thinking of many things. He had determined
to give himself up to a day's happiness; it was happiness of a
very harmless kind--the satisfaction of thought, the bliss of mere
consciousness; but such as it was it did not elude him nor turn bitter
in his heart, and the long summer day closed upon him before his spirit,
hovering in perpetual circles round the idea of what might be, had begun
to rest its wing. When he rose to his feet again it was too late to
return to Blanquais in the same way that he had come; the evening was
at hand, the light was already fading, and the walk he had taken was
one which even if he had not felt very tired, he would have thought it
imprudent to attempt to repeat in the darkness. He made his way to the
nearest village, where he was able to hire a rustic carriole, in which
primitive conveyance, gaining the high-road, he jogged and jostled
through the hours of the evening slowly back to his starting-point. It
wanted an hour of midnight by the time he reached his inn, and there was
nothing left for him but to go to bed.

He went in the unshaken faith that he should leave Blanquais early on
the morrow. But early on the morrow it occurred to him that it would be
simply grotesque to go off without taking leave of Mrs. Vivian and her
daughter, and offering them some explanation of his intention. He had
given them to understand that, so delighted was he to find them there,
he would remain at Blanquais at least as long as they. He must have
seemed to them wanting in civility, to spend a whole bright Sunday
without apparently troubling his head about them, and if the unlucky
fact of his being in love with the girl were a reason for doing his
duty, it was at least not a reason for being rude. He had not yet come
to that--to accepting rudeness as an incident of virtue; it had always
been his theory that virtue had the best manners in the world, and he
flattered himself at any rate that he could guard his integrity without
making himself ridiculous. So, at what he thought a proper hour, in
the course of the morning, he retraced his steps along the little lane
through which, two days ago, Angela Vivian had shown him the way to
her mother's door. At this humble portal he knocked; the windows of the
little chalet were open, and the white curtains, behind the flower-pots,
were fluttering as he had seen them before. The door was opened by
a neat young woman, who informed him very promptly that Madame and
Mademoiselle had left Blanquais a couple of hours earlier. They had gone
to Paris--yes, very suddenly, taking with them but little luggage, and
they had left her--she had the honor of being the femme de chambre of
ces dames--to put up their remaining possessions and follow as soon
as possible. On Bernard's expressing surprise and saying that he had
supposed them to be fixed at the sea-side for the rest of the season,
the femme de chambre, who seemed a very intelligent person, begged to
remind him that the season was drawing to a close, that Madame had taken
the chalet but for five weeks, only ten days of which period were yet to
expire, that ces dames, as Monsieur perhaps knew, were great travellers,
who had been half over the world and thought nothing of breaking camp
at an hour's notice, and that, in fine, Madame might very well have
received a telegram summoning her to another part of the country.

"And where have the ladies gone?" asked Bernard.

"For the moment, to Paris."

"And in Paris where have they gone?"

"Dame, chez elles--to their house," said the femme de chambre, who
appeared to think that Bernard asked too many questions.

But Bernard persisted.

"Where is their house?"

The waiting-maid looked at him from head to foot.

"If Monsieur wishes to write, many of Madame's letters come to her
banker," she said, inscrutably.

"And who is her banker?"

"He lives in the Rue de Provence."

"Very good--I will find him out," said our hero, turning away.

The discriminating reader who has been so good as to interest himself
in this little narrative will perhaps at this point exclaim with a
pardonable consciousness of shrewdness: "Of course he went the next day
to the Rue de Provence!" Of course, yes; only as it happens Bernard did
nothing of the kind. He did one of the most singular things he ever did
in his life--a thing that puzzled him even at the time, and with regard
to which he often afterward wondered whence he had drawn the ability
for so remarkable a feat--he simply spent a fortnight at
Blanquais-les-Galets. It was a very quiet fortnight; he spoke to no one,
he formed no relations, he was company to himself. It may be added that
he had never found his own company half so good. He struck himself as
a reasonable, delicate fellow, who looked at things in such a way as
to make him refrain--refrain successfully, that was the point--from
concerning himself practically about Angela Vivian. His saying that
he would find out the banker in the Rue de Provence had been for the
benefit of the femme de chambre, whom he thought rather impertinent; he
had really no intention whatever of entering that classic thoroughfare.
He took long walks, rambled on the beach, along the base of the cliffs
and among the brown sea-caves, and he thought a good deal of certain
incidents which have figured at an earlier stage of this narrative. He
had forbidden himself the future, as an object of contemplation, and
it was therefore a matter of necessity that his imagination should take
refuge among the warm and familiar episodes of the past. He wondered why
Mrs. Vivian should have left the place so suddenly, and was of course
struck with the analogy between this incident and her abrupt departure
from Baden. It annoyed him, it troubled him, but it by no means
rekindled the alarm he had felt on first perceiving the injured Angela
on the beach. That alarm had been quenched by Angela's manner during
the hour that followed and during their short talk in the evening. This
evening was to be forever memorable, for it had brought with it the
revelation which still, at moments, suddenly made Bernard tremble; but
it had also brought him the assurance that Angela cared as little as
possible for anything that a chance acquaintance might have said about
her. It is all the more singular, therefore, that one evening, after he
had been at Blanquais a fortnight, a train of thought should suddenly
have been set in motion in his mind. It was kindled by no outward
occurrence, but by some wandering spark of fancy or of memory, and the
immediate effect of it was to startle our hero very much as he had been
startled on the evening I have described. The circumstances were the
same; he had wandered down to the beach alone, very late, and he stood
looking at the duskily-tumbling sea. Suddenly the same voice that had
spoken before murmured another phrase in the darkness, and it rang upon
his ear for the rest of the night. It startled him, as I have said,
at first; then, the next morning, it led him to take his departure for
Paris. During the journey it lingered in his ear; he sat in the corner
of the railway-carriage with his eyes closed, abstracted, on purpose to
prolong the reverberation. If it were not true it was at least, as the
Italians have it, ben trovato, and it was wonderful how well it bore
thinking of. It bears telling less well; but I can at least give a hint
of it. The theory that Angela hated him had evaporated in her presence,
and another of a very different sort had sprung into being. It fitted
a great many of the facts, it explained a great many contradictions,
anomalies, mysteries, and it accounted for Miss Vivian's insisting upon
her mother's leaving Blanquais at a few hours' notice, even better
than the theory of her resentment could have done. At any rate, it
obliterated Bernard's scruples very effectually, and led him on his
arrival in Paris to repair instantly to the Rue de Provence. This street
contains more than one banker, but there is one with whom Bernard deemed
Mrs. Vivian most likely to have dealings. He found he had reckoned
rightly, and he had no difficulty in procuring her address. Having done
so, however, he by no means went immediately to see her; he waited a
couple of days--perhaps to give those obliterated scruples I have spoken
of a chance to revive. They kept very quiet, and it must be confessed
that Bernard took no great pains to recall them to life. After he had
been in Paris three days, he knocked at Mrs. Vivian's door.






CHAPTER XXII

It was opened by the little waiting-maid whom he had seen at Blanquais,
and who looked at him very hard before she answered his inquiry.

"You see I have found Mrs. Vivian's dwelling, though you would n't give
me the address," Bernard said to her, smiling.

"Monsieur has put some time to it!" the young woman answered dryly. And
she informed him that Madame was at home, though Mademoiselle, for whom
he had not asked, was not.

Mrs. Vivian occupied a diminutive apartment at the summit of one of
the tall white houses which ornament the neighborhood of the Arc de
Triomphe. The early days of September had arrived, but Paris was still
a city of absentees. The weather was warm and charming, and a certain
savour of early autumn in the air was in accord with the somewhat
melancholy aspect of the empty streets and closed shutters of this
honorable quarter, where the end of the monumental vistas seemed to
be curtained with a hazy emanation from the Seine. It was late in
the afternoon when Bernard was ushered into Mrs. Vivian's little
high-nestling drawing-room, and a patch of sunset tints, faintly red,
rested softly upon the gilded wall. Bernard had seen these ladies only
in borrowed and provisional abodes; but here was a place where they were
really living and which was stamped with their tastes, their habits,
their charm. The little salon was very elegant; it contained a
multitude of pretty things, and it appeared to Bernard to be arranged
in perfection. The long windows--the ceiling being low, they were really
very short--opened upon one of those solid balconies, occupying the
width of the apartment, which are often in Paris a compensation for
living up five flights of stairs, and this balcony was filled with
flowers and cushions. Bernard stepped out upon it to await the coming
of Mrs. Vivian, and, as she was not quick to appear, he had time to
see that his friends enjoyed a magnificent view. They looked up at the
triumphal Arch, which presented itself at a picturesque angle, and near
the green tree-tops of the Champs Elysees, beyond which they caught a
broad gleam of the Seine and a glimpse, blue in the distance, of the
great towers of Notre Dame. The whole vast city lay before them and
beneath them, with its ordered brilliancy and its mingled aspect of
compression and expansion; and yet the huge Parisian murmur died away
before it reached Mrs. Vivian's sky-parlor, which seemed to Bernard the
brightest and quietest little habitation he had ever known.

His hostess came rustling in at last; she seemed agitated; she knocked
over with the skirt of her dress a little gilded chair which was
reflected in the polished parquet as in a sheet of looking-glass. Mrs.
Vivian had a fixed smile--she hardly knew what to say.

"I found your address at the banker's," said Bernard. "Your maid, at
Blanquais, refused to give it to me."

Mrs. Vivian gave him a little look--there was always more or less of
it in her face--which seemed equivalent to an entreaty that her
interlocutor should spare her.

"Maids are so strange," she murmured; "especially the French!"

It pleased Bernard for the moment not to spare her, though he felt a
sort of delight of kindness for her.

"Your going off from Blanquais so suddenly, without leaving me any
explanation, any clue, any message of any sort--made me feel at first as
if you did n't wish that I should look you up. It reminded me of the way
you left Baden--do you remember?--three years ago."

"Baden was so charming--but one could n't stay forever," said Mrs.
Vivian.

"I had a sort of theory one could. Our life was so pleasant that it
seemed a shame to break the spell, and if no one had moved I am sure we
might be sitting there now."

Mrs. Vivian stared, still with her little fixed smile.

"I think we should have had bad weather."

"Very likely," said Bernard, laughing. "Nature would have grown jealous
of our good-humor--of our tranquil happiness. And after all, here we are
together again--that is, some of us. But I have only my own audacity
to thank for it. I was quite free to believe that you were not at all
pleased to see me re-appear--and it is only because I am not easy to
discourage--am indeed probably a rather impudent fellow--that I have
ventured to come here to-day."

"I am very glad to see you re-appear, Mr. Longueville," Mrs. Vivian
declared with the accent of veracity.

"It was your daughter's idea, then, running away from Blanquais?"

Mrs. Vivian lowered her eyes.

"We were obliged to go to Fontainebleau. We have but just come back. I
thought of writing to you," she softly added.

"Ah, what pleasure that would have given me!"

"I mean, to tell you where we were, and that we should have been so
happy to see you."

"I thank you for the intention. I suppose your daughter would n't let
you carry it out."

"Angela is so peculiar," Mrs. Vivian said, simply.

"You told me that the first time I saw you."

"Yes, at Siena," said Mrs. Vivian.

"I am glad to hear you speak frankly of that place!"

"Perhaps it 's better," Mrs. Vivian murmured. She got up and went to the
window; then stepping upon the balcony, she looked down a moment into
the street. "She will come back in a moment," she said, coming into the
room again. "She has gone to see a friend who lives just beside us. We
don't mind about Siena now," she added, softly.

Bernard understood her--understood this to be a retraction of the
request she had made of him at Baden.

"Dear little woman," he said to himself, "she wants to marry her
daughter still--only now she wants to marry her to me!"

He wished to show her that he understood her, and he was on the point of
seizing her hand, to do he did n't know what--to hold it, to press it,
to kiss it--when he heard the sharp twang of the bell at the door of the
little apartment.

Mrs. Vivian fluttered away.

"It 's Angela," she cried, and she stood there waiting and listening,
smiling at Bernard, with her handkerchief pressed to her lips.

In a moment the girl came into the drawing-room, but on seeing Bernard
she stopped, with her hand on the door-knob. Her mother went to her and
kissed her.

"It 's Mr. Longueville, dearest--he has found us out."

"Found us out?" repeated Angela, with a little laugh. "What a singular
expression!"

She was blushing as she had blushed when she first saw him at
Blanquais. She seemed to Bernard now to have a great and peculiar
brightness--something she had never had before.

"I certainly have been looking for you," he said. "I was greatly
disappointed when I found you had taken flight from Blanquais."

"Taken flight?" She repeated his words as she had repeated her mother's.
"That is also a strange way of speaking!"

"I don't care what I say," said Bernard, "so long as I make you
understand that I have wanted very much to see you again, and that I
have wondered every day whether I might venture--"

"I don't know why you should n't venture!" she interrupted, giving her
little laugh again. "We are not so terrible, are we, mamma?--that is,
when once you have climbed our five flights of stairs."

"I came up very fast," said Bernard, "and I find your apartment
magnificent."

"Mr. Longueville must come again, must he not, dear?" asked mamma.

"I shall come very often, with your leave," Bernard declared.

"It will be immensely kind," said Angela, looking away.

"I am not sure that you will think it that."

"I don't know what you are trying to prove," said Angela; "first that we
ran away from you, and then that we are not nice to our visitors."

"Oh no, not that!" Bernard exclaimed; "for I assure you I shall not care
how cold you are with me."

She walked away toward another door, which was masked with a curtain
that she lifted.

"I am glad to hear that, for it gives me courage to say that I am very
tired, and that I beg you will excuse me."

She glanced at him a moment over her shoulder; then she passed out,
dropping the curtain.

Bernard stood there face to face with Mrs. Vivian, whose eyes seemed to
plead with him more than ever. In his own there was an excited smile.

"Please don't mind that," she murmured. "I know it 's true that she is
tired."

"Mind it, dear lady?" cried the young man. "I delight in it. It 's just
what I like."

"Ah, she 's very peculiar!" sighed Mrs. Vivian.

"She is strange--yes. But I think I understand her a little."

"You must come back to-morrow, then."

"I hope to have many to-morrows!" cried Bernard as he took his
departure.






CHAPTER XXIII

And he had them in fact. He called the next day at the same hour, and he
found the mother and the daughter together in their pretty salon. Angela
was very gentle and gracious; he suspected Mrs. Vivian had given her a
tender little lecture upon the manner in which she had received him the
day before. After he had been there five minutes, Mrs. Vivian took a
decanter of water that was standing upon a table and went out on the
balcony to irrigate her flowers. Bernard watched her a while from his
place in the room; then she moved along the balcony and out of sight.
Some ten minutes elapsed without her re-appearing, and then Bernard
stepped to the threshold of the window and looked for her. She was not
there, and as he came and took his seat near Angela again, he announced,
rather formally, that Mrs. Vivian had passed back into one of the other
windows.

Angela was silent a moment--then she said--

"Should you like me to call her?"

She was very peculiar--that was very true; yet Bernard held to his
declaration of the day before that he now understood her a little.

"No, I don't desire it," he said. "I wish to see you alone; I have
something particular to say to you."

She turned her face toward him, and there was something in its
expression that showed him that he looked to her more serious than he
had ever looked. He sat down again; for some moments he hesitated to go
on.

"You frighten me," she said laughing; and in spite of her laugh this was
obviously true.

"I assure you my state of mind is anything but formidable. I am afraid
of you, on the contrary; I am humble and apologetic."

"I am sorry for that," said Angela. "I particularly dislike receiving
apologies, even when I know what they are for. What yours are for, I
can't imagine."

"You don't dislike me--you don't hate me?" Bernard suddenly broke out.

"You don't ask me that humbly. Excuse me therefore if I say I have
other, and more practical, things to do."

"You despise me," said Bernard.

"That is not humble either, for you seem to insist upon it."

"It would be after all a way of thinking of me, and I have a reason for
wishing you to do that."

"I remember very well that you used to have a reason for everything. It
was not always a good one."

"This one is excellent," said Bernard, gravely. "I have been in love
with you for three years."

She got up slowly, turning away.

"Is that what you wished to say to me?"

She went toward the open window, and he followed her.

"I hope it does n't offend you. I don't say it lightly--it 's not a
piece of gallantry. It 's the very truth of my being. I did n't know it
till lately--strange as that may seem. I loved you long before I knew
it--before I ventured or presumed to know it. I was thinking of you
when I seemed to myself to be thinking of other things. It is very
strange--there are things in it I don't understand. I travelled over
the world, I tried to interest, to divert myself; but at bottom it was
a perfect failure. To see you again--that was what I wanted. When I saw
you last month at Blanquais I knew it; then everything became clear. It
was the answer to the riddle. I wished to read it very clearly--I wished
to be sure; therefore I did n't follow you immediately. I questioned my
heart--I cross-questioned it. It has borne the examination, and now I am
sure. I am very sure. I love you as my life--I beg you to listen to me!"

She had listened--she had listened intently, looking straight out of the
window and without moving.

"You have seen very little of me," she said, presently, turning her
illuminated eye on him.

"I have seen enough," Bernard added, smiling. "You must remember that at
Baden I saw a good deal of you."

"Yes, but that did n't make you like me. I don't understand."

Bernard stood there a moment, frowning, with his eyes lowered.

"I can imagine that. But I think I can explain."

"Don't explain now," said Angela. "You have said enough; explain some
other time." And she went out on the balcony.

Bernard, of course, in a moment was beside her, and, disregarding her
injunction, he began to explain.

"I thought I disliked you--but I have come to the conclusion it was just
the contrary. In reality I was in love with you. I had been so from the
first time I saw you--when I made that sketch of you at Siena."

"That in itself needs an explanation. I was not at all nice then--I was
very rude, very perverse. I was horrid!"

"Ah, you admit it!" cried Bernard, with a sort of quick elation.

She had been pale, but she suddenly blushed.

"Your own conduct was singular, as I remember it. It was not exactly
agreeable."

"Perhaps not; but at least it was meant to be. I did n't know how to
please you then, and I am far from supposing that I have learned now.
But I entreat you to give me a chance."

She was silent a while; her eyes wandered over the great prospect of
Paris.

"Do you know how you can please me now?" she said, at last. "By leaving
me alone."

Bernard looked at her a moment, then came straight back into the
drawing-room and took his hat.

"You see I avail myself of the first chance. But I shall come back
to-morrow."

"I am greatly obliged to you for what you have said. Such a speech as
that deserves to be listened to with consideration. You may come back
to-morrow," Angela added.

On the morrow, when he came back, she received him alone.

"How did you know, at Baden, that I did n't like you?" he asked, as soon
as she would allow him.

She smiled, very gently.

"You assured me yesterday that you did like me."

"I mean that I supposed I did n't. How did you know that?"

"I can only say that I observed."

"You must have observed very closely, for, superficially, I rather had
the air of admiring you," said Bernard.

"It was very superficial."

"You don't mean that; for, after all, that is just what my admiration,
my interest in you, were not. They were deep, they were latent. They
were not superficial--they were subterranean."

"You are contradicting yourself, and I am perfectly consistent,"
said Angela. "Your sentiments were so well hidden that I supposed I
displeased you."

"I remember that at Baden, you used to contradict yourself," Bernard
answered.

"You have a terrible memory!"

"Don't call it terrible, for it sees everything now in a charming
light--in the light of this understanding that we have at last arrived
at, which seems to shine backward--to shine full on those Baden days."

"Have we at last arrived at an understanding?" she asked, with a grave
directness which Bernard thought the most beautiful thing he had ever
seen.

"It only depends upon you," he declared; and then he broke out again
into a protestation of passionate tenderness. "Don't put me off this
time," he cried. "You have had time to think about it; you have had
time to get over the surprise, the shock. I love you, and I offer you
everything that belongs to me in this world." As she looked at him with
her dark, clear eyes, weighing this precious vow and yet not committing
herself--"Ah, you don't forgive me!" he murmured.

She gazed at him with the same solemn brightness.

"What have I to forgive you?"

This question seemed to him enchanting. He reached forward and took her
hands, and if Mrs. Vivian had come in she would have seen him kneeling
at her daughter's feet.

But Mrs. Vivian remained in seclusion, and Bernard saw her only the next
time he came.

"I am very happy, because I think my daughter is happy," she said.

"And what do you think of me?"

"I think you are very clever. You must promise me to be very good to
her."

"I am clever enough to promise that."

"I think you are good enough to keep it," said Mrs. Vivian. She looked
as happy as she said, and her happiness gave her a communicative,
confidential tendency. "It is very strange how things come about--how
the wheel turns round," she went on. "I suppose there is no harm in my
telling you that I believe she always cared for you."

"Why did n't you tell me before?" said Bernard, with almost filial
reproachfulness.

"How could I? I don't go about the world offering my daughter to
people--especially to indifferent people."

"At Baden you did n't think I was indifferent. You were afraid of my not
being indifferent enough."

Mrs. Vivian colored.

"Ah, at Baden I was a little too anxious!"

"Too anxious I should n't speak to your daughter!" said Bernard,
laughing.

"At Baden," Mrs. Vivian went on, "I had views. But I have n't any now--I
have given them up."

"That makes your acceptance of me very flattering!" Bernard exclaimed,
laughing still more gaily.

"I have something better," said Mrs. Vivian, laying her finger-tips on
his arm. "I have confidence."

Bernard did his best to encourage this gracious sentiment, and it seemed
to him that there was something yet to be done to implant it more firmly
in Angela's breast.

"I have a confession to make to you," he said to her one day. "I wish
you would listen to it."

"Is it something very horrible?" Angela asked.

"Something very horrible indeed. I once did you an injury."

"An injury?" she repeated, in a tone which seemed to reduce the offence
to contemptible proportions by simple vagueness of mind about it.

"I don't know what to call it," said Bernard. "A poor service--an
ill-turn."

Angela gave a shrug, or rather an imitation of a shrug; for she was not
a shrugging person.

"I never knew it."

"I misrepresented you to Gordon Wright," Bernard went on.

"Why do you speak to me of him?" she asked rather sadly.

"Does it displease you?"

She hesitated a little.

"Yes, it displeases me. If your confession has anything to do with him,
I would rather not hear it."

Bernard returned to the subject another time--he had plenty of
opportunities. He spent a portion of every day in the company of these
dear women; and these days were the happiest of his life. The autumn
weather was warm and soothing, the quartier was still deserted, and the
uproar of the great city, which seemed a hundred miles away, reached
them through the dense October air with a softened and muffled sound.
The evenings, however, were growing cool, and before long they lighted
the first fire of the season in Mrs. Vivian's heavily draped little
chimney-piece. On this occasion Bernard sat there with Angela, watching
the bright crackle of the wood and feeling that the charm of winter
nights had begun. These two young persons were alone together in the
gathering dusk; it was the hour before dinner, before the lamp had been
lighted.

"I insist upon making you my confession," said Bernard. "I shall be very
unhappy until you let me do it."

"Unhappy? You are the happiest of men."

"I lie upon roses, if you will; but this memory, this remorse, is
a folded rose-leaf. I was completely mistaken about you at Baden; I
thought all manner of evil of you--or at least I said it."

"Men are dull creatures," said Angela.

"I think they are. So much so that, as I look back upon that time, there
are some things I don't understand even now."

"I don't see why you should look back. People in our position are
supposed to look forward."

"You don't like those Baden days yourself," said Bernard. "You don't
like to think of them."

"What a wonderful discovery!"

Bernard looked at her a moment in the brightening fire-light.

"What part was it you tried to play there?"

Angela shook her head.

"Men are dull creatures."

"I have already granted that, and I am eating humble pie in asking for
an explanation."

"What did you say of me?" Angela asked, after a silence.

"I said you were a coquette. Remember that I am simply historical."

She got up and stood in front of the fire, having her hand on the
chimney-piece and looking down at the blaze. For some moments she
remained there. Bernard could not see her face.

"I said you were a dangerous woman to marry," he went on deliberately.
"I said it because I thought it. I gave Gordon an opinion about you--it
was a very unfavorable one. I could n't make you out--I thought you were
playing a double part. I believed that you were ready to marry him, and
yet I saw--I thought I saw--" and Bernard paused again.

"What did you see?" and Angela turned toward him.

"That you were encouraging me--playing with me."

"And you did n't like that?"

"I liked it immensely--for myself! But did n't like it for Gordon; and
I must do myself the justice to say that I thought more of him than of
myself."

"You were an excellent friend," said Angela, simply.

"I believe I was. And I am so still," Bernard added.

She shook her head sadly.

"Poor Mr. Wright!"

"He is a dear good fellow," said Bernard.

"Thoroughly good, and dear, doubtless to his wife, the affectionate
Blanche."

"You don't like him--you don't like her," said Bernard.

"Those are two very different matters. I am very sorry for Mr. Wright."

"You need n't be that. He is doing very well."

"So you have already informed me. But I am sorry for him, all the same."

"That does n't answer my question," Bernard exclaimed, with a certain
irritation. "What part were you playing?"

"What part do you think?"

"Have n't I told you I gave it up, long ago?"

Angela stood with her back to the fire, looking at him; her hands were
locked behind her.

"Did it ever strike you that my position at Baden was a charming
one?--knowing that I had been handed over to you to be put under the
microscope--like an insect with a pin stuck through it!"

"How in the world did you know it? I thought we were particularly
careful."

"How can a woman help knowing such a thing? She guesses it--she
discovers it by instinct; especially if she be a proud woman."

"Ah," said Bernard, "if pride is a source of information, you must be a
prodigy of knowledge!"

"I don't know that you are particularly humble!" the girl retorted. "The
meekest and most submissive of her sex would not have consented to have
such a bargain as that made about her--such a trick played upon her!"

"My dearest Angela, it was no bargain--no trick!" Bernard interposed.

"It was a clumsy trick--it was a bad bargain!" she declared. "At any
rate I hated it--I hated the idea of your pretending to pass judgment
upon me; of your having come to Baden for the purpose. It was as if Mr.
Wright had been buying a horse and you had undertaken to put me through
my paces!"

"I undertook nothing--I declined to undertake."

"You certainly made a study of me--and I was determined you should get
your lesson wrong. I determined to embarrass, to mislead, to defeat you.
Or rather, I did n't determine; I simply obeyed a natural impulse of
self-defence--the impulse to evade the fierce light of criticism. I
wished to put you in the wrong."

"You did it all very well. You put me admirably in the wrong."

"The only justification for my doing it at all was my doing it well,"
said Angela.

"You were justified then! You must have hated me fiercely."

She turned her back to him and stood looking at the fire again.

"Yes, there are some things that I did that can be accounted for only by
an intense aversion."

She said this so naturally that in spite of a certain theory that was
touched upon a few pages back, Bernard was a good deal bewildered. He
rose from the sofa where he had been lounging and went and stood beside
her a moment. Then he passed his arm round her waist and murmured an
almost timorous--

"Really?"

"I don't know what you are trying to make me say!" she answered.

He looked down at her for a moment as he held her close to him.

"I don't see, after all, why I should wish to make you say it. It would
only make my remorse more acute."

She was musing, with her eyes on the fire, and for a moment she made no
answer; then, as if her attention were returning--

"Are you still talking about your remorse?" she asked.

"You see I put it very strongly."

"That I was a horrid creature?"

"That you were not a woman to marry."

"Ah, my poor Bernard," said Angela, "I can't attempt to prove to you
that you are not inconsistent!"

The month of September drew to a close, and she consented to fix a day
for their wedding. The last of October was the moment selected, and the
selection was almost all that was wanting to Bernard's happiness. I say
"almost," for there was a solitary spot in his consciousness which felt
numb and dead--unpervaded by the joy with which the rest of his spirit
seemed to thrill and tingle. The removal of this hard grain in the sweet
savour of life was needed to complete his felicity. Bernard felt that he
had made the necessary excision when, at the end of the month, he
wrote to Gordon Wright of his engagement. He had been putting off
the performance of this duty from day to day--it seemed so hard to
accomplish it gracefully. He did it at the end very briefly; it struck
him that this was the best way. Three days after he had sent his letter
there arrived one from Gordon himself, informing Bernard that he had
suddenly determined to bring Blanche to Europe. She was not well, and
they would lose no time. They were to sail within a week after his
writing. The letter contained a postscript--"Captain Lovelock comes with
us."






CHAPTER XXIV

Bernard prepared for Gordon's arrival in Paris, which, according to his
letter, would take place in a few days. He was not intending to stop in
England; Blanche desired to proceed immediately to the French capital,
to confer with her man-milliner, after which it was probable that they
would go to Italy or to the East for the winter. "I have given her a
choice of Rome or the Nile," said Gordon, "but she tells me she does n't
care a fig where we go."

I say that Bernard prepared to receive his friends, and I mean that he
prepared morally--or even intellectually. Materially speaking, he could
simply hold himself in readiness to engage an apartment at a hotel and
to go to meet them at the station. He expected to hear from Gordon
as soon as this interesting trio should reach England, but the first
notification he received came from a Parisian hotel. It came to him in
the shape of a very short note, in the morning, shortly before lunch,
and was to the effect that his friends had alighted in the Rue de la
Paix the night before.

"We were tired, and I have slept late," said Gordon; "otherwise you
should have heard from me earlier. Come to lunch, if possible. I want
extremely to see you."

Bernard, of course, made a point of going to lunch. In as short a time
as possible he found himself in Gordon's sitting-room at the Hotel
Middlesex. The table was laid for the midday repast, and a gentleman
stood with his back to the door, looking out of the window. As Bernard
came in, this gentleman turned and exhibited the ambrosial beard, the
symmetrical shape, the monocular appendage, of Captain Lovelock.

The Captain screwed his glass into his eye, and greeted Bernard in his
usual fashion--that is, as if he had parted with him overnight.

"Oh, good morning! Beastly morning, is n't it? I suppose you are come to
luncheon--I have come to luncheon. It ought to be on table, you know--it
's nearly two o'clock. But I dare say you have noticed foreigners are
never punctual--it 's only English servants that are punctual. And they
don't understand luncheon, you know--they can't make out our eating at
this sort of hour. You know they always dine so beastly early. Do you
remember the sort of time they used to dine at Baden?--half-past five,
half-past six; some unearthly hour of that kind. That 's the sort of
time you dine in America. I found they 'd invite a man at half-past six.
That 's what I call being in a hurry for your food. You know they always
accuse the Americans of making a rush for their victuals. I am bound
to say that in New York, and that sort of place, the victuals were very
good when you got them. I hope you don't mind my saying anything about
America? You know the Americans are so deucedly thin-skinned--they
always bristle up if you say anything against their institutions. The
English don't care a rap what you say--they 've got a different sort
of temper, you know. With the Americans I 'm deuced careful--I never
breathe a word about anything. While I was over there I went in for
being complimentary. I laid it on thick, and I found they would take all
I could give them. I did n't see much of their institutions, after all;
I went in for seeing the people. Some of the people were charming--upon
my soul, I was surprised at some of the people. I dare say you know some
of the people I saw; they were as nice people as you would see anywhere.
There were always a lot of people about Mrs. Wright, you know; they
told me they were all the best people. You know she is always late for
everything. She always comes in after every one is there--looking so
devilish pretty, pulling on her gloves. She wears the longest gloves I
ever saw in my life. Upon my word, if they don't come, I think I will
ring the bell and ask the waiter what 's the matter. Would n't you ring
the bell? It 's a great mistake, their trying to carry out their ideas
of lunching. That 's Wright's character, you know; he 's always trying
to carry out some idea. When I am abroad, I go in for the foreign
breakfast myself. You may depend upon it they had better give up trying
to do this sort of thing at this hour."

Captain Lovelock was more disposed to conversation than Bernard had
known him before. His discourse of old had been languid and fragmentary,
and our hero had never heard him pursue a train of ideas through so
many involutions. To Bernard's observant eye, indeed, the Captain was
an altered man. His manner betrayed a certain restless desire to be
agreeable, to anticipate judgment--a disposition to smile, and be civil,
and entertain his auditor, a tendency to move about and look out of the
window and at the clock. He struck Bernard as a trifle nervous--as
less solidly planted on his feet than when he lounged along the Baden
gravel-walks by the side of his usual companion--a lady for whom,
apparently, his admiration was still considerable. Bernard was curious
to see whether he would ring the bell to inquire into the delay
attending the service of lunch; but before this sentiment, rather idle
under the circumstances, was gratified, Blanche passed into the room
from a neighboring apartment. To Bernard's perception Blanche, at least,
was always Blanche; she was a person in whom it would not have occurred
to him to expect any puzzling variation, and the tone of her little,
soft, thin voice instantly rang in his ear like an echo of yesterday's
talk. He had already remarked to himself that after however long
an interval one might see Blanche, she re-appeared with an air of
familiarity. This was in some sense, indeed, a proof of the agreeable
impression she made, and she looked exceedingly pretty as she now
suddenly stopped on seeing our two gentlemen, and gave a little cry of
surprise.

"Ah! I did n't know you were here. They never told me. Have you been
waiting a long time? How d' ye do? You must think we are polite."
She held out her hand to Bernard, smiling very graciously. At Captain
Lovelock she barely glanced. "I hope you are very well," she went on to
Longueville; "but I need n't ask that. You 're as blooming as a rose.
What in the world has happened to you? You look so brilliant--so fresh.
Can you say that to a man--that he looks fresh? Or can you only say that
about butter and eggs?"

"It depends upon the man," said Captain Lovelock. "You can't say that a
man 's fresh who spends his time in running about after you!"

"Ah, are you here?" cried Blanche with another little cry of surprise.
"I did n't notice you--I thought you were the waiter. This is what
he calls running about after me," she added, to Bernard; "coming to
breakfast without being asked. How queerly they have arranged the
table!" she went on, gazing with her little elevated eyebrows at this
piece of furniture. "I always thought that in Paris, if they could
n't do anything else, they could arrange a table. I don't like that
at all--those horrid little dishes on each side! Don't you think those
things ought to be off the table, Mr. Longueville? I don't like to see
a lot of things I 'm not eating. And I told them to have some
flowers--pray, where are the flowers? Do they call those things
flowers? They look as if they had come out of the landlady's bonnet! Mr.
Longueville, do look at those objects."

"They are not like me--they are not very fresh," laughed Bernard.

"It 's no great matter--we have not got to eat them," growled Captain
Lovelock.

"I should think you would expect to--with the luncheon you usually
make!" rejoined Blanche. "Since you are here, though I did n't ask you,
you might as well make yourself useful. Will you be so good as to ring
the bell? If Gordon expects that we are going to wait another quarter of
an hour for him he exaggerates the patience of a long-suffering wife. If
you are very curious to know what he is about, he is writing letters, by
way of a change. He writes about eighty a day; his correspondents
must be strong people! It 's a lucky thing for me that I am married
to Gordon; if I were not he might write to me--to me, to whom it 's a
misery to have to answer even an invitation to dinner! To begin with, I
don't know how to spell. If Captain Lovelock ever boasts that he has
had letters from me, you may know it 's an invention. He has never had
anything but telegrams--three telegrams--that I sent him in America
about a pair of slippers that he had left at our house and that I did
n't know what to do with. Captain Lovelock's slippers are no trifle
to have on one's hands--on one's feet, I suppose I ought to say. For
telegrams the spelling does n't matter; the people at the office correct
it--or if they don't you can put it off on them. I never see anything
nowadays but Gordon's back," she went on, as they took their places at
table--"his noble broad back, as he sits writing his letters. That 's my
principal view of my husband. I think that now we are in Paris I ought
to have a portrait of it by one of the great artists. It would be such a
characteristic pose. I have quite forgotten his face and I don't think I
should know it."

Gordon's face, however, presented itself just at this moment; he came in
quickly, with his countenance flushed with the pleasure of meeting his
old friend again. He had the sun-scorched look of a traveller who has
just crossed the Atlantic, and he smiled at Bernard with his honest
eyes.

"Don't think me a great brute for not being here to receive you," he
said, as he clasped his hand. "I was writing an important letter and I
put it to myself in this way: 'If I interrupt my letter I shall have to
come back and finish it; whereas if I finish it now, I can have all the
rest of the day to spend with him.' So I stuck to it to the end, and now
we can be inseparable."

"You may be sure Gordon reasoned it out," said Blanche, while her
husband offered his hand in silence to Captain Lovelock.

"Gordon's reasoning is as fine as other people's feeling!" declared
Bernard, who was conscious of a desire to say something very pleasant to
Gordon, and who did not at all approve of Blanche's little ironical tone
about her husband.

"And Bernard's compliments are better than either," said Gordon,
laughing and taking his seat at table.

"I have been paying him compliments," Blanche went on. "I have been
telling him he looks so brilliant, so blooming--as if something had
happened to him, as if he had inherited a fortune. He must have been
doing something very wicked, and he ought to tell us all about it,
to amuse us. I am sure you are a dreadful Parisian, Mr. Longueville.
Remember that we are three dull, virtuous people, exceedingly bored
with each other's society, and wanting to hear something strange and
exciting. If it 's a little improper, that won't spoil it."

"You certainly are looking uncommonly well," said Gordon, still smiling,
across the table, at his friend. "I see what Blanche means--"

"My dear Gordon, that 's a great event," his wife interposed.

"It 's a good deal to pretend, certainly," he went on, smiling always,
with his red face and his blue eyes. "But this is no great credit to me,
because Bernard's superb condition would strike any one. You look as if
you were going to marry the Lord Mayor's daughter!"

If Bernard was blooming, his bloom at this juncture must have deepened,
and in so doing indeed have contributed an even brighter tint to his
expression of salubrious happiness. It was one of the rare occasions of
his life when he was at a loss for a verbal expedient.

"It 's a great match," he nevertheless murmured, jestingly. "You must
excuse my inflated appearance."

"It has absorbed you so much that you have had no time to write to me,"
said Gordon. "I expected to hear from you after you arrived."

"I wrote to you a fortnight ago--just before receiving your own letter.
You left New York before my letter reached it."

"Ah, it will have crossed us," said Gordon. "But now that we have your
society I don't care. Your letters, of course, are delightful, but that
is still better."

In spite of this sympathetic statement Bernard cannot be said to have
enjoyed his lunch; he was thinking of something else that lay before him
and that was not agreeable. He was like a man who has an acrobatic feat
to perform--a wide ditch to leap, a high pole to climb--and who has a
presentiment of fractures and bruises. Fortunately he was not obliged to
talk much, as Mrs. Gordon displayed even more than her usual vivacity,
rendering her companions the graceful service of lifting the burden of
conversation from their shoulders.

"I suppose you were surprised to see us rushing out here so suddenly,"
she observed in the course of the repast. "We had said nothing about
it when you last saw us, and I believe we are supposed to tell you
everything, ain't we? I certainly have told you a great many things, and
there are some of them I hope you have n't repeated. I have no doubt
you have told them all over Paris, but I don't care what you tell in
Paris--Paris is n't so easily shocked. Captain Lovelock does n't repeat
what I tell him; I set him up as a model of discretion. I have told him
some pretty bad things, and he has liked them so much he has kept them
all to himself. I say my bad things to Captain Lovelock, and my good
things to other people; he does n't know the difference and he is
perfectly content."

"Other people as well often don't know the difference," said Gordon,
gravely. "You ought always to tell us which are which."

Blanche gave her husband a little impertinent stare.

"When I am not appreciated," she said, with an attempt at superior
dryness, "I am too proud to point it out. I don't know whether you know
that I 'm proud," she went on, turning to Gordon and glancing at Captain
Lovelock; "it 's a good thing to know. I suppose Gordon will say that I
ought to be too proud to point that out; but what are you to do when no
one has any imagination? You have a grain or two, Mr. Longueville; but
Captain Lovelock has n't a speck. As for Gordon, je n'en parle pas! But
even you, Mr. Longueville, would never imagine that I am an interesting
invalid--that we are travelling for my delicate health. The doctors have
n't given me up, but I have given them up. I know I don't look as if I
were out of health; but that 's because I always try to look my best.
My appearance proves nothing--absolutely nothing. Do you think my
appearance proves anything, Captain Lovelock?"

Captain Lovelock scrutinized Blanche's appearance with a fixed and
solemn eye; and then he replied--

"It proves you are very lovely."

Blanche kissed her finger-tips to him in return for this compliment.

"You only need to give Captain Lovelock a chance," she rattled on, "and
he is as clever as any one. That 's what I like to do to my friends--I
like to make chances for them. Captain Lovelock is like my dear little
blue terrier that I left at home. If I hold out a stick he will jump
over it. He won't jump without the stick; but as soon as I produce it he
knows what he has to do. He looks at it a moment and then he gives his
little hop. He knows he will have a lump of sugar, and Captain Lovelock
expects one as well. Dear Captain Lovelock, shall I ring for a lump?
Would n't it be touching? Garcon, un morceau de sucre pour Monsieur
le Capitaine! But what I give Monsieur le Capitaine is moral sugar! I
usually administer it in private, and he shall have a good big morsel
when you go away."

Gordon got up, turning to Bernard and looking at his watch.

"Let us go away, in that case," he said, smiling, "and leave Captain
Lovelock to receive his reward. We will go and take a walk; we will go
up the Champs Elysees. Good morning, Monsieur le Capitaine."

Neither Blanche nor the Captain offered any opposition to this proposal,
and Bernard took leave of his hostess and joined Gordon, who had already
passed into the antechamber.






CHAPTER XXV

Gordon took his arm and they gained the street; they strolled in the
direction of the Champs Elysees.

"For a little exercise and a good deal of talk, it 's the pleasantest
place," said Gordon. "I have a good deal to say; I have a good deal to
ask you."

Bernard felt the familiar pressure of his friend's hand, as it rested on
his arm, and it seemed to him never to have lain there with so heavy a
weight. It held him fast--it held him to account; it seemed a physical
symbol of responsibility. Bernard was not re-assured by hearing that
Gordon had a great deal to say, and he expected a sudden explosion of
bitterness on the subject of Blanche's irremediable triviality. The
afternoon was a lovely one--the day was a perfect example of the
mellowest mood of autumn. The air was warm and filled with a golden
haze, which seemed to hang about the bare Parisian trees, as if with a
tender impulse to drape their nakedness. A fine day in Paris brings
out a wonderfully bright and appreciative multitude of strollers and
loungers, and the liberal spaces of the Champs Elysees were on this
occasion filled with those placid votaries of inexpensive entertainment
who abound in the French capital. The benches and chairs on the edge of
the great avenue exhibited a dense fraternity of gazers, and up and down
the broad walk passed the slow-moving and easily pleased pedestrians.
Gordon, in spite of his announcement that he had a good deal to say,
confined himself at first to superficial allusions, and Bernard after a
while had the satisfaction of perceiving that he was not likely, for the
moment, to strike the note of conjugal discord. He appeared, indeed, to
feel no desire to speak of Blanche in any manner whatever. He fell into
the humor of the hour and the scene, looked at the crowd, talked about
trifles. He remarked that Paris was a wonderful place after all, and
that a little glimpse of the Parisian picture was a capital thing as a
change; said he was very glad they had come, and that for his part he
was willing to stay three months.

"And what have you been doing with yourself?" he asked. "How have you
been occupied, and what are you meaning to do?"

Bernard said nothing for a moment, and Gordon presently glanced at
his face to see why he was silent. Bernard, looking askance, met his
companion's eyes, and then, resting his own upon them, he stopped short.
His heart was beating; it was a question of saying to Gordon outright,
"I have been occupied in becoming engaged to Angela Vivian." But he
could n't say it, and yet he must say something. He tried to invent
something; but he could think of nothing, and still Gordon was looking
at him.

"I am so glad to see you!" he exclaimed, for want of something better;
and he blushed--he felt foolish, he felt false--as he said it.

"My dear Bernard!" Gordon murmured gratefully, as they walked on. "It
's very good of you to say that; I am very glad we are together again.
I want to say something," he added, in a moment; "I hope you won't
mind it--" Bernard gave a little laugh at his companion's scruples, and
Gordon continued. "To tell the truth, it has sometimes seemed to me that
we were not so good friends as we used to be--that something had come
between us--I don't know what, I don't know why. I don't know what to
call it but a sort of lowering of the temperature. I don't know whether
you have felt it, or whether it has been simply a fancy of mine.
Whatever it may have been, it 's all over, is n't it? We are too old
friends--too good friends--not to stick together. Of course, the rubs of
life may occasionally loosen the cohesion; but it is very good to feel
that, with a little direct contact, it may easily be re-established.
Is n't that so? But we should n't reason about these things; one feels
them, and that 's enough."

Gordon spoke in his clear, cheerful voice, and Bernard listened
intently. It seemed to him there was an undertone of pain and effort in
his companion's speech; it was that of an unhappy man trying to be wise
and make the best of things.

"Ah, the rubs of life--the rubs of life!" Bernard repeated vaguely.

"We must n't mind them," said Gordon, with a conscientious laugh.
"We must toughen our hides; or, at the worst, we must plaster up our
bruises. But why should we choose this particular place and hour for
talking of the pains of life?" he went on. "Are we not in the midst of
its pleasures? I mean, henceforth, to cultivate its pleasures. What
are yours, just now, Bernard? Is n't it supposed that in Paris one must
amuse one's self? How have you been amusing yourself?"

"I have been leading a very quiet life," said Bernard.

"I notice that 's what people always say when they have been
particularly dissipated. What have you done? Whom have you seen that one
knows?"

Bernard was silent a moment.

"I have seen some old friends of yours," he said at last. "I have seen
Mrs. Vivian and her daughter."

"Ah!" Gordon made this exclamation, and then stopped short. Bernard
looked at him, but Gordon was looking away; his eyes had caught some one
in the crowd. Bernard followed the direction they had taken, and then
Gordon went on: "Talk of the devil--excuse the adage! Are not those the
ladies in question?"

Mrs. Vivian and her daughter were, in fact, seated among a great many
other quiet people, in a couple of hired chairs, at the edge of the
great avenue. They were turned toward our two friends, and when Bernard
distinguished them, in the well-dressed multitude, they were looking
straight at Gordon Wright.

"They see you!" said Bernard.

"You say that as if I wished to run away," Gordon answered. "I don't
want to run away; on the contrary, I want to speak to them."

"That 's easily done," said Bernard, and they advanced to the two
ladies.

Mrs. Vivian and her daughter rose from their chairs as they came; they
had evidently rapidly exchanged observations, and had decided that
it would facilitate their interview with Gordon Wright to receive him
standing. He made his way to them through the crowd, blushing deeply,
as he always did when excited; then he stood there bare-headed,
shaking hands with each of them, with a fixed smile, and with nothing,
apparently, to say. Bernard watched Angela's face; she was giving his
companion a beautiful smile. Mrs. Vivian was delicately cordial.

"I was sure it was you," said Gordon at last. "We were just talking of
you."

"Did Mr. Longueville deny it was we?" asked Mrs. Vivian, archly; "after
we had supposed that we had made an impression on him!"

"I knew you were in Paris--we were in the act of talking of you," Gordon
went on. "I am very glad to see you."

Bernard had shaken hands with Angela, looking at her intently; and in
her eyes, as his own met them, it seemed to him that there was a gleam
of mockery. At whom was she mocking--at Gordon, or at himself? Bernard
was uncomfortable enough not to care to be mocked; but he felt even more
sorry that Gordon should be.

"We also knew you were coming--Mr. Longueville had told us," said Mrs.
Vivian; "and we have been expecting the pleasure of seeing Blanche. Dear
little Blanche!"

"Dear little Blanche will immediately come and see you," Gordon replied.

"Immediately, we hope," said Mrs. Vivian. "We shall be so very glad."
Bernard perceived that she wished to say something soothing and
sympathetic to poor Gordon; having it, as he supposed, on her
conscience that, after having once encouraged him to regard himself
as indispensable (in the capacity of son-in-law) to her happiness,
she should now present to him the spectacle of a felicity which had
established itself without his aid. "We were so very much interested in
your marriage," she went on. "We thought it so--so delightful."

Gordon fixed his eyes on the ground for a moment.

"I owe it partly to you," he answered. "You had done so much for
Blanche. You had so cultivated her mind and polished her manners that
her attractions were doubled, and I fell an easy victim to them."

He uttered these words with an exaggerated solemnity, the result of
which was to produce, for a moment, an almost embarrassing silence.
Bernard was rapidly becoming more and more impatient of his own
embarrassment, and now he exclaimed, in a loud and jovial voice--

"Blanche makes victims by the dozen! I was a victim last winter; we are
all victims!"

"Dear little Blanche!" Mrs. Vivian murmured again.

Angela had said nothing; she had simply stood there, making no attempt
to address herself to Gordon, and yet with no affectation of reserve or
of indifference. Now she seemed to feel the impulse to speak to him.

"When Blanche comes to see us, you must be sure to come with her," she
said, with a friendly smile.

Gordon looked at her, but he said nothing.

"We were so sorry to hear she is out of health," Angela went on.

Still Gordon was silent, with his eyes fixed on her expressive and
charming face.

"It is not serious," he murmured at last.

"She used to be so well--so bright," said Angela, who also appeared to
have the desire to say something kind and comfortable.

Gordon made no response to this; he only looked at her.

"I hope you are well, Miss Vivian," he broke out at last.

"Very well, thank you."

"Do you live in Paris?"

"We have pitched our tent here for the present."

"Do you like it?"

"I find it no worse than other places."

Gordon appeared to desire to talk with her; but he could think of
nothing to say. Talking with her was a pretext for looking at her;
and Bernard, who thought she had never been so handsome as at that
particular moment, smiling at her troubled ex-lover, could easily
conceive that his friend should desire to prolong this privilege.

"Have you been sitting here long?" Gordon asked, thinking of something
at last.

"Half an hour. We came out to walk, and my mother felt tired. It is time
we should turn homeward," Angela added.

"Yes, I am tired, my daughter. We must take a voiture, if Mr.
Longueville will be so good as to find us one," said Mrs. Vivian.

Bernard, professing great alacrity, looked about him; but he still
lingered near his companions. Gordon had thought of something else.
"Have you been to Baden again?" Bernard heard him ask. But at this
moment Bernard espied at a distance an empty hackney-carriage crawling
up the avenue, and he was obliged to go and signal to it. When he came
back, followed by the vehicle, the two ladies, accompanied by Gordon,
had come to the edge of the pavement. They shook hands with Gordon
before getting into the cab, and Mrs. Vivian exclaimed--

"Be sure you give our love to your dear wife!"

Then the two ladies settled themselves and smiled their adieux, and the
little victoria rumbled away at an easy pace, while Bernard stood with
Gordon, looking after it. They watched it a moment, and then Gordon
turned to his companion. He looked at Bernard for some moments intently,
with a singular expression.

"It is strange for me to see her!" he said, presently.

"I hope it is not altogether disagreeable," Bernard answered smiling.

"She is delightfully handsome," Gordon went on.

"She is a beautiful woman."

"And the strange thing is that she strikes me now so differently,"
Gordon continued. "I used to think her so mysterious--so ambiguous. She
seems to be now so simple."

"Ah," said Bernard, laughing, "that's an improvement!"

"So simple and so good!" Gordon exclaimed.

Bernard laid his hand on his companion's shoulder, shaking his head
slowly.

"You must not think too much about that," he said.

"So simple--so good--so charming!" Gordon repeated.

"Ah, my dear Gordon!" Bernard murmured.

But still Gordon continued.

"So intelligent, so reasonable, so sensible."

"Have you discovered all that in two minutes' talk?"

"Yes, in two minutes' talk. I should n't hesitate about her now!"

"It 's better you should n't say that," said Bernard.

"Why should n't I say it? It seems to me it 's my duty to say it."

"No--your duty lies elsewhere," said Bernard. "There are two reasons.
One is that you have married another woman."

"What difference does that make?" cried Gordon.

Bernard made no attempt to answer this inquiry; he simply went on--

"The other is--the other is--"

But here he paused.

"What is the other?" Gordon asked.

"That I am engaged to marry Miss Vivian."

And with this Bernard took his hand off Gordon's shoulder.

Gordon stood staring.

"To marry Miss Vivian?"

Now that Bernard had heard himself say it, audibly, distinctly, loudly,
the spell of his apprehension seemed broken, and he went on bravely.

"We are to be married very shortly. It has all come about within a few
weeks. It will seem to you very strange--perhaps you won't like it. That
's why I have hesitated to tell you."

Gordon turned pale; it was the first time Bernard had ever seen him do
so; evidently he did not like it. He stood staring and frowning.

"Why, I thought--I thought," he began at last--"I thought that you
disliked her!"

"I supposed so, too," said Bernard. "But I have got over that."

Gordon turned away, looking up the great avenue into the crowd. Then
turning back, he said--

"I am very much surprised."

"And you are not pleased!"

Gordon fixed his eyes on the ground a moment.

"I congratulate you on your engagement," he said at last, looking up
with a face that seemed to Bernard hard and unnatural.

"It is very good of you to say that, but of course you can't like it! I
was sure you would n't like it. But what could I do? I fell in love with
her, and I could n't run away simply to spare you a surprise. My dear
Gordon," Bernard added, "you will get used to it."

"Very likely," said Gordon, dryly. "But you must give me time."

"As long as you like!"

Gordon stood for a moment again staring down at the ground.

"Very well, then, I will take my time," he said. "Good-bye!"

And he turned away, as if to walk off alone.

"Where are you going?" asked Bernard, stopping him.

"I don't know--to the hotel, anywhere. To try to get used to what you
have told me."

"Don't try too hard; it will come of itself," said Bernard.

"We shall see!"

And Gordon turned away again.

"Do you prefer to go alone?"

"Very much--if you will excuse me!"

"I have asked you to excuse a greater want of ceremony!" said Bernard,
smiling.

"I have not done so yet!" Gordon rejoined; and marching off, he mingled
with the crowd.

Bernard watched him till he lost sight of him, and then, dropping into
the first empty chair that he saw, he sat and reflected that his friend
liked it quite as little as he had feared.






CHAPTER XXVI

Bernard sat thinking for a long time; at first with a good deal of
mortification--at last with a good deal of bitterness. He felt angry
at last; but he was not angry with himself. He was displeased with poor
Gordon, and with Gordon's displeasure. He was uncomfortable, and he was
vexed at his discomfort. It formed, it seemed to him, no natural part of
his situation; he had had no glimpse of it in the book of fate where he
registered on a fair blank page his betrothal to a charming girl. That
Gordon should be surprised, and even a little shocked and annoyed--this
was his right and his privilege; Bernard had been prepared for that, and
had determined to make the best of it. But it must not go too far; there
were limits to the morsel of humble pie that he was disposed to swallow.
Something in Gordon's air and figure, as he went off in a huff, looking
vicious and dangerous--yes, that was positively his look--left a
sinister impression on Bernard's mind, and, after a while, made him
glad to take refuge in being angry. One would like to know what Gordon
expected, par exemple! Did he expect Bernard to give up Angela simply
to save him a shock; or to back out of his engagement by way of an ideal
reparation? No, it was too absurd, and, if Gordon had a wife of his own,
why in the name of justice should not Bernard have one?

Being angry was a relief, but it was not exactly a solution, and
Bernard, at last, leaving his place, where for an hour or two he had
been absolutely unconscious of everything that went on around him,
wandered about for some time in deep restlessness and irritation. At
one moment he thought of going back to Gordon's hotel, to see him, to
explain. But then he became aware that he was too angry for that--to say
nothing of Gordon's being too angry also; and, moreover, that there
was nothing to explain. He was to marry Angela Vivian; that was a
very simple fact--it needed no explanation. Was it so wonderful, so
inconceivable, an incident so unlikely to happen? He went, as he always
did on Sunday, to dine with Mrs. Vivian, and it seemed to him that he
perceived in the two ladies some symptoms of a discomposure which had
the same origin as his own. Bernard, on this occasion, at dinner, failed
to make himself particularly agreeable; he ate fast--as if he had no
idea what he was eating, and talked little; every now and then his
eyes rested for some time upon Angela, with a strange, eagerly excited
expression, as if he were looking her over and trying to make up his
mind about her afresh. This young lady bore his inscrutable scrutiny
with a deal of superficial composure; but she was also silent, and she
returned his gaze, from time to time, with an air of unusual anxiety.
She was thinking, of course, of Gordon, Bernard said to himself; and a
woman's first meeting, in after years, with an ex-lover must always make
a certain impression upon her. Gordon, however, had never been a
lover, and if Bernard noted Angela's gravity it was not because he felt
jealous. "She is simply sorry for him," he said to himself; and by the
time he had finished his dinner it began to come back to him that he
was sorry, too. Mrs. Vivian was probably sorry as well, for she had a
slightly confused and preoccupied look--a look from which, even in the
midst of his chagrin, Bernard extracted some entertainment. It was Mrs.
Vivian's intermittent conscience that had been reminded of one of its
lapses; her meeting with Gordon Wright had recalled the least exemplary
episode of her life--the time when she whispered mercenary counsel in
the ear of a daughter who sat, grave and pale, looking at her with eyes
that wondered. Mrs. Vivian blushed a little now, when she met Bernard's
eyes; and to remind herself that she was after all a virtuous woman,
talked as much as possible about superior and harmless things--the
beauty of the autumn weather, the pleasure of seeing French papas
walking about on Sunday with their progeny in their hands, the
peculiarities of the pulpit-oratory of the country as exemplified in
the discourse of a Protestant pasteur whom she had been to hear in the
morning.

When they rose from table and went back into her little drawing-room,
she left her daughter alone for awhile with Bernard. The two were
standing together before the fire; Bernard watched Mrs. Vivian close the
door softly behind her. Then, looking for a moment at his companion--

"He is furious!" he announced at last.

"Furious?" said Angela. "Do you mean Mr. Wright?"

"The amiable, reasonable Gordon. He takes it very hard."

"Do you mean about me?" asked Angela.

"It 's not with you he 's furious, of course; it is with me. He won't
let me off easily."

Angela looked for a moment at the fire.

"I am very sorry for him," she said, at last.

"It seems to me I am the one to be pitied," said Bernard; "and I don't
see what compassion you, of all people in the world, owe him."

Angela again rested her eyes on the fire; then presently, looking up--

"He liked me very much," she remarked.

"All the more shame to him!" cried Bernard.

"What do you mean?" asked the girl, with her beautiful stare.

"If he liked you, why did he give you up?"

"He did n't give me up."

"What do you mean, please?" asked Bernard, staring back at her.

"I sent him away--I refused him," said Angela.

"Yes; but you thought better of it, and your mother had persuaded you
that if he should ask you again, you had better accept him. Then it was
that he backed out--in consequence of what I said to him on his return
from England."

She shook her head slowly, with a strange smile.

"My poor Bernard, you are talking very wildly. He did ask me again."

"That night?" cried Bernard.

"The night he came back from England--the last time I saw him, until
to-day."

"After I had denounced you?" our puzzled hero exclaimed, frowning
portentously.

"I am sorry to let you know the small effect of your words!"

Bernard folded his hands together--almost devoutly--and stood gazing at
her with a long, inarticulate murmur of satisfaction.

"Ah! then, I did n't injure you--I did n't deprive you of a chance?"

"Oh, sir, the intention on your part was the same!" Angela exclaimed.

"Then all my uneasiness, all my remorse, were wasted?" he went on.

But she kept the same tone, and its tender archness only gave a greater
sweetness to his sense of relief.

"It was a very small penance for you to pay."

"You dismissed him definitely, and that was why he vanished?" asked
Bernard, wondering still.

"He gave me another 'chance,' as you elegantly express it, and I
declined to take advantage of it."

"Ah, well, now," cried Bernard, "I am sorry for him!"

"I was very kind--very respectful," said Angela. "I thanked him from the
bottom of my heart; I begged his pardon very humbly for the wrong--if
wrong it was--that I was doing him. I did n't in the least require of
him that he should leave Baden at seven o'clock the next morning. I had
no idea that he would do so, and that was the reason that I insisted to
my mother that we ourselves should go away. When we went I knew nothing
about his having gone, and I supposed he was still there. I did n't wish
to meet him again."

Angela gave this information slowly, softly, with pauses between the
sentences, as if she were recalling the circumstances with a certain
effort; and meanwhile Bernard, with his transfigured face and his eyes
fixed upon her lips, was moving excitedly about the room.

"Well, he can't accuse me, then!" he broke out again. "If what I said
had no more effect upon him than that, I certainly did him no wrong."

"I think you are rather vexed he did n't believe you," said Angela.

"I confess I don't understand it. He had all the air of it. He certainly
had not the air of a man who was going to rush off and give you the last
proof of his confidence."

"It was not a proof of confidence," said Angela. "It had nothing to
do with me. It was as between himself and you; it was a proof of
independence. He did believe you, more or less, and what you said fell
in with his own impressions--strange impressions that they were, poor
man! At the same time, as I say, he liked me, too; it was out of his
liking me that all his trouble came! He caught himself in the act of
listening to you too credulously--and that seemed to him unmanly and
dishonorable. The sensation brought with it a reaction, and to prove
to himself that in such a matter he could be influenced by nobody, he
marched away, an hour after he had talked with you, and, in the teeth
of his perfect mistrust, confirmed by your account of my
irregularities--heaven forgive you both!--again asked me to be his wife.
But he hoped I would refuse!"

"Ah," cried Bernard, "the recreant! He deserved--he deserved--"

"That I should accept him?" Angela asked, smiling still.

Bernard was so much affected by this revelation, it seemed to him to
make such a difference in his own responsibility and to lift such a
weight off his conscience, that he broke out again into the liveliest
ejaculations of relief.

"Oh, I don't care for anything, now, and I can do what I please! Gordon
may hate me, and I shall be sorry for him; but it 's not my fault, and I
owe him no reparation. No, no; I am free!"

"It 's only I who am not, I suppose," said Angela, "and the reparation
must come from me! If he is unhappy, I must take the responsibility."

"Ah yes, of course," said Bernard, kissing her.

"But why should he be unhappy?" asked Angela. "If I refused him, it was
what he wanted."

"He is hard to please," Bernard rejoined. "He has got a wife of his
own."

"If Blanche does n't please him, he is certainly difficult;" and Angela
mused a little. "But you told me the other day that they were getting on
so well."

"Yes, I believe I told you," Bernard answered, musing a little too.

"You are not attending to what I say."

"No, I am thinking of something else--I am thinking of what it was that
made you refuse him that way, at the last, after you had let your mother
hope." And Bernard stood there, smiling at her.

"Don't think any more; you will not find out," the girl declared,
turning away.

"Ah, it was cruel of you to let me think I was wrong all these years,"
he went on; "and, at the time, since you meant to refuse him, you might
have been more frank with me."

"I thought my fault had been that I was too frank."

"I was densely stupid, and you might have made me understand better."

"Ah," said Angela, "you ask a great deal of a girl!"

"Why have you let me go on so long thinking that my deluded words had
had an effect upon Gordon--feeling that I had done you a brutal wrong?
It was real to me, the wrong--and I have told you of the pangs and the
shame which, for so many months, it has cost me! Why have you never
undeceived me until to-day, and then only by accident?"

At this question Angela blushed a little; then she answered, smiling--

"It was my vengeance."

Bernard shook his head.

"That won't do--you don't mean it. You never cared--you were too proud
to care; and when I spoke to you about my fault, you did n't even know
what I meant. You might have told me, therefore, that my remorse
was idle, that what I said to Gordon had not been of the smallest
consequence, and that the rupture had come from yourself."

For some time Angela said nothing, then at last she gave him one of the
deeply serious looks with which her face was occasionally ornamented.

"If you want really to know, then--can't you see that your remorse
seemed to me connected in a certain way with your affection; a sort of
guarantee of it? You thought you had injured some one or other, and
that seemed to be mixed up with your loving me, and therefore I let it
alone."

"Ah," said Bernard, "my remorse is all gone, and yet I think I love you
about as much as ever! So you see how wrong you were not to tell me."

"The wrong to you I don't care about. It is very true I might have told
you for Mr. Wright's sake. It would perhaps have made him look better.
But as you never attacked him for deserting me, it seemed needless for
me to defend him."



"I confess," said Bernard, "I am quite at sea about Gordon's look in
the matter. Is he looking better now--or is he looking worse? You put it
very well just now; I was attending to you, though you said I was not.
If he hoped you would refuse him, with whom is his quarrel at present?
And why was he so cool to me for months after we parted at Baden? If
that was his state of mind, why should he accuse me of inconsistency?"

"There is something in it, after all, that a woman can understand. I
don't know whether a man can. He hoped I would refuse him, and yet when
I had done so he was vexed. After a while his vexation subsided, and he
married poor Blanche; but, on learning to-day that I had accepted you,
it flickered up again. I suppose that was natural enough; but it won't
be serious."

"What will not be serious, my dear?" asked Mrs. Vivian, who had come
back to the drawing-room, and who, apparently, could not hear that the
attribute in question was wanting in any direction, without some alarm.

"Shall I tell mamma, Bernard?" said Angela.

"Ah, my dear child, I hope it 's nothing that threatens your mutual
happiness," mamma murmured, with gentle earnestness.

"Does it threaten our mutual happiness, Bernard?" the girl went on,
smiling.

"Let Mrs. Vivian decide whether we ought to let it make us miserable,"
said Bernard. "Dear Mrs. Vivian, you are a casuist, and this is a nice
case."

"Is it anything about poor Mr. Wright?" the elder lady inquired.

"Why do you say 'poor' Mr. Wright?" asked Bernard.

"Because I am sadly afraid he is not happy with Blanche."

"How did you discover that--without seeing them together?"

"Well, perhaps you will think me very fanciful," said Mrs. Vivian; "but
it was by the way he looked at Angela. He has such an expressive face."

"He looked at me very kindly, mamma," Angela observed.

"He regularly stared, my daughter. In any one else I should have said
it was rude. But his situation is so peculiar; and one could see that he
admired you still." And Mrs. Vivian gave a little soft sigh.

"Ah! she is thinking of the thirty thousand a year," Bernard said to
himself.

"I am sure I hope he admires me still," the girl cried, laughing. "There
is no great harm in that."

"He was comparing you with Blanche--and he was struck with the
contrast."

"It could n't have been in my favor. If it 's a question of being looked
at, Blanche bears it better than I."

"Poor little Blanche!" murmured Mrs. Vivian, sweetly.

"Why did you tell me he was so happy with her?" Angela asked, turning to
Bernard, abruptly.

Bernard gazed at her a moment, with his eyebrows raised.

"I never saw any one ask such sudden questions!" he exclaimed.

"You can answer me at your leisure," she rejoined, turning away.

"It was because I adored you."

"You would n't say that at your leisure," said the girl.

Mrs. Vivian stood watching them.

"You, who are so happy together, you ought to think kindly of others who
are less fortunate."

"That is very true, Mrs. Vivian; and I have never thought of any one so
kindly as I have of Gordon for the last year."

Angela turned round again.

"Is Blanche so very bad, then?"

"You will see for yourself!"

"Ah, no," said Mrs. Vivian, "she is not bad; she is only very light. I
am so glad she is to be near us again. I think a great deal can be done
by association. We must help her, Angela. I think we helped her before."

"It is also very true that she is light, Mrs. Vivian," Bernard observed,
"and if you could make her a little heavier, I should be tremendously
grateful."

Bernard's prospective mother-in-law looked at him a little.

"I don't know whether you are laughing at me--I always think you are.
But I shall not give up Blanche for that. I never give up any one that I
have once tried to help. Blanche will come back to me."

Mrs. Vivian had hardly spoken when the sharp little vibration of her
door-bell was heard in the hall. Bernard stood for a moment looking at
the door of the drawing-room.

"It is poor Gordon come to make a scene!" he announced.

"Is that what you mean--that he opposed your marriage?" asked Mrs.
Vivian, with a frightened air.

"I don't know what he proposes to do with Blanche," said Bernard,
laughing.

There were voices in the hall. Angela had been listening.

"You say she will come back to you, mamma," she exclaimed. "Here she is
arrived!"






CHAPTER XXVII

At the same moment the door was thrown open, and Mrs. Gordon appeared
on the threshold with a gentleman behind her. Blanche stood an instant
looking into the lighted room and hesitating--flushed a little, smiling,
extremely pretty.

"May I come in?" she said, "and may I bring in Captain Lovelock?"

The two ladies, of course, fluttering toward her with every
demonstration of hospitality, drew her into the room, while Bernard
proceeded to greet the Captain, who advanced with a certain awkward and
bashful majesty, almost sweeping with his great stature Mrs. Vivian's
humble ceiling. There was a tender exchange of embraces between Blanche
and her friends, and the charming visitor, losing no time, began to
chatter with her usual volubility. Mrs. Vivian and Angela made her
companion graciously welcome; but Blanche begged they would n't mind
him--she had only brought him as a watch-dog.

"His place is on the rug," she said. "Captain Lovelock, go and lie down
on the rug."

"Upon my soul, there is nothing else but rugs in these French places!"
the Captain rejoined, looking round Mrs. Vivian's salon. "Which rug do
you mean?"

Mrs. Vivian had remarked to Blanche that it was very kind of her to come
first, and Blanche declared that she could not have laid her head on her
pillow before she had seen her dear Mrs. Vivian.

"Do you suppose I would wait because I am married?" she inquired, with
a keen little smile in her charming eyes. "I am not so much married as
that, I can tell you! Do you think I look much as if I were married,
with no one to bring me here to-night but Captain Lovelock?"

"I am sure Captain Lovelock is a very gallant escort," said Mrs. Vivian.

"Oh, he was not afraid--that is, he was not afraid of the journey,
though it lay all through those dreadful wild Champs Elysees. But when
we arrived, he was afraid to come in--to come up here. Captain Lovelock
is so modest, you know--in spite of all the success he had in America.
He will tell you about the success he had in America; it quite makes up
for the defeat of the British army in the Revolution. They were defeated
in the Revolution, the British, were n't they? I always told him so, but
he insists they were not. 'How do we come to be free, then?' I always
ask him; 'I suppose you admit that we are free.' Then he becomes
personal and says that I am free enough, certainly. But it 's the
general fact I mean; I wish you would tell him about the general fact. I
think he would believe you, because he knows you know a great deal about
history and all that. I don't mean this evening, but some time when
it is convenient. He did n't want to come in--he wanted to stay in the
carriage and smoke a cigar; he thought you would n't like it, his coming
with me the first time. But I told him he need n't mind that, for I
would certainly explain. I would be very careful to let you know that
I brought him only as a substitute. A substitute for whom? A substitute
for my husband, of course. My dear Mrs. Vivian, of course I ought to
bring you some pretty message from Gordon--that he is dying to come and
see you, only that he had nineteen letters to write and that he could
n't possibly stir from his fireside. I suppose a good wife ought to
invent excuses for her husband--ought to throw herself into the breach;
is n't that what they call it? But I am afraid I am not a good wife.
Do you think I am a good wife, Mr. Longueville? You once stayed three
months with us, and you had a chance to see. I don't ask you that
seriously, because you never tell the truth. I always do; so I will
say I am not a good wife. And then the breach is too big, and I am too
little. Oh, I am too little, Mrs. Vivian; I know I am too little. I am
the smallest woman living; Gordon can scarcely see me with a microscope,
and I believe he has the most powerful one in America. He is going to
get another here; that is one of the things he came abroad for; perhaps
it will do better. I do tell the truth, don't I, Mrs. Vivian? I have
that merit, if I have n't any other. You once told me so at Baden; you
said you could say one thing for me, at any rate--that I did n't tell
fibs. You were very nice to me at Baden," Blanche went on, with her
little intent smile, laying her hand in that of her hostess. "You see,
I have never forgotten it. So, to keep up my reputation, I must tell the
truth about Gordon. He simply said he would n't come--voila! He gave no
reason and he did n't send you any pretty message. He simply declined,
and he went out somewhere else. So you see he is n't writing letters. I
don't know where he can have gone; perhaps he has gone to the theatre.
I know it is n't proper to go to the theatre on Sunday evening; but
they say charity begins at home, and as Gordon's does n't begin at home,
perhaps it does n't begin anywhere. I told him that if he would n't come
with me I would come alone, and he said I might do as I chose--that he
was not in a humor for making visits. I wanted to come to you very much;
I had been thinking about it all day; and I am so fond of a visit like
this in the evening, without being invited. Then I thought perhaps you
had a salon--does n't every one in Paris have a salon? I tried to have a
salon in New York, only Gordon said it would n't do. He said it was n't
in our manners. Is this a salon to-night, Mrs. Vivian? Oh, do say it
is; I should like so much to see Captain Lovelock in a salon! By good
fortune he happened to have been dining with us; so I told him he must
bring me here. I told you I would explain, Captain Lovelock," she added,
"and I hope you think I have made it clear."

The Captain had turned very red during this wandering discourse. He sat
pulling his beard and shifting the position which, with his stalwart
person, he had taken up on a little gilded chair--a piece of furniture
which every now and then gave a delicate creak.

"I always understand you well enough till you begin to explain," he
rejoined, with a candid, even if embarrassed, laugh. "Then, by Jove,
I 'm quite in the woods. You see such a lot more in things than most
people. Does n't she, Miss Vivian?"

"Blanche has a fine imagination," said Angela, smiling frankly at the
charming visitor.

When Blanche was fairly adrift upon the current of her articulate
reflections, it was the habit of her companions--indeed, it was a sort
of tacit agreement among them--simply to make a circle and admire. They
sat about and looked at her--yawning, perhaps, a little at times, but
on the whole very well entertained, and often exchanging a smiling
commentary with each other. She looked at them, smiled at them each,
in succession. Every one had his turn, and this always helped to give
Blanche an audience. Incoherent and aimless as much of her talk was, she
never looked prettier than in the attitude of improvisation--or rather,
I should say, than in the hundred attitudes which she assumed at such a
time. Perpetually moving, she was yet constantly graceful, and while
she twisted her body and turned her head, with charming hands that never
ceased to gesticulate, and little, conscious, brilliant eyes that looked
everywhere at once--eyes that seemed to chatter even faster than her
lips--she made you forget the nonsense she poured forth, or think of it
only as a part of her personal picturesqueness. The thing was a regular
performance; the practice of unlimited chatter had made her perfect. She
rested upon her audience and held it together, and the sight of half
a dozen pairs of amused and fascinated faces led her from one piece of
folly to another. On this occasion, her audience was far from failing
her, for they were all greatly interested. Captain Lovelock's interest,
as we know, was chronic, and our three other friends were much occupied
with a matter with which Blanche was intimately connected. Bernard,
as he listened to her, smiling mechanically, was not encouraged. He
remembered what Mrs. Vivian had said shortly before she came in, and it
was not pleasant to him to think that Gordon had been occupied half
the day in contrasting the finest girl in the world with this magnified
butterfly. The contrast was sufficiently striking as Angela sat there
near her, very still, bending her handsome head a little, with her hands
crossed in her lap, and on her lips a kind but inscrutable smile. Mrs.
Vivian was on the sofa next to Blanche, one of whose hands, when it was
not otherwise occupied, she occasionally took into her own.

"Dear little Blanche!" she softly murmured, at intervals.

These few remarks represent a longer pause than Mrs. Gordon often
suffered to occur. She continued to deliver herself upon a hundred
topics, and it hardly matters where we take her up.

"I have n't the least idea what we are going to do. I have nothing to
say about it whatever. Gordon tells me every day I must decide, and
then I ask Captain Lovelock what he thinks; because, you see, he always
thinks a great deal. Captain Lovelock says he does n't care a fig--that
he will go wherever I go. So you see that does n't carry us very far.
I want to settle on some place where Captain Lovelock won't go, but he
won't help me at all. I think it will look better for him not to follow
us; don't you think it will look better, Mrs. Vivian? Not that I care in
the least where we go--or whether Captain Lovelock follows us, either.
I don't take any interest in anything, Mrs. Vivian; don't you think that
is very sad? Gordon may go anywhere he likes--to St. Petersburg, or to
Bombay."

"You might go to a worse place than Bombay," said Captain Lovelock,
speaking with the authority of an Anglo-Indian rich in reminiscences.

Blanche gave him a little stare.

"Ah well, that 's knocked on the head! From the way you speak of it, I
think you would come after us; and the more I think of that, the more
I see it would n't do. But we have got to go to some southern place,
because I am very unwell. I have n't the least idea what 's the matter
with me, and neither has any one else; but that does n't make any
difference. It 's settled that I am out of health. One might as well
be out of it as in it, for all the advantage it is. If you are out of
health, at any rate you can come abroad. It was Gordon's discovery--he
's always making discoveries. You see it 's because I 'm so silly; he
can always put it down to my being an invalid. What I should like to do,
Mrs. Vivian, would be to spend the winter with you--just sitting on the
sofa beside you and holding your hand. It would be rather tiresome for
you; but I really think it would be better for me than anything else.
I have never forgotten how kind you were to me before my marriage--that
summer at Baden. You were everything to me--you and Captain Lovelock. I
am sure I should be happy if I never went out of this lovely room. You
have got it so beautifully arranged--I mean to do my own room just like
it when I go home. And you have got such lovely clothes. You never used
to say anything about it, but you and Angela always had better clothes
than I. Are you always so quiet and serious--never talking about
chiffons--always reading some wonderful book? I wish you would let
me come and stay with you. If you only ask me, Gordon would be too
delighted. He would n't have to trouble about me any more. He could go
and live over in the Latin Quarter--that 's the desire of his heart--and
think of nothing but old bottles. I know it is n't very good manners
to beg for an invitation," Blanche went on, smiling with a gentler
radiance; "but when it 's a question of one's health. One wants to keep
one's self alive--does n't one? One wants to keep one's self going. It
would be so good for me, Mrs. Vivian; it would really be very good for
me!"

She had turned round more and more to her hostess as she talked; and at
last she had given both her hands to Mrs. Vivian, and sat looking at her
with a singular mixture of earnestness and jocosity. It was hard to know
whether Blanche were expressing a real desire or a momentary caprice,
and whether this abrupt little petition were to be taken seriously, or
treated merely as a dramatic pose in a series of more or less effective
attitudes. Her smile had become almost a grimace, she was flushed, she
showed her pretty teeth; but there was a little passionate quiver in her
voice.

"My dear child," said Mrs. Vivian, "we should be delighted to have you
pay us a visit, and we should be so happy if we could do you any good.
But I am afraid you would very soon get tired of us, and I ought to tell
you, frankly, that our little home is to be--a broken up. You know there
is to be a--a change," the good lady continued, with a hesitation which
apparently came from a sense of walking on uncertain ground, while she
glanced with a smile at Bernard and Angela.

Blanche sat there with her little excited, yet innocent--too
innocent--stare; her eyes followed Mrs. Vivian's. They met Bernard's for
an instant, and for some reason, at this moment, Bernard flushed.

He rose quickly and walked away to the window where he stood looking out
into the darkness. "The devil--the devil!" he murmured to himself; "she
does n't even know we are to be married--Gordon has n't been able to
trust himself to tell her!" And this fact seemed pregnant with evidence
as to Gordon's state of mind; it did not appear to simplify the
situation. After a moment, while Bernard stood there with his back
turned--he felt rather awkward and foolish--he heard Blanche begin with
her little surprised voice.

"Ah, you are going away? You are going to travel? But that 's charming;
we can travel together. You are not going to travel? What then are you
going to do? You are going back to America? Ah, but you must n't do
that, as soon as I come abroad; that 's not nice or friendly, Mrs.
Vivian, to your poor little old Blanche. You are not going back to
America? Ah, then, I give it up! What 's the great mystery? Is it
something about Angela? There was always a mystery about Angela. I hope
you won't mind my saying it, my dear; but I was always afraid of you.
My husband--he admires you so much, you know--has often tried to explain
you to me; but I have never understood. What are you going to do now?
Are you going into a convent? Are you going to be--A-a-h!"

And, suddenly, quickly, interrupting herself, Mrs. Gordon gave a long,
wondering cry. Bernard heard her spring to her feet, and the two other
ladies rise from their seats. Captain Lovelock got up as well; Bernard
heard him knock over his little gilded chair. There was a pause, during
which Blanche went through a little mute exhibition of amazement and
pleasure. Bernard turned round, to receive half a dozen quick questions.

"What are you hiding away for? What are you blushing for? I never saw
you do anything like that before! Why do you look so strange, and what
are you making me say? Angela, is it true--is there something like
that?" Without waiting for the answer to this last question, Blanche
threw herself upon Mrs. Vivian. "My own Mrs. Vivian," she cried, "is she
married?"

"My dear Blanche," said Bernard, coming forward, "has not Gordon told
you? Angela and I are not married, but we hope to be before long. Gordon
only knew it this morning; we ourselves have only known it a short time.
There is no mystery about it, and we only want your congratulations."

"Well, I must say you have been very quiet about it!" cried Blanche.
"When I was engaged, I wrote you all a letter."

"By Jove, she wrote to me!" observed Captain Lovelock.

Angela went to her and kissed her.

"Your husband does n't seem to have explained me very successfully!"

Mrs. Gordon held Bernard's intended for a moment at arm's length, with
both her hands, looking at her with eyes of real excitement and wonder.
Then she folded her in a prolonged, an exaggerated, embrace.

"Why did n't he tell me--why did n't he tell me?" she presently began.
"He has had all day to tell me, and it was very cruel of him to let
me come here without knowing it. Could anything be more absurd--more
awkward? You don't think it 's awkward--you don't mind it? Ah well, you
are very good! But I like it, Angela--I like it extremely, immensely.
I think it 's delightful, and I wonder it never occurred to me. Has
it been going on long? Ah, of course, it has been going on! Did n't it
begin at Baden, and did n't I see it there? Do you mind my alluding to
that? At Baden we were all so mixed up that one could n't tell who was
attentive to whom! But Bernard has been very faithful, my dear; I can
assure you of that. When he was in America he would n't look at another
woman. I know something about that! He stayed three months in my house
and he never spoke to me. Now I know why, Mr. Bernard; but you might
have told me at the time. The reason was certainly good enough. I always
want to know why, you know. Why Gordon never told me, for instance; that
's what I want to know!"

Blanche refused to sit down again; she declared that she was so agitated
by this charming news that she could not be quiet, and that she must
presently take her departure. Meanwhile she congratulated each of her
friends half a dozen times; she kissed Mrs. Vivian again, she almost
kissed Bernard; she inquired about details; she longed to hear all
about Angela's "things." Of course they would stop for the wedding;
but meantime she must be very discreet; she must not intrude too
much. Captain Lovelock addressed to Angela a few fragmentary, but
well-intentioned sentences, pulling his beard and fixing his eyes on the
door-knob--an implement which presently turned in his manly fist, as he
opened the door for his companion to withdraw. Blanche went away in a
flutter of ejaculations and protestations which left our three friends
in Mrs. Vivian's little drawing-room standing looking at each other as
the door closed behind her.

"It certainly would have been better taste in him to tell her,"
said Bernard, frowning, "and not let other people see how little
communication there is between them. It has mortified her."

"Poor Mr. Wright had his reasons," Mrs. Vivian suggested, and then she
ventured to explain: "He still cares for Angela, and it was painful to
him to talk about her marrying some one else."

This had been Bernard's own reflection, and it was no more agreeable as
Mrs. Vivian presented it; though Angela herself seemed indifferent to
it--seemed, indeed, not to hear it, as if she were thinking of something
else.

"We must simply marry as soon as possible; to-morrow, if necessary,"
said Bernard, with some causticity. "That 's the best thing we can do
for every one. When once Angela is married, Gordon will stop thinking
of her. He will never permit his imagination to hover about a married
woman; I am very sure of that. He does n't approve of that sort of
thing, and he has the same law for himself as for other people."

"It does n't matter," said Angela, simply.

"How do you mean, my daughter, it does n't matter?"

"I don't feel obliged to feel so sorry for him now."

"Now? Pray, what has happened? I am more sorry than ever, since I have
heard poor Blanche's dreadful tone about him."

The girl was silent a moment; then she shook her head, lightly.

"Her tone--her tone? Dearest mother, don't you see? She is intensely in
love with him!"






CHAPTER XXVIII

This observation struck Bernard as extremely ingenious and worthy of his
mistress's fine intelligence; he greeted it with enthusiasm, and thought
of it for the next twelve hours. The more he thought of it the more
felicitous it seemed to him, and he went to Mrs. Vivian's the next day
almost for the express purpose of saying to Angela that, decidedly,
she was right. He was admitted by his old friend, the little femme
de chambre, who had long since bestowed upon him, definitively, her
confidence; and as in the ante-chamber he heard the voice of a gentleman
raised and talking with some emphasis, come to him from the salon, he
paused a moment, looking at her with an interrogative eye.

"Yes," said Mrs. Vivian's attendant, "I must tell Monsieur frankly that
another gentleman is there. Moreover, what does it matter? Monsieur
would perceive it for himself!"

"Has he been here long?" asked Bernard.

"A quarter of an hour. It probably does n't seem long to the gentleman!"

"Is he alone with Mademoiselle?"

"He asked for Mademoiselle only. I introduced him into the salon, and
Mademoiselle, after conversing a little while with Madame, consented
to receive him. They have been alone together, as I have told Monsieur,
since about three o'clock. Madame is in her own apartment. The position
of Monsieur," added this discriminating woman, "certainly justifies him
in entering the salon."

Bernard was quite of this opinion, and in a moment more he had crossed
the threshold of the little drawing-room and closed the door behind him.

Angela sat there on a sofa, leaning back with her hands clasped in her
lap and her eyes fixed upon Gordon Wright, who stood squarely before
her, as if he had been making her a resolute speech. Her face wore a
look of distress, almost of alarm; she kept her place, but her eyes gave
Bernard a mute welcome. Gordon turned and looked at him slowly from head
to foot. Bernard remembered, with a good deal of vividness, the last
look his friend had given him in the Champs Elysees the day before; and
he saw with some satisfaction that this was not exactly a repetition of
that expression of cold horror. It was a question, however, whether the
horror were changed for the better. Poor Gordon looked intensely sad and
grievously wronged. The keen resentment had faded from his face, but
an immense reproach was there--a heavy, helpless, appealing reproach.
Bernard saw that he had not a scene of violence to dread--and yet, when
he perceived what was coming, he would almost have preferred violence.
Gordon did not offer him his hand, and before Bernard had had time to
say anything, began to speak again, as if he were going on with what he
had been saying to Angela.

"You have done me a great wrong--you have done me a cruel wrong! I have
been telling it to Miss Vivian; I came on purpose to tell her. I can't
really tell her; I can't tell her the details; it 's too painful! But
you know what I mean! I could n't stand it any longer. I thought of
going away--but I could n't do that. I must come and say what I feel. I
can't bear it now."

This outbreak of a passionate sense of injury in a man habitually so
undemonstrative, so little disposed to call attention to himself, had in
it something at once of the touching and the terrible. Bernard, for an
instant, felt almost bewildered; he asked himself whether he had not,
after all, been a monster of duplicity. He was guilty of the weakness
of taking refuge in what is called, I believe, in legal phrase, a
side-issue.

"Don't say all this before Angela!" he exclaimed, with a kind of
artificial energy. "You know she is not in the least at fault, and that
it can only give her pain. The thing is between ourselves."

Angela was sitting there, looking up at both the men. "I like to hear
it," she said.

"You have a singular taste!" Bernard declared.

"I know it 's between ourselves," cried Gordon, "and that Miss Vivian is
not at fault. She is only too lovely, too wise, too good! It is you
and I that are at fault--horribly at fault! You see I admit it, and you
don't. I never dreamed that I should live to say such things as this
to you; but I never dreamed you would do what you have done! It 's
horrible, most horrible, that such a difference as this should come
between two men who believed themselves--or whom I believed, at
least--the best friends in the world. For it is a difference--it 's a
great gulf, and nothing will ever fill it up. I must say so; I can't
help it. You know I don't express myself easily; so, if I break out this
way, you may know what I feel. I know it is a pain to Miss Vivian, and
I beg her to forgive me. She has so much to forgive that she can forgive
that, too. I can't pretend to accept it; I can't sit down and let it
pass. And then, it is n't only my feelings; it 's the right; it 's the
justice. I must say to her that you have no right to marry her; and beg
of her to listen to me and let you go."

"My dear Gordon, are you crazy?" Bernard demanded, with an energy which,
this time at least, was sufficiently real.

"Very likely I am crazy. I am crazy with disappointment and the
bitterness of what I have lost. Add to that the wretchedness of what I
have found!"

"Ah, don't say that, Mr. Wright," Angela begged.

He stood for an instant looking at her, but not heeding her words.
"Will you listen to me again? Will you forget the wrong I did you?--my
stupidity and folly and unworthiness? Will you blot out the past and let
me begin again. I see you as clearly now as the light of that window.
Will you give me another chance?"

Angela turned away her eyes and covered her face with her hands. "You do
pain me!" she murmured.

"You go too far," said Bernard. "To what position does your
extraordinary proposal relegate your wife?"

Gordon turned his pleading eyes on his old friend without a ray of
concession; but for a moment he hesitated. "Don't speak to me of my
wife. I have no wife."

"Ah, poor girl!" said Angela, springing up from the sofa.

"I am perfectly serious," Gordon went on, addressing himself again to
her. "No, after all, I am not crazy; I see only too clearly--I see what
should be; when people see that, you call them crazy. Bernard has no
right--he must give you up. If you really care for him, you should help
him. He is in a very false position; you should n't wish to see him
in such a position. I can't explain to you--if it were even for my own
sake. But Bernard must have told you; it is not possible that he has not
told you?"

"I have told Angela everything, Gordon," said Bernard.

"I don't know what you mean by your having done me a wrong!" the girl
exclaimed.

"If he has told you, then--I may say it! In listening to him, in
believing him."

"But you did n't believe me," Bernard exclaimed, "since you immediately
went and offered yourself to Miss Vivian!"

"I believed you all the same! When did I ever not believe you?"

"The last words I ever heard from Mr. Wright were words of the deepest
kindness," said Angela.

She spoke with such a serious, tender grace, that Gordon seemed stirred
to his depths again.

"Ah, give me another chance!" he moaned.

The poor girl could not help her tone, and it was in the same tone that
she continued--

"If you think so well of me, try and be reasonable."

Gordon looked at her, slowly shaking his head.

"Reasonable--reasonable? Yes, you have a right to say that, for you are
full of reason. But so am I. What I ask is within reasonable limits."

"Granting your happiness were lost," said Bernard--"I say that only for
the argument--is that a ground for your wishing to deprive me of mine?"

"It is not yours--it is mine, that you have taken! You put me off my
guard, and then you took it! Yours is elsewhere, and you are welcome to
it!"

"Ah," murmured Bernard, giving him a long look and turning away, "it is
well for you that I am willing still to regard you as my best friend!"

Gordon went on, more passionately, to Angela.

"He put me off my guard--I can't call it anything else. I know I gave
him a great chance--I encouraged him, urged him, tempted him. But when
once he had spoken, he should have stood to it. He should n't have had
two opinions--one for me, and one for himself! He put me off my guard.
It was because I still resisted him that I went to you again, that last
time. But I was still afraid of you, and in my heart I believed him. As
I say, I always believed him; it was his great influence upon me. He is
the cleverest, the most intelligent, the most brilliant of men. I don't
think that a grain less than I ever thought it," he continued, turning
again to Bernard. "I think it only the more, and I don't wonder that you
find a woman to believe it. But what have you done but deceive me? It
was just my belief in your intelligence that reassured me. When Miss
Vivian refused me a second time, and I left Baden, it was at first with
a sort of relief. But there came back a better feeling--a feeling faint
compared to this feeling of to-day, but strong enough to make me uneasy
and to fill me with regret. To quench my regret, I kept thinking of what
you had said, and it kept me quiet. Your word had such weight with me!"

"How many times more would you have wished to be refused, and how many
refusals would have been required to give me my liberty?" asked Bernard.

"That question means nothing, because you never knew that I had again
offered myself to Miss Vivian."

"No; you told me very little, considering all that you made me tell
you."

"I told you beforehand that I should do exactly as I chose."

"You should have allowed me the same liberty!"

"Liberty!" cried Gordon. "Had n't you liberty to range the whole world
over? Could n't he have found a thousand other women?"

"It is not for me to think so," said Angela, smiling a little.

Gordon looked at her a moment.

"Ah, you cared for him from the first!" he cried.

"I had seen him before I ever saw you," said the girl.

Bernard suppressed an exclamation. There seemed to flash through these
words a sort of retrospective confession which told him something that
she had never directly told him. She blushed as soon as she had spoken,
and Bernard found a beauty in this of which the brightness blinded him
to the awkward aspect of the fact she had just presented to Gordon. At
this fact Gordon stood staring; then at last he apprehended it--largely.

"Ah, then, it had been a plot between you!" he cried out.

Bernard and Angela exchanged a glance of pity.

"We had met for five minutes, and had exchanged a few words before I
came to Baden. It was in Italy--at Siena. It was a simple accident that
I never told you," Bernard explained.

"I wished that nothing should be said about it," said Angela.

"Ah, you loved him!" Gordon exclaimed.

Angela turned away--she went to the window. Bernard followed her for
three seconds with his eyes; then he went on--

"If it were so, I had no reason to suppose it. You have accused me of
deceiving you, but I deceived only myself. You say I put you off your
guard, but you should rather say you put me on mine. It was, thanks to
that, that I fell into the most senseless, the most brutal of delusions.
The delusion passed away--it had contained the germ of better things.
I saw my error, and I bitterly repented of it; and on the day you were
married I felt free."

"Ah, yes, I have no doubt you waited for that!" cried Gordon. "It may
interest you to know that my marriage is a miserable failure."

"I am sorry to hear it--but I can't help it."

"You have seen it with your own eyes. You know all about it, and I need
n't tell you."

"My dear Mr. Wright," said Angela, pleadingly, turning round, "in
Heaven's name, don't say that!"

"Why should n't I say it? I came here on purpose to say it. I came here
with an intention--with a plan. You know what Blanche is--you need n't
pretend, for kindness to me, that you don't. You know what a precious,
what an inestimable wife she must make me--how devoted, how sympathetic
she must be, and what a household blessing at every hour of the day.
Bernard can tell you all about us--he has seen us in the sanctity of our
home." Gordon gave a bitter laugh and went on, with the same strange,
serious air of explaining his plan. "She despises me, she hates me, she
cares no more for me than for the button on her glove--by which I mean
that she does n't care a hundredth part as much. You may say that it
serves me right, and that I have got what I deserve. I married her
because she was silly. I wanted a silly wife; I had an idea you were too
wise. Oh, yes, that 's what I thought of you! Blanche knew why I picked
her out, and undertook to supply the article required. Heaven forgive
her! She has certainly kept her engagement. But you can imagine how
it must have made her like me--knowing why I picked her out! She has
disappointed me all the same. I thought she had a heart; but that was a
mistake. It does n't matter, though, because everything is over between
us."

"What do you mean, everything is over?" Bernard demanded.

"Everything will be over in a few weeks. Then I can speak to Miss Vivian
seriously."

"Ah! I am glad to hear this is not serious," said Bernard.

"Miss Vivian, wait a few weeks," Gordon went on. "Give me another chance
then. Then it will be perfectly right; I shall be free."

"You speak as if you were going to put an end to your wife!"

"She is rapidly putting an end to herself. She means to leave me."

"Poor, unhappy man, do you know what you are saying?" Angela murmured.

"Perfectly. I came here to say it. She means to leave me, and I mean to
offer her every facility. She is dying to take a lover, and she has got
an excellent one waiting for her. Bernard knows whom I mean; I don't
know whether you do. She was ready to take one three months after our
marriage. It is really very good of her to have waited all this time;
but I don't think she can go more than a week or two longer. She is
recommended a southern climate, and I am pretty sure that in the course
of another ten days I may count upon their starting together for the
shores of the Mediterranean. The shores of the Mediterranean, you know,
are lovely, and I hope they will do her a world of good. As soon as they
have left Paris I will let you know; and then you will of course admit
that, virtually, I am free."

"I don't understand you."

"I suppose you are aware," said Gordon, "that we have the advantage of
being natives of a country in which marriages may be legally dissolved."

Angela stared; then, softly--

"Are you speaking of a divorce?"

"I believe that is what they call it," Gordon answered, gazing back at
her with his densely clouded blue eyes. "The lawyers do it for you; and
if she goes away with Lovelock, nothing will be more simple than for me
to have it arranged."

Angela stared, I say; and Bernard was staring, too. Then the latter,
turning away, broke out into a tremendous, irrepressible laugh.

Gordon looked at him a moment; then he said to Angela, with a deeper
tremor in his voice--

"He was my dearest friend."

"I never felt more devoted to you than at this moment!" Bernard
declared, smiling still.

Gordon had fixed his sombre eyes upon the girl again.

"Do you understand me now?"

Angela looked back at him for some instants.

"Yes," she murmured at last.

"And will you wait, and give me another chance?"

"Yes," she said, in the same tone.

Bernard uttered a quick exclamation, but Angela checked him with a
glance, and Gordon looked from one of them to the other.

"Can I trust you?" Gordon asked.

"I will make you happy," said Angela.

Bernard wondered what under the sun she meant; but he thought he might
safely add--

"I will abide by her choice."

Gordon actually began to smile.

"It won't be long, I think; two or three weeks."

Angela made no answer to this; she fixed her eyes on the floor.

"I shall see Blanche as often as possible," she presently said.

"By all means! The more you see her the better you will understand me."

"I understand you very well now. But you have shaken me very much, and
you must leave me. I shall see you also--often."

Gordon took up his hat and stick; he saw that Bernard did not do the
same.

"And Bernard?" he exclaimed.

"I shall ask him to leave Paris," said Angela.

"Will you go?"

"I will do what Angela requests," said Bernard.

"You have heard what she requests; it 's for you to come now."

"Ah, you must at least allow me to take leave!" cried Bernard.

Gordon went to the door, and when he had opened it he stood for a while,
holding it and looking at his companions. Then--

"I assure you she won't be long!" he said to Angela, and rapidly passed
out.

The others stood silent till they heard the outer door of the apartment
close behind him.

"And now please to elucidate!" said Bernard, folding his arms.

Angela gave no answer for some moments; then she turned upon him a smile
which appeared incongruous, but which her words presently helped to
explain.

"He is intensely in love with his wife!"






CHAPTER XXIX

This statement was very effective, but it might well have seemed at
first to do more credit to her satiric powers than to her faculty of
observation. This was the light in which it presented itself to Bernard;
but, little by little, as she amplified the text, he grew to think
well of it, and at last he was quite ready to place it, as a triumph of
sagacity, on a level with that other discovery which she had made the
evening before and with regard to which his especial errand to-day
had been to congratulate her afresh. It brought him, however, less
satisfaction than it appeared to bring to his clever companion; for,
as he observed plausibly enough, Gordon was quite out of his head, and,
this being the case, of what importance was the secret of his heart?

"The secret of his heart and the condition of his head are one and the
same thing," said Angela. "He is turned upside down by the wretchedly
false position that he has got into with his wife. She has treated him
badly, but he has treated her wrongly. They are in love with each other,
and yet they both do nothing but hide it. He is not in the least in love
with poor me--not to-day any more than he was three years ago. He thinks
he is, because he is full of sorrow and bitterness, and because the news
of our engagement has given him a shock. But that 's only a pretext--a
chance to pour out the grief and pain which have been accumulating in
his heart under a sense of his estrangement from Blanche. He is too
proud to attribute his feelings to that cause, even to himself; but he
wanted to cry out and say he was hurt, to demand justice for a wrong;
and the revelation of the state of things between you and me--which of
course strikes him as incongruous; we must allow largely for that--came
to him as a sudden opportunity. No, no," the girl went on, with a
generous ardor in her face, following further the train of her argument,
which she appeared to find extremely attractive, "I know what you
are going to say and I deny it. I am not fanciful, or sophistical, or
irrational, and I know perfectly what I am about. Men are so stupid; it
's only women that have real discernment. Leave me alone, and I shall do
something. Blanche is silly, yes, very silly; but she is not so bad as
her husband accused her of being, in those dreadful words which he
will live to repent of. She is wise enough to care for him, greatly, at
bottom, and to feel her little heart filled with rage and shame that
he does n't appear to care for her. If he would take her a little
more seriously--it 's an immense pity he married her because she was
silly!--she would be flattered by it, and she would try and deserve it.
No, no, no! she does n't, in reality, care a straw for Captain Lovelock,
I assure you, I promise you she does n't. A woman can tell. She is in
danger, possibly, and if her present situation, as regards her husband,
lasts, she might do something as horrid as he said. But she would do
it out of spite--not out of affection for the Captain, who must be got
immediately out of the way. She only keeps him to torment her husband
and make Gordon come back to her. She would drop him forever to-morrow."
Angela paused a moment, reflecting, with a kindled eye. "And she shall!"

Bernard looked incredulous.

"How will that be, Miss Solomon?"

"You shall see when you come back."

"When I come back? Pray, where am I going?"

"You will leave Paris for a fortnight--as I promised our poor friend."

Bernard gave an irate laugh.

"My dear girl, you are ridiculous! Your promising it was almost as
childish as his asking it."

"To play with a child you must be childish. Just see the effect of this
abominable passion of love, which you have been crying up to me so! By
its operation Gordon Wright, the most sensible man of our acquaintance,
is reduced to the level of infancy! If you will only go away, I will
manage him."

"You certainly manage me! Pray, where shall I go?"

"Wherever you choose. I will write to you every day."

"That will be an inducement," said Bernard. "You know I have never
received a letter from you."

"I write the most delightful ones!" Angela exclaimed; and she succeeded
in making him promise to start that night for London.

She had just done so when Mrs. Vivian presented herself, and the good
lady was not a little astonished at being informed of his intention.

"You surely are not going to give up my daughter to oblige Mr. Wright?"
she observed.

"Upon my word, I feel as if I were!" said Bernard.

"I will explain it, dear mamma," said Angela. "It is very interesting.
Mr. Wright has made a most fearful scene; the state of things between
him and Blanche is dreadful."

Mrs. Vivian opened her clear eyes.

"You really speak as if you liked it!"

"She does like it--she told Gordon so," said Bernard. "I don't know what
she is up to! Gordon has taken leave of his wits; he wishes to put away
his wife."

"To put her away?"

"To repudiate her, as the historians say!"

"To repudiate little Blanche!" murmured Mrs. Vivian, as if she were
struck with the incongruity of the operation.

"I mean to keep them together," said Angela, with a firm decision.

Her mother looked at her with admiration.

"My dear daughter, I will assist you."

The two ladies had such an air of mysterious competence to the task they
had undertaken that it seemed to Bernard that nothing was left to him
but to retire into temporary exile. He accordingly betook himself to
London, where he had social resources which would, perhaps, make exile
endurable. He found himself, however, little disposed to avail himself
of these resources, and he treated himself to no pleasures but those of
memory and expectation. He ached with a sense of his absence from Mrs.
Vivian's deeply familiar sky-parlor, which seemed to him for the time
the most sacred spot on earth--if on earth it could be called--and he
consigned to those generous postal receptacles which ornament with their
brilliant hue the London street-corners, an inordinate number of the
most voluminous epistles that had ever been dropped into them. He took
long walks, alone, and thought all the way of Angela, to whom, it seemed
to him, that the character of ministering angel was extremely becoming.
She was faithful to her promise of writing to him every day, and she was
an angel who wielded--so at least Bernard thought, and he was particular
about letters--a very ingenious pen. Of course she had only one
topic--the success of her operations with regard to Gordon. "Mamma has
undertaken Blanche," she wrote, "and I am devoting myself to Mr. W. It
is really very interesting." She told Bernard all about it in detail,
and he also found it interesting; doubly so, indeed, for it must be
confessed that the charming figure of the mistress of his affections
attempting to heal a great social breach with her light and delicate
hands, divided his attention pretty equally with the distracted, the
distorted, the almost ludicrous, image of his old friend.

Angela wrote that Gordon had come back to see her the day after his
first visit, and had seemed greatly troubled on learning that Bernard
had taken himself off. "It was because you insisted on it, of course,"
he said; "it was not from feeling the justice of it himself." "I told
him," said Angela, in her letter, "that I had made a point of it, but
that we certainly ought to give you a little credit for it. But I could
n't insist upon this, for fear of sounding a wrong note and exciting
afresh what I suppose he would be pleased to term his jealousy. He asked
me where you had gone, and when I told him--'Ah, how he must hate me!'
he exclaimed. 'There you are quite wrong,' I answered. 'He feels as
kindly to you as--as I do.' He looked as if he by no means believed
this; but, indeed, he looks as if he believed nothing at all. He is
quite upset and demoralized. He stayed half an hour and paid me his
visit--trying hard to 'please' me again! Poor man, he is in a charming
state to please the fair sex! But if he does n't please me, he interests
me more and more; I make bold to say that to you. You would have said
it would be very awkward; but, strangely enough, I found it very easy. I
suppose it is because I am so interested. Very likely it was awkward for
him, poor fellow, for I can certify that he was not a whit happier at
the end of his half-hour, in spite of the privilege he had enjoyed. He
said nothing more about you, and we talked of Paris and New York,
of Baden and Rome. Imagine the situation! I shall make no resistance
whatever to it; I shall simply let him perceive that conversing with me
on these topics does not make him feel a bit more comfortable, and that
he must look elsewhere for a remedy. I said not a word about Blanche."

She spoke of Blanche, however, the next time. "He came again this
afternoon," she said in her second letter, "and he wore exactly the same
face as yesterday--namely, a very unhappy one. If I were not entirely
too wise to believe his account of himself, I might suppose that he was
unhappy because Blanche shows symptoms of not taking flight. She has
been with us a great deal--she has no idea what is going on--and I can't
honestly say that she chatters any less than usual. But she is greatly
interested in certain shops that she is buying out, and especially in
her visits to her tailor. Mamma has proposed to her--in view of your
absence--to come and stay with us, and she does n't seem afraid of the
idea. I told her husband to-day that we had asked her, and that we
hoped he had no objection. 'None whatever; but she won't come.' 'On
the contrary, she says she will.' 'She will pretend to, up to the last
minute; and then she will find a pretext for backing out.' 'Decidedly,
you think very ill of her,' I said. 'She hates me,' he answered, looking
at me strangely. 'You say that of every one,' I said. 'Yesterday you
said it of Bernard.' 'Ah, for him there would be more reason!' he
exclaimed. 'I won't attempt to answer for Bernard,' I went on, 'but
I will answer for Blanche. Your idea of her hating you is a miserable
delusion. She cares for you more than for any one in the world. You only
misunderstand each other, and with a little good will on both sides you
can easily get out of your tangle.' But he would n't listen to me; he
stopped me short. I saw I should excite him if I insisted; so I dropped
the subject. But it is not for long; he shall listen to me."

Later she wrote that Blanche had in fact "backed out," and would
not come to stay with them, having given as an excuse that she was
perpetually trying on dresses, and that at Mrs. Vivian's she should be
at an inconvenient distance from the temple of these sacred rites, and
the high priest who conducted the worship. "But we see her every day,"
said Angela, "and mamma is constantly with her. She likes mamma better
than me. Mamma listens to her a great deal and talks to her a little--I
can't do either when we are alone. I don't know what she says--I mean
what mamma says; what Blanche says I know as well as if I heard it. We
see nothing of Captain Lovelock, and mamma tells me she has not spoken
of him for two days. She thinks this is a better symptom, but I am
not so sure. Poor Mr. Wright treats it as a great triumph that Blanche
should behave as he foretold. He is welcome to the comfort he can get
out of this, for he certainly gets none from anything else. The society
of your correspondent is not that balm to his spirit which he appeared
to expect, and this in spite of the fact that I have been as gentle and
kind with him as I know how to be. He is very silent--he sometimes
sits for ten minutes without speaking; I assure you it is n't amusing.
Sometimes he looks at me as if he were going to break out with that
crazy idea to which he treated me the other day. But he says nothing,
and then I see that he is not thinking of me--he is simply thinking of
Blanche. The more he thinks of her the better."

"My dear Bernard," she began on another occasion, "I hope you are not
dying of ennui, etc. Over here things are going so-so. He asked me
yesterday to go with him to the Louvre, and we walked about among the
pictures for half an hour. Mamma thinks it a very strange sort of thing
for me to be doing, and though she delights, of all things, in a good
cause, she is not sure that this cause is good enough to justify the
means. I admit that the means are very singular, and, as far as the
Louvre is concerned, they were not successful. We sat and looked for a
quarter of an hour at the great Venus who has lost her arms, and he said
never a word. I think he does n't know what to say. Before we separated
he asked me if I heard from you. 'Oh, yes,' I said, 'every day.'
'And does he speak of me?' 'Never!' I answered; and I think he looked
disappointed." Bernard had, in fact, in writing to Angela, scarcely
mentioned his name. "He had not been here for two days," she continued,
at the end of a week; "but last evening, very late--too late for a
visitor--he came in. Mamma had left the drawing-room, and I was sitting
alone; I immediately saw that we had reached a crisis. I thought
at first he was going to tell me that Blanche had carried out his
prediction; but I presently saw that this was not where the shoe
pinched; and, besides, I knew that mamma was watching her too closely.
'How can I have ever been such a dull-souled idiot?' he broke out, as
soon as he had got into the room. 'I like to hear you say that,' I said,
'because it does n't seem to me that you have been at all wise.' 'You
are cleverness, kindness, tact, in the most perfect form!' he went on.
As a veracious historian I am bound to tell you that he paid me a bushel
of compliments, and thanked me in the most flattering terms for my
having let him bore me so for a week. 'You have not bored me,' I
said; 'you have interested me.' 'Yes,' he cried, 'as a curious case of
monomania. It 's a part of your kindness to say that; but I know I have
bored you to death; and the end of it all is that you despise me. You
can't help despising me; I despise myself. I used to think that I was a
man, but I have given that up; I am a poor creature! I used to think I
could take things quietly and bear them bravely. But I can't! If it were
not for very shame I could sit here and cry to you.' 'Don't mind me,'
I said; 'you know it is a part of our agreement that I was not to
be critical.' 'Our agreement?' he repeated, vaguely. 'I see you have
forgotten it,' I answered; 'but it does n't in the least matter; it is
not of that I wish to talk to you. All the more that it has n't done you
a particle of good. I have been extremely nice with you for a week;
but you are just as unhappy now as you were at the beginning. Indeed, I
think you are rather worse.' 'Heaven forgive me, Miss Vivian, I believe
I am!' he cried. 'Heaven will easily forgive you; you are on the wrong
road. To catch up with your happiness, which has been running away from
you, you must take another; you must travel in the same direction as
Blanche; you must not separate yourself from your wife.' At the sound of
Blanche's name he jumped up and took his usual tone; he knew all about
his wife, and needed no information. But I made him sit down again, and
I made him listen to me. I made him listen for half an hour, and at the
end of the time he was interested. He had all the appearance of it; he
sat gazing at me, and at last the tears came into his eyes. I believe I
had a moment of eloquence. I don't know what I said, nor how I said it,
to what point it would bear examination, nor how, if you had been there,
it would seem to you, as a disinterested critic, to hang together; but
I know that after a while there were tears in my own eyes. I begged him
not to give up Blanche; I assured him that she is not so foolish as she
seems; that she is a very delicate little creature to handle, and that,
in reality, whatever she does, she is thinking only of him. He had been
all goodness and kindness to her, I knew that; but he had not, from the
first, been able to conceal from her that he regarded her chiefly as a
pretty kitten. She wished to be more than that, and she took refuge in
flirting, simply to excite his jealousy and make him feel strongly
about her. He has felt strongly, and he was feeling strongly now; he was
feeling passionately--that was my whole contention. But he had perhaps
never made it plain to those rather near-sighted little mental eyes of
hers, and he had let her suppose something that could n't fail to rankle
in her mind and torment it. 'You have let her suppose,' I said, 'that
you were thinking of me, and the poor girl has been jealous of me. I
know it, but from nothing she herself has said. She has said nothing;
she has been too proud and too considerate. If you don't think that 's
to her honor, I do. She has had a chance every day for a week, but she
has treated me without a grain of spite. I have appreciated it, I have
understood it, and it has touched me very much. It ought to touch you,
Mr. Wright. When she heard I was engaged to Mr. Longueville, it gave her
an immense relief. And yet, at the same moment you were protesting, and
denouncing, and saying those horrible things about her! I know how she
appears--she likes admiration. But the admiration in the world which she
would most delight in just now would be yours. She plays with Captain
Lovelock as a child does with a wooden harlequin, she pulls a string
and he throws up his arms and legs. She has about as much intention
of eloping with him as a little girl might have of eloping with a
pasteboard Jim Crow. If you were to have a frank explanation with her,
Blanche would very soon throw Jim Crow out of the window. I very humbly
entreat you to cease thinking of me. I don't know what wrong you have
ever done me, or what kindness I have ever done you, that you should
feel obliged to trouble your head about me. You see all I am--I tell you
now. I am nothing in the least remarkable. As for your thinking ill of
me at Baden, I never knew it nor cared about it. If it had been so, you
see how I should have got over it. Dear Mr. Wright, we might be such
good friends, if you would only believe me. She 's so pretty, so
charming, so universally admired. You said just now you had bored me,
but it 's nothing--in spite of all the compliments you have paid me--to
the way I have bored you. If she could only know it--that I have bored
you! Let her see for half an hour that I am out of your mind--the rest
will take care of itself. She might so easily have made a quarrel with
me. The way she has behaved to me is one of the prettiest things I have
ever seen, and you shall see the way I shall always behave to her! Don't
think it necessary to say out of politeness that I have not bored you;
it is not in the least necessary. You know perfectly well that you are
disappointed in the charm of my society. And I have done my best, too.
I can honestly affirm that!' For some time he said nothing, and then he
remarked that I was very clever, but he did n't see a word of sense
in what I said. 'It only proves,' I said, 'that the merit of my
conversation is smaller than you had taken it into your head to fancy.
But I have done you good, all the same. Don't contradict me; you don't
know yet; and it 's too late for us to argue about it. You will tell me
to-morrow.'"






CHAPTER XXX

Some three evenings after he received this last report of the progress
of affairs in Paris, Bernard, upon whom the burden of exile sat none the
more lightly as the days went on, turned out of the Strand into one of
the theatres. He had been gloomily pushing his way through the various
London densities--the November fog, the nocturnal darkness, the jostling
crowd. He was too restless to do anything but walk, and he had been
saying to himself, for the thousandth time, that if he had been guilty
of a misdemeanor in succumbing to the attractions of the admirable girl
who showed to such advantage in letters of twelve pages, his fault was
richly expiated by these days of impatience and bereavement. He gave
little heed to the play; his thoughts were elsewhere, and, while they
rambled, his eyes wandered round the house. Suddenly, on the other
side of it, he beheld Captain Lovelock, seated squarely in his
orchestra-stall, but, if Bernard was not mistaken, paying as little
attention to the stage as he himself had done. The Captain's eyes, it
is true, were fixed upon the scene; his head was bent a little, his
magnificent beard rippled over the expanse of his shirt-front. But
Bernard was not slow to see that his gaze was heavy and opaque, and
that, though he was staring at the actresses, their charms were lost
upon him. He saw that, like himself, poor Lovelock had matter for
reflection in his manly breast, and he concluded that Blanche's
ponderous swain was also suffering from a sense of disjunction. Lovelock
sat in the same posture all the evening, and that his imagination had
not projected itself into the play was proved by the fact that during
the entractes he gazed with the same dull fixedness at the curtain.
Bernard forebore to interrupt him; we know that he was not at this
moment socially inclined, and he judged that the Captain was as little
so, inasmuch as causes even more imperious than those which had operated
in his own case must have been at the bottom of his sudden appearance in
London. On leaving the theatre, however, Bernard found himself detained
with the crowd in the vestibule near the door, which, wide open to the
street, was a scene of agitation and confusion. It had come on to rain,
and the raw dampness mingled itself with the dusky uproar of the Strand.
At last, among the press of people, as he was passing out, our hero
became aware that he had been brought into contact with Lovelock,
who was walking just beside him. At the same moment Lovelock noticed
him--looked at him for an instant, and then looked away. But he
looked back again the next instant, and the two men then uttered that
inarticulate and inexpressive exclamation which passes for a sign of
greeting among gentlemen of the Anglo-Saxon race, in their moments of
more acute self-consciousness.

"Oh, are you here?" said Bernard. "I thought you were in Paris."

"No; I ain't in Paris," Lovelock answered with some dryness. "Tired of
the beastly hole!"

"Oh, I see," said Bernard. "Excuse me while I put up my umbrella."

He put up his umbrella, and from under it, the next moment, he saw the
Captain waving two fingers at him out of the front of a hansom. When
he returned to his hotel he found on his table a letter superscribed in
Gordon Wright's hand. This communication ran as follows:

"I believe you are making a fool of me. In Heaven's name, come back to
Paris! G. W."

Bernard hardly knew whether to regard these few words as a further
declaration of war, or as an overture to peace; but he lost no time in
complying with the summons they conveyed. He started for Paris the
next morning, and in the evening, after he had removed the dust of his
journey and swallowed a hasty dinner, he rang at Mrs. Vivian's door.
This lady and her daughter gave him a welcome which--I will not say
satisfied him, but which, at least, did something toward soothing the
still unhealed wounds of separation.

"And what is the news of Gordon?" he presently asked.

"We have not seen him in three days," said Angela.

"He is cured, dear Bernard; he must be. Angela has been wonderful," Mrs.
Vivian declared.

"You should have seen mamma with Blanche," her daughter said, smiling.
"It was most remarkable."

Mrs. Vivian smiled, too, very gently.

"Dear little Blanche! Captain Lovelock has gone to London."

"Yes, he thinks it a beastly hole. Ah, no," Bernard added, "I have got
it wrong."

But it little mattered. Late that night, on his return to his own rooms,
Bernard sat gazing at his fire. He had not begun to undress; he was
thinking of a good many things. He was in the midst of his reflections
when there came a rap at his door, which the next moment was flung open.
Gordon Wright stood there, looking at him--with a gaze which Bernard
returned for a moment before bidding him to come in. Gordon came in and
came up to him; then he held out his hand. Bernard took it with great
satisfaction; his last feeling had been that he was very weary of this
ridiculous quarrel, and it was an extreme relief to find it was over.

"It was very good of you to go to London," said Gordon, looking at him
with all the old serious honesty of his eyes.

"I have always tried to do what I could to oblige you," Bernard
answered, smiling.

"You must have cursed me over there," Gordon went on.

"I did, a little. As you were cursing me here, it was permissible."

"That 's over now," said Gordon. "I came to welcome you back. It seemed
to me I could n't lay my head on my pillow without speaking to you."

"I am glad to get back," Bernard admitted, smiling still. "I can't
deny that. And I find you as I believed I should." Then he added,
seriously--"I knew Angela would keep us good friends."

For a moment Gordon said nothing. Then, at last--

"Yes, for that purpose it did n't matter which of us should marry her.
If it had been I," he added, "she would have made you accept it."

"Ah, I don't know!" Bernard exclaimed.

"I am sure of it," said Gordon earnestly--almost argumentatively. "She
's an extraordinary woman."

"Keeping you good friends with me--that 's a great thing. But it 's
nothing to her keeping you good friends with your wife."

Gordon looked at Bernard for an instant; then he fixed his eyes for some
time on the fire.

"Yes, that is the greatest of all things. A man should value his
wife. He should believe in her. He has taken her, and he should keep
her--especially when there is a great deal of good in her. I was a great
fool the other day," he went on. "I don't remember what I said. It was
very weak."

"It seemed to me feeble," said Bernard. "But it is quite within a man's
rights to be a fool once in a while, and you had never abused of the
license."

"Well, I have done it for a lifetime--for a lifetime." And Gordon took
up his hat. He looked into the crown of it for a moment, and then he
fixed his eyes on Bernard's again. "But there is one thing I hope you
won't mind my saying. I have come back to my old impression of Miss
Vivian."

"Your old impression?"

And Miss Vivian's accepted lover frowned a little.

"I mean that she 's not simple. She 's very strange."

Bernard's frown cleared away in a sudden, almost eager smile.

"Say at once that you dislike her! That will do capitally."

Gordon shook his head, and he, too, almost smiled a little.

"It 's not true. She 's very wonderful. And if I did dislike her, I
should struggle with it. It would never do for me to dislike your wife!"

After he had gone, when the night was half over, Bernard, lying awake
a while, gave a laugh in the still darkness, as this last sentence came
back to him.

On the morrow he saw Blanche, for he went to see Gordon. The latter, at
first, was not at home; but he had a quarter of an hour's talk with his
wife, whose powers of conversation were apparently not in the smallest
degree affected by anything that had occurred.

"I hope you enjoyed your visit to London," she said. "Did you go to buy
Angela a set of diamonds in Bond Street? You did n't buy anything--you
did n't go into a shop? Then pray what did you go for? Excuse my
curiosity--it seems to me it 's rather flattering. I never know anything
unless I am told. I have n't any powers of observation. I noticed you
went--oh, yes, I observed that very much; and I thought it very strange,
under the circumstances. Your most intimate friend arrived in Paris, and
you choose the next day to make a little tour! I don't like to see you
treat my husband so; he would never have done it to you. And if you did
n't stay for Gordon, you might have staid for Angela. I never heard of
anything so monstrous as a gentleman rushing away from the object of his
affection, for no particular purpose that any one could discover, the
day after she has accepted him. It was not the day after? Well, it was
too soon, at any rate. Angela could n't in the least tell me what
you had gone for; she said it was for a 'change.' That was a charming
reason! But she was very much ashamed of you--and so was I; and at last
we all sent Captain Lovelock after you to bring you back. You came back
without him? Ah, so much the better; I suppose he is still looking for
you, and, as he is n't very clever, that will occupy him for some time.
We want to occupy him; we don't approve of his being so idle. However,
for my own part, I am very glad you were away. I was a great deal at
Mrs. Vivian's, and I should n't have felt nearly so much at liberty
to go if I had known I should always find you there making love to
Mademoiselle. It would n't have seemed to me discreet,--I know what you
are going to say--that it 's the first time you ever heard of my wishing
to avoid an indiscretion. It 's a taste I have taken up lately,--for the
same reason you went to London, for a 'change.'" Here Blanche paused
for an appreciable moment; and then she added--"Well, I must say, I have
never seen anything so lovely as Mrs. Vivian's influence. I hope mamma
won't be disappointed in it this time."

When Bernard next saw the other two ladies, he said to them that he
was surprised at the way in which clever women incurred moral
responsibilities.

"We like them," said Mrs. Vivian. "We delight in them!"

"Well," said Bernard, "I would n't for the world have it on my
conscience to have reconciled poor Gordon to Mrs. Blanche."

"You are not to say a word against Blanche," Angela declared. "She 's a
little miracle."

"It will be all right, dear Bernard," Mrs. Vivian added, with soft
authority.

"I have taken a great fancy to her," the younger lady went on.

Bernard gave a little laugh.

"Gordon is right in his ultimate opinion. You are very strange!"

"You may abuse me as much as you please; but I will never hear a word
against Mrs. Gordon."

And she never would in future; though it is not recorded that Bernard
availed himself in any special degree of the license offered him in
conjunction with this warning.

Blanche's health within a few days had, according to her own account,
taken a marvellous turn for the better; but her husband appeared still
to think it proper that they should spend the winter beneath a brilliant
sun, and he presently informed his friends that they had at last settled
it between them that a voyage up the Nile must be, for a thoroughly
united couple, a very agreeable pastime. To perform this expedition
advantageously they must repair to Cairo without delay, and for this
reason he was sure that Bernard and Angela would easily understand their
not making a point of waiting for the wedding. These happy people
quite understood it. Their nuptials were to be celebrated with extreme
simplicity. If, however, Gordon was not able to be present, he, in
conjunction with his wife, bought for Angela, as a bridal gift, a
necklace of the most beautiful pearls the Rue de la Paix could furnish;
and on his arrival at Cairo, while he waited for his dragoman to give
the signal for starting, he found time, in spite of the exactions of
that large correspondence which has been more than once mentioned in the
course of our narrative, to write Bernard the longest letter he had
ever addressed to him. The letter reached Bernard in the middle of his
honeymoon.



PART I


At the little town of Vevey, in Switzerland, there is a particularly
comfortable hotel. There are, indeed, many hotels, for the entertainment
of tourists is the business of the place, which, as many travelers will
remember, is seated upon the edge of a remarkably blue lake--a lake that
it behooves every tourist to visit. The shore of the lake presents an
unbroken array of establishments of this order, of every category, from
the "grand hotel" of the newest fashion, with a chalk-white front, a
hundred balconies, and a dozen flags flying from its roof, to the little
Swiss pension of an elder day, with its name inscribed in German-looking
lettering upon a pink or yellow wall and an awkward summerhouse in the
angle of the garden. One of the hotels at Vevey, however, is famous,
even classical, being distinguished from many of its upstart neighbors
by an air both of luxury and of maturity. In this region, in the month
of June, American travelers are extremely numerous; it may be said,
indeed, that Vevey assumes at this period some of the characteristics
of an American watering place. There are sights and sounds which evoke a
vision, an echo, of Newport and Saratoga. There is a flitting hither
and thither of "stylish" young girls, a rustling of muslin flounces,
a rattle of dance music in the morning hours, a sound of high-pitched
voices at all times. You receive an impression of these things at the
excellent inn of the "Trois Couronnes" and are transported in fancy to
the Ocean House or to Congress Hall. But at the "Trois Couronnes," it
must be added, there are other features that are much at variance with
these suggestions: neat German waiters, who look like secretaries of
legation; Russian princesses sitting in the garden; little Polish boys
walking about held by the hand, with their governors; a view of the
sunny crest of the Dent du Midi and the picturesque towers of the Castle
of Chillon.

I hardly know whether it was the analogies or the differences that were
uppermost in the mind of a young American, who, two or three years ago,
sat in the garden of the "Trois Couronnes," looking about him, rather
idly, at some of the graceful objects I have mentioned. It was a
beautiful summer morning, and in whatever fashion the young American
looked at things, they must have seemed to him charming. He had come
from Geneva the day before by the little steamer, to see his aunt, who
was staying at the hotel--Geneva having been for a long time his place
of residence. But his aunt had a headache--his aunt had almost always a
headache--and now she was shut up in her room, smelling camphor, so that
he was at liberty to wander about. He was some seven-and-twenty years
of age; when his friends spoke of him, they usually said that he was at
Geneva "studying." When his enemies spoke of him, they said--but,
after all, he had no enemies; he was an extremely amiable fellow, and
universally liked. What I should say is, simply, that when certain
persons spoke of him they affirmed that the reason of his spending so
much time at Geneva was that he was extremely devoted to a lady who
lived there--a foreign lady--a person older than himself. Very few
Americans--indeed, I think none--had ever seen this lady, about whom
there were some singular stories. But Winterbourne had an old attachment
for the little metropolis of Calvinism; he had been put to school there
as a boy, and he had afterward gone to college there--circumstances
which had led to his forming a great many youthful friendships. Many of
these he had kept, and they were a source of great satisfaction to him.

After knocking at his aunt's door and learning that she was indisposed,
he had taken a walk about the town, and then he had come in to his
breakfast. He had now finished his breakfast; but he was drinking a
small cup of coffee, which had been served to him on a little table in
the garden by one of the waiters who looked like an attache. At last
he finished his coffee and lit a cigarette. Presently a small boy came
walking along the path--an urchin of nine or ten. The child, who was
diminutive for his years, had an aged expression of countenance, a pale
complexion, and sharp little features. He was dressed in knickerbockers,
with red stockings, which displayed his poor little spindle-shanks;
he also wore a brilliant red cravat. He carried in his hand a long
alpenstock, the sharp point of which he thrust into everything that
he approached--the flowerbeds, the garden benches, the trains of the
ladies' dresses. In front of Winterbourne he paused, looking at him with
a pair of bright, penetrating little eyes.

"Will you give me a lump of sugar?" he asked in a sharp, hard little
voice--a voice immature and yet, somehow, not young.

Winterbourne glanced at the small table near him, on which his coffee
service rested, and saw that several morsels of sugar remained. "Yes,
you may take one," he answered; "but I don't think sugar is good for
little boys."

This little boy stepped forward and carefully selected three of
the coveted fragments, two of which he buried in the pocket of his
knickerbockers, depositing the other as promptly in another place. He
poked his alpenstock, lance-fashion, into Winterbourne's bench and tried
to crack the lump of sugar with his teeth.

"Oh, blazes; it's har-r-d!" he exclaimed, pronouncing the adjective in a
peculiar manner.

Winterbourne had immediately perceived that he might have the honor
of claiming him as a fellow countryman. "Take care you don't hurt your
teeth," he said, paternally.

"I haven't got any teeth to hurt. They have all come out. I have only
got seven teeth. My mother counted them last night, and one came out
right afterward. She said she'd slap me if any more came out. I can't
help it. It's this old Europe. It's the climate that makes them come
out. In America they didn't come out. It's these hotels."

Winterbourne was much amused. "If you eat three lumps of sugar, your
mother will certainly slap you," he said.

"She's got to give me some candy, then," rejoined his young
interlocutor. "I can't get any candy here--any American candy. American
candy's the best candy."

"And are American little boys the best little boys?" asked Winterbourne.

"I don't know. I'm an American boy," said the child.

"I see you are one of the best!" laughed Winterbourne.

"Are you an American man?" pursued this vivacious infant. And then,
on Winterbourne's affirmative reply--"American men are the best," he
declared.

His companion thanked him for the compliment, and the child, who had
now got astride of his alpenstock, stood looking about him, while he
attacked a second lump of sugar. Winterbourne wondered if he himself
had been like this in his infancy, for he had been brought to Europe at
about this age.

"Here comes my sister!" cried the child in a moment. "She's an American
girl."

Winterbourne looked along the path and saw a beautiful young lady
advancing. "American girls are the best girls," he said cheerfully to
his young companion.

"My sister ain't the best!" the child declared. "She's always blowing at
me."

"I imagine that is your fault, not hers," said Winterbourne. The young
lady meanwhile had drawn near. She was dressed in white muslin, with a
hundred frills and flounces, and knots of pale-colored ribbon. She was
bareheaded, but she balanced in her hand a large parasol, with a deep
border of embroidery; and she was strikingly, admirably pretty. "How
pretty they are!" thought Winterbourne, straightening himself in his
seat, as if he were prepared to rise.

The young lady paused in front of his bench, near the parapet of the
garden, which overlooked the lake. The little boy had now converted his
alpenstock into a vaulting pole, by the aid of which he was springing
about in the gravel and kicking it up not a little.

"Randolph," said the young lady, "what ARE you doing?"

"I'm going up the Alps," replied Randolph. "This is the way!" And he
gave another little jump, scattering the pebbles about Winterbourne's
ears.

"That's the way they come down," said Winterbourne.

"He's an American man!" cried Randolph, in his little hard voice.

The young lady gave no heed to this announcement, but looked straight
at her brother. "Well, I guess you had better be quiet," she simply
observed.

It seemed to Winterbourne that he had been in a manner presented. He
got up and stepped slowly toward the young girl, throwing away his
cigarette. "This little boy and I have made acquaintance," he said, with
great civility. In Geneva, as he had been perfectly aware, a young
man was not at liberty to speak to a young unmarried lady except under
certain rarely occurring conditions; but here at Vevey, what conditions
could be better than these?--a pretty American girl coming and standing
in front of you in a garden. This pretty American girl, however, on
hearing Winterbourne's observation, simply glanced at him; she then
turned her head and looked over the parapet, at the lake and the
opposite mountains. He wondered whether he had gone too far, but he
decided that he must advance farther, rather than retreat. While he was
thinking of something else to say, the young lady turned to the little
boy again.

"I should like to know where you got that pole," she said.

"I bought it," responded Randolph.

"You don't mean to say you're going to take it to Italy?"

"Yes, I am going to take it to Italy," the child declared.

The young girl glanced over the front of her dress and smoothed out a
knot or two of ribbon. Then she rested her eyes upon the prospect again.
"Well, I guess you had better leave it somewhere," she said after a
moment.

"Are you going to Italy?" Winterbourne inquired in a tone of great
respect.

The young lady glanced at him again. "Yes, sir," she replied. And she
said nothing more.

"Are you--a--going over the Simplon?" Winterbourne pursued, a little
embarrassed.

"I don't know," she said. "I suppose it's some mountain. Randolph, what
mountain are we going over?"

"Going where?" the child demanded.

"To Italy," Winterbourne explained.

"I don't know," said Randolph. "I don't want to go to Italy. I want to
go to America."

"Oh, Italy is a beautiful place!" rejoined the young man.

"Can you get candy there?" Randolph loudly inquired.

"I hope not," said his sister. "I guess you have had enough candy, and
mother thinks so too."

"I haven't had any for ever so long--for a hundred weeks!" cried the
boy, still jumping about.

The young lady inspected her flounces and smoothed her ribbons again;
and Winterbourne presently risked an observation upon the beauty of the
view. He was ceasing to be embarrassed, for he had begun to perceive
that she was not in the least embarrassed herself. There had not been
the slightest alteration in her charming complexion; she was evidently
neither offended nor flattered. If she looked another way when he spoke
to her, and seemed not particularly to hear him, this was simply her
habit, her manner. Yet, as he talked a little more and pointed out some
of the objects of interest in the view, with which she appeared quite
unacquainted, she gradually gave him more of the benefit of her glance;
and then he saw that this glance was perfectly direct and unshrinking.
It was not, however, what would have been called an immodest glance,
for the young girl's eyes were singularly honest and fresh. They were
wonderfully pretty eyes; and, indeed, Winterbourne had not seen for
a long time anything prettier than his fair countrywoman's various
features--her complexion, her nose, her ears, her teeth. He had a great
relish for feminine beauty; he was addicted to observing and analyzing
it; and as regards this young lady's face he made several observations.
It was not at all insipid, but it was not exactly expressive; and
though it was eminently delicate, Winterbourne mentally accused it--very
forgivingly--of a want of finish. He thought it very possible that
Master Randolph's sister was a coquette; he was sure she had a spirit of
her own; but in her bright, sweet, superficial little visage there was
no mockery, no irony. Before long it became obvious that she was much
disposed toward conversation. She told him that they were going to Rome
for the winter--she and her mother and Randolph. She asked him if he was
a "real American"; she shouldn't have taken him for one; he seemed more
like a German--this was said after a little hesitation--especially when
he spoke. Winterbourne, laughing, answered that he had met Germans who
spoke like Americans, but that he had not, so far as he remembered, met
an American who spoke like a German. Then he asked her if she should not
be more comfortable in sitting upon the bench which he had just quitted.
She answered that she liked standing up and walking about; but she
presently sat down. She told him she was from New York State--"if you
know where that is." Winterbourne learned more about her by catching
hold of her small, slippery brother and making him stand a few minutes
by his side.

"Tell me your name, my boy," he said.

"Randolph C. Miller," said the boy sharply. "And I'll tell you her
name;" and he leveled his alpenstock at his sister.

"You had better wait till you are asked!" said this young lady calmly.

"I should like very much to know your name," said Winterbourne.

"Her name is Daisy Miller!" cried the child. "But that isn't her real
name; that isn't her name on her cards."

"It's a pity you haven't got one of my cards!" said Miss Miller.

"Her real name is Annie P. Miller," the boy went on.

"Ask him HIS name," said his sister, indicating Winterbourne.

But on this point Randolph seemed perfectly indifferent; he continued to
supply information with regard to his own family. "My father's name is
Ezra B. Miller," he announced. "My father ain't in Europe; my father's
in a better place than Europe."

Winterbourne imagined for a moment that this was the manner in which the
child had been taught to intimate that Mr. Miller had been removed to
the sphere of celestial reward. But Randolph immediately added, "My
father's in Schenectady. He's got a big business. My father's rich, you
bet!"

"Well!" ejaculated Miss Miller, lowering her parasol and looking at
the embroidered border. Winterbourne presently released the child,
who departed, dragging his alpenstock along the path. "He doesn't like
Europe," said the young girl. "He wants to go back."

"To Schenectady, you mean?"

"Yes; he wants to go right home. He hasn't got any boys here. There is
one boy here, but he always goes round with a teacher; they won't let
him play."

"And your brother hasn't any teacher?" Winterbourne inquired.

"Mother thought of getting him one, to travel round with us. There was a
lady told her of a very good teacher; an American lady--perhaps you know
her--Mrs. Sanders. I think she came from Boston. She told her of this
teacher, and we thought of getting him to travel round with us. But
Randolph said he didn't want a teacher traveling round with us. He said
he wouldn't have lessons when he was in the cars. And we ARE in the cars
about half the time. There was an English lady we met in the cars--I
think her name was Miss Featherstone; perhaps you know her. She wanted
to know why I didn't give Randolph lessons--give him 'instruction,' she
called it. I guess he could give me more instruction than I could give
him. He's very smart."

"Yes," said Winterbourne; "he seems very smart."

"Mother's going to get a teacher for him as soon as we get to Italy. Can
you get good teachers in Italy?"

"Very good, I should think," said Winterbourne.

"Or else she's going to find some school. He ought to learn some more.
He's only nine. He's going to college." And in this way Miss Miller
continued to converse upon the affairs of her family and upon other
topics. She sat there with her extremely pretty hands, ornamented with
very brilliant rings, folded in her lap, and with her pretty eyes now
resting upon those of Winterbourne, now wandering over the garden, the
people who passed by, and the beautiful view. She talked to Winterbourne
as if she had known him a long time. He found it very pleasant. It was
many years since he had heard a young girl talk so much. It might have
been said of this unknown young lady, who had come and sat down beside
him upon a bench, that she chattered. She was very quiet; she sat in a
charming, tranquil attitude; but her lips and her eyes were constantly
moving. She had a soft, slender, agreeable voice, and her tone was
decidedly sociable. She gave Winterbourne a history of her movements
and intentions and those of her mother and brother, in Europe, and
enumerated, in particular, the various hotels at which they had stopped.
"That English lady in the cars," she said--"Miss Featherstone--asked me
if we didn't all live in hotels in America. I told her I had never been
in so many hotels in my life as since I came to Europe. I have never
seen so many--it's nothing but hotels." But Miss Miller did not make
this remark with a querulous accent; she appeared to be in the best
humor with everything. She declared that the hotels were very good, when
once you got used to their ways, and that Europe was perfectly sweet.
She was not disappointed--not a bit. Perhaps it was because she had
heard so much about it before. She had ever so many intimate friends
that had been there ever so many times. And then she had had ever so
many dresses and things from Paris. Whenever she put on a Paris dress
she felt as if she were in Europe.

"It was a kind of a wishing cap," said Winterbourne.

"Yes," said Miss Miller without examining this analogy; "it always made
me wish I was here. But I needn't have done that for dresses. I am sure
they send all the pretty ones to America; you see the most frightful
things here. The only thing I don't like," she proceeded, "is the
society. There isn't any society; or, if there is, I don't know where it
keeps itself. Do you? I suppose there is some society somewhere, but I
haven't seen anything of it. I'm very fond of society, and I have always
had a great deal of it. I don't mean only in Schenectady, but in New
York. I used to go to New York every winter. In New York I had lots of
society. Last winter I had seventeen dinners given me; and three of them
were by gentlemen," added Daisy Miller. "I have more friends in New York
than in Schenectady--more gentleman friends; and more young lady friends
too," she resumed in a moment. She paused again for an instant; she was
looking at Winterbourne with all her prettiness in her lively eyes and
in her light, slightly monotonous smile. "I have always had," she said,
"a great deal of gentlemen's society."

Poor Winterbourne was amused, perplexed, and decidedly charmed. He
had never yet heard a young girl express herself in just this fashion;
never, at least, save in cases where to say such things seemed a kind of
demonstrative evidence of a certain laxity of deportment. And yet was he
to accuse Miss Daisy Miller of actual or potential inconduite, as they
said at Geneva? He felt that he had lived at Geneva so long that he
had lost a good deal; he had become dishabituated to the American tone.
Never, indeed, since he had grown old enough to appreciate things, had
he encountered a young American girl of so pronounced a type as this.
Certainly she was very charming, but how deucedly sociable! Was she
simply a pretty girl from New York State? Were they all like that, the
pretty girls who had a good deal of gentlemen's society? Or was she also
a designing, an audacious, an unscrupulous young person? Winterbourne
had lost his instinct in this matter, and his reason could not help him.
Miss Daisy Miller looked extremely innocent. Some people had told him
that, after all, American girls were exceedingly innocent; and others
had told him that, after all, they were not. He was inclined to think
Miss Daisy Miller was a flirt--a pretty American flirt. He had never, as
yet, had any relations with young ladies of this category. He had
known, here in Europe, two or three women--persons older than Miss Daisy
Miller, and provided, for respectability's sake, with husbands--who were
great coquettes--dangerous, terrible women, with whom one's relations
were liable to take a serious turn. But this young girl was not a
coquette in that sense; she was very unsophisticated; she was only a
pretty American flirt. Winterbourne was almost grateful for having found
the formula that applied to Miss Daisy Miller. He leaned back in his
seat; he remarked to himself that she had the most charming nose he had
ever seen; he wondered what were the regular conditions and limitations
of one's intercourse with a pretty American flirt. It presently became
apparent that he was on the way to learn.

"Have you been to that old castle?" asked the young girl, pointing with
her parasol to the far-gleaming walls of the Chateau de Chillon.

"Yes, formerly, more than once," said Winterbourne. "You too, I suppose,
have seen it?"

"No; we haven't been there. I want to go there dreadfully. Of course I
mean to go there. I wouldn't go away from here without having seen that
old castle."

"It's a very pretty excursion," said Winterbourne, "and very easy to
make. You can drive, you know, or you can go by the little steamer."

"You can go in the cars," said Miss Miller.

"Yes; you can go in the cars," Winterbourne assented.

"Our courier says they take you right up to the castle," the young girl
continued. "We were going last week, but my mother gave out. She suffers
dreadfully from dyspepsia. She said she couldn't go. Randolph wouldn't
go either; he says he doesn't think much of old castles. But I guess
we'll go this week, if we can get Randolph."

"Your brother is not interested in ancient monuments?" Winterbourne
inquired, smiling.

"He says he don't care much about old castles. He's only nine. He
wants to stay at the hotel. Mother's afraid to leave him alone, and the
courier won't stay with him; so we haven't been to many places. But it
will be too bad if we don't go up there." And Miss Miller pointed again
at the Chateau de Chillon.

"I should think it might be arranged," said Winterbourne. "Couldn't you
get some one to stay for the afternoon with Randolph?"

Miss Miller looked at him a moment, and then, very placidly, "I wish YOU
would stay with him!" she said.

Winterbourne hesitated a moment. "I should much rather go to Chillon
with you."

"With me?" asked the young girl with the same placidity.

She didn't rise, blushing, as a young girl at Geneva would have done;
and yet Winterbourne, conscious that he had been very bold, thought
it possible she was offended. "With your mother," he answered very
respectfully.

But it seemed that both his audacity and his respect were lost upon Miss
Daisy Miller. "I guess my mother won't go, after all," she said. "She
don't like to ride round in the afternoon. But did you really mean what
you said just now--that you would like to go up there?"

"Most earnestly," Winterbourne declared.

"Then we may arrange it. If mother will stay with Randolph, I guess
Eugenio will."

"Eugenio?" the young man inquired.

"Eugenio's our courier. He doesn't like to stay with Randolph; he's the
most fastidious man I ever saw. But he's a splendid courier. I guess
he'll stay at home with Randolph if mother does, and then we can go to
the castle."

Winterbourne reflected for an instant as lucidly as possible--"we" could
only mean Miss Daisy Miller and himself. This program seemed almost too
agreeable for credence; he felt as if he ought to kiss the young lady's
hand. Possibly he would have done so and quite spoiled the project, but
at this moment another person, presumably Eugenio, appeared. A tall,
handsome man, with superb whiskers, wearing a velvet morning coat and
a brilliant watch chain, approached Miss Miller, looking sharply at her
companion. "Oh, Eugenio!" said Miss Miller with the friendliest accent.

Eugenio had looked at Winterbourne from head to foot; he now bowed
gravely to the young lady. "I have the honor to inform mademoiselle that
luncheon is upon the table."

Miss Miller slowly rose. "See here, Eugenio!" she said; "I'm going to
that old castle, anyway."

"To the Chateau de Chillon, mademoiselle?" the courier inquired.
"Mademoiselle has made arrangements?" he added in a tone which struck
Winterbourne as very impertinent.

Eugenio's tone apparently threw, even to Miss Miller's own apprehension,
a slightly ironical light upon the young girl's situation. She turned
to Winterbourne, blushing a little--a very little. "You won't back out?"
she said.

"I shall not be happy till we go!" he protested.

"And you are staying in this hotel?" she went on. "And you are really an
American?"

The courier stood looking at Winterbourne offensively. The young man,
at least, thought his manner of looking an offense to Miss Miller; it
conveyed an imputation that she "picked up" acquaintances. "I shall have
the honor of presenting to you a person who will tell you all about me,"
he said, smiling and referring to his aunt.

"Oh, well, we'll go some day," said Miss Miller. And she gave him a
smile and turned away. She put up her parasol and walked back to the inn
beside Eugenio. Winterbourne stood looking after her; and as she moved
away, drawing her muslin furbelows over the gravel, said to himself that
she had the tournure of a princess.

He had, however, engaged to do more than proved feasible, in promising
to present his aunt, Mrs. Costello, to Miss Daisy Miller. As soon as the
former lady had got better of her headache, he waited upon her in her
apartment; and, after the proper inquiries in regard to her health, he
asked her if she had observed in the hotel an American family--a mamma,
a daughter, and a little boy.

"And a courier?" said Mrs. Costello. "Oh yes, I have observed them. Seen
them--heard them--and kept out of their way." Mrs. Costello was a widow
with a fortune; a person of much distinction, who frequently intimated
that, if she were not so dreadfully liable to sick headaches, she would
probably have left a deeper impress upon her time. She had a long, pale
face, a high nose, and a great deal of very striking white hair, which
she wore in large puffs and rouleaux over the top of her head. She had
two sons married in New York and another who was now in Europe. This
young man was amusing himself at Hamburg, and, though he was on his
travels, was rarely perceived to visit any particular city at the moment
selected by his mother for her own appearance there. Her nephew, who had
come up to Vevey expressly to see her, was therefore more attentive than
those who, as she said, were nearer to her. He had imbibed at Geneva the
idea that one must always be attentive to one's aunt. Mrs. Costello
had not seen him for many years, and she was greatly pleased with him,
manifesting her approbation by initiating him into many of the secrets
of that social sway which, as she gave him to understand, she exerted in
the American capital. She admitted that she was very exclusive; but, if
he were acquainted with New York, he would see that one had to be. And
her picture of the minutely hierarchical constitution of the society of
that city, which she presented to him in many different lights, was, to
Winterbourne's imagination, almost oppressively striking.

He immediately perceived, from her tone, that Miss Daisy Miller's place
in the social scale was low. "I am afraid you don't approve of them," he
said.

"They are very common," Mrs. Costello declared. "They are the sort of
Americans that one does one's duty by not--not accepting."

"Ah, you don't accept them?" said the young man.

"I can't, my dear Frederick. I would if I could, but I can't."

"The young girl is very pretty," said Winterbourne in a moment.

"Of course she's pretty. But she is very common."

"I see what you mean, of course," said Winterbourne after another pause.

"She has that charming look that they all have," his aunt resumed. "I
can't think where they pick it up; and she dresses in perfection--no,
you don't know how well she dresses. I can't think where they get their
taste."

"But, my dear aunt, she is not, after all, a Comanche savage."

"She is a young lady," said Mrs. Costello, "who has an intimacy with her
mamma's courier."

"An intimacy with the courier?" the young man demanded.

"Oh, the mother is just as bad! They treat the courier like a familiar
friend--like a gentleman. I shouldn't wonder if he dines with them.
Very likely they have never seen a man with such good manners, such
fine clothes, so like a gentleman. He probably corresponds to the young
lady's idea of a count. He sits with them in the garden in the evening.
I think he smokes."

Winterbourne listened with interest to these disclosures; they helped
him to make up his mind about Miss Daisy. Evidently she was rather wild.
"Well," he said, "I am not a courier, and yet she was very charming to
me."

"You had better have said at first," said Mrs. Costello with dignity,
"that you had made her acquaintance."

"We simply met in the garden, and we talked a bit."

"Tout bonnement! And pray what did you say?"

"I said I should take the liberty of introducing her to my admirable
aunt."

"I am much obliged to you."

"It was to guarantee my respectability," said Winterbourne.

"And pray who is to guarantee hers?"

"Ah, you are cruel!" said the young man. "She's a very nice young girl."

"You don't say that as if you believed it," Mrs. Costello observed.

"She is completely uncultivated," Winterbourne went on. "But she is
wonderfully pretty, and, in short, she is very nice. To prove that I
believe it, I am going to take her to the Chateau de Chillon."

"You two are going off there together? I should say it proved just the
contrary. How long had you known her, may I ask, when this interesting
project was formed? You haven't been twenty-four hours in the house."

"I have known her half an hour!" said Winterbourne, smiling.

"Dear me!" cried Mrs. Costello. "What a dreadful girl!"

Her nephew was silent for some moments. "You really think, then," he
began earnestly, and with a desire for trustworthy information--"you
really think that--" But he paused again.

"Think what, sir?" said his aunt.

"That she is the sort of young lady who expects a man, sooner or later,
to carry her off?"

"I haven't the least idea what such young ladies expect a man to do. But
I really think that you had better not meddle with little American girls
that are uncultivated, as you call them. You have lived too long out of
the country. You will be sure to make some great mistake. You are too
innocent."

"My dear aunt, I am not so innocent," said Winterbourne, smiling and
curling his mustache.

"You are guilty too, then!"

Winterbourne continued to curl his mustache meditatively. "You won't let
the poor girl know you then?" he asked at last.

"Is it literally true that she is going to the Chateau de Chillon with
you?"

"I think that she fully intends it."

"Then, my dear Frederick," said Mrs. Costello, "I must decline the honor
of her acquaintance. I am an old woman, but I am not too old, thank
Heaven, to be shocked!"

"But don't they all do these things--the young girls in America?"
Winterbourne inquired.

Mrs. Costello stared a moment. "I should like to see my granddaughters
do them!" she declared grimly.

This seemed to throw some light upon the matter, for Winterbourne
remembered to have heard that his pretty cousins in New York were
"tremendous flirts." If, therefore, Miss Daisy Miller exceeded the
liberal margin allowed to these young ladies, it was probable that
anything might be expected of her. Winterbourne was impatient to see her
again, and he was vexed with himself that, by instinct, he should not
appreciate her justly.

Though he was impatient to see her, he hardly knew what he should say
to her about his aunt's refusal to become acquainted with her; but he
discovered, promptly enough, that with Miss Daisy Miller there was
no great need of walking on tiptoe. He found her that evening in the
garden, wandering about in the warm starlight like an indolent sylph,
and swinging to and fro the largest fan he had ever beheld. It was ten
o'clock. He had dined with his aunt, had been sitting with her since
dinner, and had just taken leave of her till the morrow. Miss Daisy
Miller seemed very glad to see him; she declared it was the longest
evening she had ever passed.

"Have you been all alone?" he asked.

"I have been walking round with mother. But mother gets tired walking
round," she answered.

"Has she gone to bed?"

"No; she doesn't like to go to bed," said the young girl. "She doesn't
sleep--not three hours. She says she doesn't know how she lives. She's
dreadfully nervous. I guess she sleeps more than she thinks. She's gone
somewhere after Randolph; she wants to try to get him to go to bed. He
doesn't like to go to bed."

"Let us hope she will persuade him," observed Winterbourne.

"She will talk to him all she can; but he doesn't like her to talk
to him," said Miss Daisy, opening her fan. "She's going to try to get
Eugenio to talk to him. But he isn't afraid of Eugenio. Eugenio's a
splendid courier, but he can't make much impression on Randolph! I don't
believe he'll go to bed before eleven." It appeared that Randolph's
vigil was in fact triumphantly prolonged, for Winterbourne strolled
about with the young girl for some time without meeting her mother. "I
have been looking round for that lady you want to introduce me to," his
companion resumed. "She's your aunt." Then, on Winterbourne's admitting
the fact and expressing some curiosity as to how she had learned it, she
said she had heard all about Mrs. Costello from the chambermaid. She was
very quiet and very comme il faut; she wore white puffs; she spoke to no
one, and she never dined at the table d'hote. Every two days she had a
headache. "I think that's a lovely description, headache and all!" said
Miss Daisy, chattering along in her thin, gay voice. "I want to know her
ever so much. I know just what YOUR aunt would be; I know I should like
her. She would be very exclusive. I like a lady to be exclusive; I'm
dying to be exclusive myself. Well, we ARE exclusive, mother and I. We
don't speak to everyone--or they don't speak to us. I suppose it's about
the same thing. Anyway, I shall be ever so glad to know your aunt."

Winterbourne was embarrassed. "She would be most happy," he said; "but I
am afraid those headaches will interfere."

The young girl looked at him through the dusk. "But I suppose she
doesn't have a headache every day," she said sympathetically.

Winterbourne was silent a moment. "She tells me she does," he answered
at last, not knowing what to say.

Miss Daisy Miller stopped and stood looking at him. Her prettiness was
still visible in the darkness; she was opening and closing her enormous
fan. "She doesn't want to know me!" she said suddenly. "Why don't you
say so? You needn't be afraid. I'm not afraid!" And she gave a little
laugh.

Winterbourne fancied there was a tremor in her voice; he was touched,
shocked, mortified by it. "My dear young lady," he protested, "she knows
no one. It's her wretched health."

The young girl walked on a few steps, laughing still. "You needn't be
afraid," she repeated. "Why should she want to know me?" Then she paused
again; she was close to the parapet of the garden, and in front of her
was the starlit lake. There was a vague sheen upon its surface, and in
the distance were dimly seen mountain forms. Daisy Miller looked out
upon the mysterious prospect and then she gave another little laugh.
"Gracious! she IS exclusive!" she said. Winterbourne wondered whether
she was seriously wounded, and for a moment almost wished that her sense
of injury might be such as to make it becoming in him to attempt to
reassure and comfort her. He had a pleasant sense that she would be very
approachable for consolatory purposes. He felt then, for the instant,
quite ready to sacrifice his aunt, conversationally; to admit that she
was a proud, rude woman, and to declare that they needn't mind her.
But before he had time to commit himself to this perilous mixture
of gallantry and impiety, the young lady, resuming her walk, gave an
exclamation in quite another tone. "Well, here's Mother! I guess she
hasn't got Randolph to go to bed." The figure of a lady appeared at a
distance, very indistinct in the darkness, and advancing with a slow and
wavering movement. Suddenly it seemed to pause.

"Are you sure it is your mother? Can you distinguish her in this thick
dusk?" Winterbourne asked.

"Well!" cried Miss Daisy Miller with a laugh; "I guess I know my own
mother. And when she has got on my shawl, too! She is always wearing my
things."

The lady in question, ceasing to advance, hovered vaguely about the spot
at which she had checked her steps.

"I am afraid your mother doesn't see you," said Winterbourne.
"Or perhaps," he added, thinking, with Miss Miller, the joke
permissible--"perhaps she feels guilty about your shawl."

"Oh, it's a fearful old thing!" the young girl replied serenely. "I told
her she could wear it. She won't come here because she sees you."

"Ah, then," said Winterbourne, "I had better leave you."

"Oh, no; come on!" urged Miss Daisy Miller.

"I'm afraid your mother doesn't approve of my walking with you."

Miss Miller gave him a serious glance. "It isn't for me; it's for
you--that is, it's for HER. Well, I don't know who it's for! But mother
doesn't like any of my gentlemen friends. She's right down timid. She
always makes a fuss if I introduce a gentleman. But I DO introduce
them--almost always. If I didn't introduce my gentlemen friends to
Mother," the young girl added in her little soft, flat monotone, "I
shouldn't think I was natural."

"To introduce me," said Winterbourne, "you must know my name." And he
proceeded to pronounce it.

"Oh, dear, I can't say all that!" said his companion with a laugh. But
by this time they had come up to Mrs. Miller, who, as they drew near,
walked to the parapet of the garden and leaned upon it, looking intently
at the lake and turning her back to them. "Mother!" said the young
girl in a tone of decision. Upon this the elder lady turned round. "Mr.
Winterbourne," said Miss Daisy Miller, introducing the young man very
frankly and prettily. "Common," she was, as Mrs. Costello had pronounced
her; yet it was a wonder to Winterbourne that, with her commonness, she
had a singularly delicate grace.

Her mother was a small, spare, light person, with a wandering eye,
a very exiguous nose, and a large forehead, decorated with a certain
amount of thin, much frizzled hair. Like her daughter, Mrs. Miller was
dressed with extreme elegance; she had enormous diamonds in her ears.
So far as Winterbourne could observe, she gave him no greeting--she
certainly was not looking at him. Daisy was near her, pulling her shawl
straight. "What are you doing, poking round here?" this young lady
inquired, but by no means with that harshness of accent which her choice
of words may imply.

"I don't know," said her mother, turning toward the lake again.

"I shouldn't think you'd want that shawl!" Daisy exclaimed.

"Well I do!" her mother answered with a little laugh.

"Did you get Randolph to go to bed?" asked the young girl.

"No; I couldn't induce him," said Mrs. Miller very gently. "He wants to
talk to the waiter. He likes to talk to that waiter."

"I was telling Mr. Winterbourne," the young girl went on; and to the
young man's ear her tone might have indicated that she had been uttering
his name all her life.

"Oh, yes!" said Winterbourne; "I have the pleasure of knowing your son."

Randolph's mamma was silent; she turned her attention to the lake. But
at last she spoke. "Well, I don't see how he lives!"

"Anyhow, it isn't so bad as it was at Dover," said Daisy Miller.

"And what occurred at Dover?" Winterbourne asked.

"He wouldn't go to bed at all. I guess he sat up all night in the public
parlor. He wasn't in bed at twelve o'clock: I know that."

"It was half-past twelve," declared Mrs. Miller with mild emphasis.

"Does he sleep much during the day?" Winterbourne demanded.

"I guess he doesn't sleep much," Daisy rejoined.

"I wish he would!" said her mother. "It seems as if he couldn't."

"I think he's real tiresome," Daisy pursued.

Then, for some moments, there was silence. "Well, Daisy Miller," said
the elder lady, presently, "I shouldn't think you'd want to talk against
your own brother!"

"Well, he IS tiresome, Mother," said Daisy, quite without the asperity
of a retort.

"He's only nine," urged Mrs. Miller.

"Well, he wouldn't go to that castle," said the young girl. "I'm going
there with Mr. Winterbourne."

To this announcement, very placidly made, Daisy's mamma offered no
response. Winterbourne took for granted that she deeply disapproved of
the projected excursion; but he said to himself that she was a simple,
easily managed person, and that a few deferential protestations would
take the edge from her displeasure. "Yes," he began; "your daughter has
kindly allowed me the honor of being her guide."

Mrs. Miller's wandering eyes attached themselves, with a sort of
appealing air, to Daisy, who, however, strolled a few steps farther,
gently humming to herself. "I presume you will go in the cars," said her
mother.

"Yes, or in the boat," said Winterbourne.

"Well, of course, I don't know," Mrs. Miller rejoined. "I have never
been to that castle."

"It is a pity you shouldn't go," said Winterbourne, beginning to feel
reassured as to her opposition. And yet he was quite prepared to find
that, as a matter of course, she meant to accompany her daughter.

"We've been thinking ever so much about going," she pursued; "but it
seems as if we couldn't. Of course Daisy--she wants to go round. But
there's a lady here--I don't know her name--she says she shouldn't think
we'd want to go to see castles HERE; she should think we'd want to wait
till we got to Italy. It seems as if there would be so many there,"
continued Mrs. Miller with an air of increasing confidence. "Of course
we only want to see the principal ones. We visited several in England,"
she presently added.

"Ah yes! in England there are beautiful castles," said Winterbourne.
"But Chillon here, is very well worth seeing."

"Well, if Daisy feels up to it--" said Mrs. Miller, in a tone
impregnated with a sense of the magnitude of the enterprise. "It seems
as if there was nothing she wouldn't undertake."

"Oh, I think she'll enjoy it!" Winterbourne declared. And he desired
more and more to make it a certainty that he was to have the privilege
of a tete-a-tete with the young lady, who was still strolling along
in front of them, softly vocalizing. "You are not disposed, madam," he
inquired, "to undertake it yourself?"

Daisy's mother looked at him an instant askance, and then walked forward
in silence. Then--"I guess she had better go alone," she said simply.
Winterbourne observed to himself that this was a very different type of
maternity from that of the vigilant matrons who massed themselves in the
forefront of social intercourse in the dark old city at the other end of
the lake. But his meditations were interrupted by hearing his name very
distinctly pronounced by Mrs. Miller's unprotected daughter.

"Mr. Winterbourne!" murmured Daisy.

"Mademoiselle!" said the young man.

"Don't you want to take me out in a boat?"

"At present?" he asked.

"Of course!" said Daisy.

"Well, Annie Miller!" exclaimed her mother.

"I beg you, madam, to let her go," said Winterbourne ardently; for
he had never yet enjoyed the sensation of guiding through the summer
starlight a skiff freighted with a fresh and beautiful young girl.

"I shouldn't think she'd want to," said her mother. "I should think
she'd rather go indoors."

"I'm sure Mr. Winterbourne wants to take me," Daisy declared. "He's so
awfully devoted!"

"I will row you over to Chillon in the starlight."

"I don't believe it!" said Daisy.

"Well!" ejaculated the elder lady again.

"You haven't spoken to me for half an hour," her daughter went on.

"I have been having some very pleasant conversation with your mother,"
said Winterbourne.

"Well, I want you to take me out in a boat!" Daisy repeated. They had
all stopped, and she had turned round and was looking at Winterbourne.
Her face wore a charming smile, her pretty eyes were gleaming, she was
swinging her great fan about. No; it's impossible to be prettier than
that, thought Winterbourne.

"There are half a dozen boats moored at that landing place," he said,
pointing to certain steps which descended from the garden to the lake.
"If you will do me the honor to accept my arm, we will go and select one
of them."

Daisy stood there smiling; she threw back her head and gave a little,
light laugh. "I like a gentleman to be formal!" she declared.

"I assure you it's a formal offer."

"I was bound I would make you say something," Daisy went on.

"You see, it's not very difficult," said Winterbourne. "But I am afraid
you are chaffing me."

"I think not, sir," remarked Mrs. Miller very gently.

"Do, then, let me give you a row," he said to the young girl.

"It's quite lovely, the way you say that!" cried Daisy.

"It will be still more lovely to do it."

"Yes, it would be lovely!" said Daisy. But she made no movement to
accompany him; she only stood there laughing.

"I should think you had better find out what time it is," interposed her
mother.

"It is eleven o'clock, madam," said a voice, with a foreign accent, out
of the neighboring darkness; and Winterbourne, turning, perceived the
florid personage who was in attendance upon the two ladies. He had
apparently just approached.

"Oh, Eugenio," said Daisy, "I am going out in a boat!"

Eugenio bowed. "At eleven o'clock, mademoiselle?"

"I am going with Mr. Winterbourne--this very minute."

"Do tell her she can't," said Mrs. Miller to the courier.

"I think you had better not go out in a boat, mademoiselle," Eugenio
declared.

Winterbourne wished to Heaven this pretty girl were not so familiar with
her courier; but he said nothing.

"I suppose you don't think it's proper!" Daisy exclaimed. "Eugenio
doesn't think anything's proper."

"I am at your service," said Winterbourne.

"Does mademoiselle propose to go alone?" asked Eugenio of Mrs. Miller.

"Oh, no; with this gentleman!" answered Daisy's mamma.

The courier looked for a moment at Winterbourne--the latter thought he
was smiling--and then, solemnly, with a bow, "As mademoiselle pleases!"
he said.

"Oh, I hoped you would make a fuss!" said Daisy. "I don't care to go
now."

"I myself shall make a fuss if you don't go," said Winterbourne.

"That's all I want--a little fuss!" And the young girl began to laugh
again.

"Mr. Randolph has gone to bed!" the courier announced frigidly.

"Oh, Daisy; now we can go!" said Mrs. Miller.

Daisy turned away from Winterbourne, looking at him, smiling and fanning
herself. "Good night," she said; "I hope you are disappointed, or
disgusted, or something!"

He looked at her, taking the hand she offered him. "I am puzzled," he
answered.

"Well, I hope it won't keep you awake!" she said very smartly; and,
under the escort of the privileged Eugenio, the two ladies passed toward
the house.

Winterbourne stood looking after them; he was indeed puzzled. He
lingered beside the lake for a quarter of an hour, turning over the
mystery of the young girl's sudden familiarities and caprices. But
the only very definite conclusion he came to was that he should enjoy
deucedly "going off" with her somewhere.

Two days afterward he went off with her to the Castle of Chillon. He
waited for her in the large hall of the hotel, where the couriers, the
servants, the foreign tourists, were lounging about and staring. It was
not the place he should have chosen, but she had appointed it. She came
tripping downstairs, buttoning her long gloves, squeezing her folded
parasol against her pretty figure, dressed in the perfection of a
soberly elegant traveling costume. Winterbourne was a man of imagination
and, as our ancestors used to say, sensibility; as he looked at her
dress and, on the great staircase, her little rapid, confiding step, he
felt as if there were something romantic going forward. He could have
believed he was going to elope with her. He passed out with her among
all the idle people that were assembled there; they were all looking
at her very hard; she had begun to chatter as soon as she joined him.
Winterbourne's preference had been that they should be conveyed to
Chillon in a carriage; but she expressed a lively wish to go in the
little steamer; she declared that she had a passion for steamboats.
There was always such a lovely breeze upon the water, and you saw such
lots of people. The sail was not long, but Winterbourne's companion
found time to say a great many things. To the young man himself their
little excursion was so much of an escapade--an adventure--that, even
allowing for her habitual sense of freedom, he had some expectation of
seeing her regard it in the same way. But it must be confessed that,
in this particular, he was disappointed. Daisy Miller was extremely
animated, she was in charming spirits; but she was apparently not at all
excited; she was not fluttered; she avoided neither his eyes nor those
of anyone else; she blushed neither when she looked at him nor when she
felt that people were looking at her. People continued to look at her
a great deal, and Winterbourne took much satisfaction in his pretty
companion's distinguished air. He had been a little afraid that she
would talk loud, laugh overmuch, and even, perhaps, desire to move about
the boat a good deal. But he quite forgot his fears; he sat smiling,
with his eyes upon her face, while, without moving from her place, she
delivered herself of a great number of original reflections. It was the
most charming garrulity he had ever heard. He had assented to the idea
that she was "common"; but was she so, after all, or was he simply
getting used to her commonness? Her conversation was chiefly of what
metaphysicians term the objective cast, but every now and then it took a
subjective turn.

"What on EARTH are you so grave about?" she suddenly demanded, fixing
her agreeable eyes upon Winterbourne's.

"Am I grave?" he asked. "I had an idea I was grinning from ear to ear."

"You look as if you were taking me to a funeral. If that's a grin, your
ears are very near together."

"Should you like me to dance a hornpipe on the deck?"

"Pray do, and I'll carry round your hat. It will pay the expenses of our
journey."

"I never was better pleased in my life," murmured Winterbourne.

She looked at him a moment and then burst into a little laugh. "I like
to make you say those things! You're a queer mixture!"

In the castle, after they had landed, the subjective element decidedly
prevailed. Daisy tripped about the vaulted chambers, rustled her skirts
in the corkscrew staircases, flirted back with a pretty little cry and
a shudder from the edge of the oubliettes, and turned a singularly
well-shaped ear to everything that Winterbourne told her about the
place. But he saw that she cared very little for feudal antiquities and
that the dusky traditions of Chillon made but a slight impression upon
her. They had the good fortune to have been able to walk about without
other companionship than that of the custodian; and Winterbourne
arranged with this functionary that they should not be hurried--that
they should linger and pause wherever they chose. The custodian
interpreted the bargain generously--Winterbourne, on his side, had been
generous--and ended by leaving them quite to themselves. Miss Miller's
observations were not remarkable for logical consistency; for anything
she wanted to say she was sure to find a pretext. She found a great many
pretexts in the rugged embrasures of Chillon for asking Winterbourne
sudden questions about himself--his family, his previous history, his
tastes, his habits, his intentions--and for supplying information upon
corresponding points in her own personality. Of her own tastes, habits,
and intentions Miss Miller was prepared to give the most definite, and
indeed the most favorable account.

"Well, I hope you know enough!" she said to her companion, after he had
told her the history of the unhappy Bonivard. "I never saw a man that
knew so much!" The history of Bonivard had evidently, as they say, gone
into one ear and out of the other. But Daisy went on to say that she
wished Winterbourne would travel with them and "go round" with them;
they might know something, in that case. "Don't you want to come
and teach Randolph?" she asked. Winterbourne said that nothing
could possibly please him so much, but that he had unfortunately other
occupations. "Other occupations? I don't believe it!" said Miss Daisy.
"What do you mean? You are not in business." The young man admitted that
he was not in business; but he had engagements which, even within a day
or two, would force him to go back to Geneva. "Oh, bother!" she said; "I
don't believe it!" and she began to talk about something else. But a few
moments later, when he was pointing out to her the pretty design of an
antique fireplace, she broke out irrelevantly, "You don't mean to say
you are going back to Geneva?"

"It is a melancholy fact that I shall have to return to Geneva
tomorrow."

"Well, Mr. Winterbourne," said Daisy, "I think you're horrid!"

"Oh, don't say such dreadful things!" said Winterbourne--"just at the
last!"

"The last!" cried the young girl; "I call it the first. I have half a
mind to leave you here and go straight back to the hotel alone." And
for the next ten minutes she did nothing but call him horrid. Poor
Winterbourne was fairly bewildered; no young lady had as yet done him
the honor to be so agitated by the announcement of his movements. His
companion, after this, ceased to pay any attention to the curiosities of
Chillon or the beauties of the lake; she opened fire upon the mysterious
charmer in Geneva whom she appeared to have instantly taken it for
granted that he was hurrying back to see. How did Miss Daisy Miller
know that there was a charmer in Geneva? Winterbourne, who denied the
existence of such a person, was quite unable to discover, and he was
divided between amazement at the rapidity of her induction and amusement
at the frankness of her persiflage. She seemed to him, in all this, an
extraordinary mixture of innocence and crudity. "Does she never allow
you more than three days at a time?" asked Daisy ironically. "Doesn't
she give you a vacation in summer? There's no one so hard worked but
they can get leave to go off somewhere at this season. I suppose, if you
stay another day, she'll come after you in the boat. Do wait over
till Friday, and I will go down to the landing to see her arrive!"
Winterbourne began to think he had been wrong to feel disappointed in
the temper in which the young lady had embarked. If he had missed the
personal accent, the personal accent was now making its appearance.
It sounded very distinctly, at last, in her telling him she would stop
"teasing" him if he would promise her solemnly to come down to Rome in
the winter.

"That's not a difficult promise to make," said Winterbourne. "My aunt
has taken an apartment in Rome for the winter and has already asked me
to come and see her."

"I don't want you to come for your aunt," said Daisy; "I want you to
come for me." And this was the only allusion that the young man was ever
to hear her make to his invidious kinswoman. He declared that, at
any rate, he would certainly come. After this Daisy stopped teasing.
Winterbourne took a carriage, and they drove back to Vevey in the dusk;
the young girl was very quiet.

In the evening Winterbourne mentioned to Mrs. Costello that he had spent
the afternoon at Chillon with Miss Daisy Miller.

"The Americans--of the courier?" asked this lady.

"Ah, happily," said Winterbourne, "the courier stayed at home."

"She went with you all alone?"

"All alone."

Mrs. Costello sniffed a little at her smelling bottle. "And that," she
exclaimed, "is the young person whom you wanted me to know!"





PART II


Winterbourne, who had returned to Geneva the day after his excursion
to Chillon, went to Rome toward the end of January. His aunt had been
established there for several weeks, and he had received a couple of
letters from her. "Those people you were so devoted to last summer at
Vevey have turned up here, courier and all," she wrote. "They seem to
have made several acquaintances, but the courier continues to be the
most intime. The young lady, however, is also very intimate with some
third-rate Italians, with whom she rackets about in a way that makes
much talk. Bring me that pretty novel of Cherbuliez's--Paule Mere--and
don't come later than the 23rd."

In the natural course of events, Winterbourne, on arriving in Rome,
would presently have ascertained Mrs. Miller's address at the American
banker's and have gone to pay his compliments to Miss Daisy. "After what
happened at Vevey, I think I may certainly call upon them," he said to
Mrs. Costello.

"If, after what happens--at Vevey and everywhere--you desire to keep
up the acquaintance, you are very welcome. Of course a man may know
everyone. Men are welcome to the privilege!"

"Pray what is it that happens--here, for instance?" Winterbourne
demanded.

"The girl goes about alone with her foreigners. As to what happens
further, you must apply elsewhere for information. She has picked up
half a dozen of the regular Roman fortune hunters, and she takes them
about to people's houses. When she comes to a party she brings with her
a gentleman with a good deal of manner and a wonderful mustache."

"And where is the mother?"

"I haven't the least idea. They are very dreadful people."

Winterbourne meditated a moment. "They are very ignorant--very innocent
only. Depend upon it they are not bad."

"They are hopelessly vulgar," said Mrs. Costello. "Whether or no being
hopelessly vulgar is being 'bad' is a question for the metaphysicians.
They are bad enough to dislike, at any rate; and for this short life
that is quite enough."

The news that Daisy Miller was surrounded by half a dozen wonderful
mustaches checked Winterbourne's impulse to go straightway to see her.
He had, perhaps, not definitely flattered himself that he had made an
ineffaceable impression upon her heart, but he was annoyed at hearing
of a state of affairs so little in harmony with an image that had lately
flitted in and out of his own meditations; the image of a very pretty
girl looking out of an old Roman window and asking herself urgently
when Mr. Winterbourne would arrive. If, however, he determined to wait a
little before reminding Miss Miller of his claims to her consideration,
he went very soon to call upon two or three other friends. One of these
friends was an American lady who had spent several winters at Geneva,
where she had placed her children at school. She was a very accomplished
woman, and she lived in the Via Gregoriana. Winterbourne found her in a
little crimson drawing room on a third floor; the room was filled with
southern sunshine. He had not been there ten minutes when the servant
came in, announcing "Madame Mila!" This announcement was presently
followed by the entrance of little Randolph Miller, who stopped in the
middle of the room and stood staring at Winterbourne. An instant later
his pretty sister crossed the threshold; and then, after a considerable
interval, Mrs. Miller slowly advanced.

"I know you!" said Randolph.

"I'm sure you know a great many things," exclaimed Winterbourne, taking
him by the hand. "How is your education coming on?"

Daisy was exchanging greetings very prettily with her hostess, but when
she heard Winterbourne's voice she quickly turned her head. "Well, I
declare!" she said.

"I told you I should come, you know," Winterbourne rejoined, smiling.

"Well, I didn't believe it," said Miss Daisy.

"I am much obliged to you," laughed the young man.

"You might have come to see me!" said Daisy.

"I arrived only yesterday."

"I don't believe that!" the young girl declared.

Winterbourne turned with a protesting smile to her mother, but this lady
evaded his glance, and, seating herself, fixed her eyes upon her son.
"We've got a bigger place than this," said Randolph. "It's all gold on
the walls."

Mrs. Miller turned uneasily in her chair. "I told you if I were to bring
you, you would say something!" she murmured.

"I told YOU!" Randolph exclaimed. "I tell YOU, sir!" he added jocosely,
giving Winterbourne a thump on the knee. "It IS bigger, too!"

Daisy had entered upon a lively conversation with her hostess;
Winterbourne judged it becoming to address a few words to her mother. "I
hope you have been well since we parted at Vevey," he said.

Mrs. Miller now certainly looked at him--at his chin. "Not very well,
sir," she answered.

"She's got the dyspepsia," said Randolph. "I've got it too. Father's got
it. I've got it most!"

This announcement, instead of embarrassing Mrs. Miller, seemed to
relieve her. "I suffer from the liver," she said. "I think it's this
climate; it's less bracing than Schenectady, especially in the winter
season. I don't know whether you know we reside at Schenectady. I was
saying to Daisy that I certainly hadn't found any one like Dr. Davis,
and I didn't believe I should. Oh, at Schenectady he stands first; they
think everything of him. He has so much to do, and yet there was nothing
he wouldn't do for me. He said he never saw anything like my dyspepsia,
but he was bound to cure it. I'm sure there was nothing he wouldn't
try. He was just going to try something new when we came off. Mr. Miller
wanted Daisy to see Europe for herself. But I wrote to Mr. Miller that
it seems as if I couldn't get on without Dr. Davis. At Schenectady he
stands at the very top; and there's a great deal of sickness there, too.
It affects my sleep."

Winterbourne had a good deal of pathological gossip with Dr. Davis's
patient, during which Daisy chattered unremittingly to her own
companion. The young man asked Mrs. Miller how she was pleased with
Rome. "Well, I must say I am disappointed," she answered. "We had heard
so much about it; I suppose we had heard too much. But we couldn't help
that. We had been led to expect something different."

"Ah, wait a little, and you will become very fond of it," said
Winterbourne.

"I hate it worse and worse every day!" cried Randolph.

"You are like the infant Hannibal," said Winterbourne.

"No, I ain't!" Randolph declared at a venture.

"You are not much like an infant," said his mother. "But we have seen
places," she resumed, "that I should put a long way before Rome." And in
reply to Winterbourne's interrogation, "There's Zurich," she concluded,
"I think Zurich is lovely; and we hadn't heard half so much about it."

"The best place we've seen is the City of Richmond!" said Randolph.

"He means the ship," his mother explained. "We crossed in that ship.
Randolph had a good time on the City of Richmond."

"It's the best place I've seen," the child repeated. "Only it was turned
the wrong way."

"Well, we've got to turn the right way some time," said Mrs. Miller with
a little laugh. Winterbourne expressed the hope that her daughter at
least found some gratification in Rome, and she declared that Daisy
was quite carried away. "It's on account of the society--the society's
splendid. She goes round everywhere; she has made a great number of
acquaintances. Of course she goes round more than I do. I must say they
have been very sociable; they have taken her right in. And then she
knows a great many gentlemen. Oh, she thinks there's nothing like Rome.
Of course, it's a great deal pleasanter for a young lady if she knows
plenty of gentlemen."

By this time Daisy had turned her attention again to Winterbourne. "I've
been telling Mrs. Walker how mean you were!" the young girl announced.

"And what is the evidence you have offered?" asked Winterbourne, rather
annoyed at Miss Miller's want of appreciation of the zeal of an admirer
who on his way down to Rome had stopped neither at Bologna nor at
Florence, simply because of a certain sentimental impatience. He
remembered that a cynical compatriot had once told him that American
women--the pretty ones, and this gave a largeness to the axiom--were at
once the most exacting in the world and the least endowed with a sense
of indebtedness.

"Why, you were awfully mean at Vevey," said Daisy. "You wouldn't do
anything. You wouldn't stay there when I asked you."

"My dearest young lady," cried Winterbourne, with eloquence, "have I
come all the way to Rome to encounter your reproaches?"

"Just hear him say that!" said Daisy to her hostess, giving a twist to a
bow on this lady's dress. "Did you ever hear anything so quaint?"

"So quaint, my dear?" murmured Mrs. Walker in the tone of a partisan of
Winterbourne.

"Well, I don't know," said Daisy, fingering Mrs. Walker's ribbons. "Mrs.
Walker, I want to tell you something."

"Mother-r," interposed Randolph, with his rough ends to his words, "I
tell you you've got to go. Eugenio'll raise--something!"

"I'm not afraid of Eugenio," said Daisy with a toss of her head. "Look
here, Mrs. Walker," she went on, "you know I'm coming to your party."

"I am delighted to hear it."

"I've got a lovely dress!"

"I am very sure of that."

"But I want to ask a favor--permission to bring a friend."

"I shall be happy to see any of your friends," said Mrs. Walker, turning
with a smile to Mrs. Miller.

"Oh, they are not my friends," answered Daisy's mamma, smiling shyly in
her own fashion. "I never spoke to them."

"It's an intimate friend of mine--Mr. Giovanelli," said Daisy without
a tremor in her clear little voice or a shadow on her brilliant little
face.

Mrs. Walker was silent a moment; she gave a rapid glance at
Winterbourne. "I shall be glad to see Mr. Giovanelli," she then said.

"He's an Italian," Daisy pursued with the prettiest serenity. "He's a
great friend of mine; he's the handsomest man in the world--except Mr.
Winterbourne! He knows plenty of Italians, but he wants to know some
Americans. He thinks ever so much of Americans. He's tremendously
clever. He's perfectly lovely!"

It was settled that this brilliant personage should be brought to Mrs.
Walker's party, and then Mrs. Miller prepared to take her leave. "I
guess we'll go back to the hotel," she said.

"You may go back to the hotel, Mother, but I'm going to take a walk,"
said Daisy.

"She's going to walk with Mr. Giovanelli," Randolph proclaimed.

"I am going to the Pincio," said Daisy, smiling.

"Alone, my dear--at this hour?" Mrs. Walker asked. The afternoon was
drawing to a close--it was the hour for the throng of carriages and of
contemplative pedestrians. "I don't think it's safe, my dear," said Mrs.
Walker.

"Neither do I," subjoined Mrs. Miller. "You'll get the fever, as sure as
you live. Remember what Dr. Davis told you!"

"Give her some medicine before she goes," said Randolph.

The company had risen to its feet; Daisy, still showing her pretty
teeth, bent over and kissed her hostess. "Mrs. Walker, you are too
perfect," she said. "I'm not going alone; I am going to meet a friend."

"Your friend won't keep you from getting the fever," Mrs. Miller
observed.

"Is it Mr. Giovanelli?" asked the hostess.

Winterbourne was watching the young girl; at this question his attention
quickened. She stood there, smiling and smoothing her bonnet ribbons;
she glanced at Winterbourne. Then, while she glanced and smiled, she
answered, without a shade of hesitation, "Mr. Giovanelli--the beautiful
Giovanelli."

"My dear young friend," said Mrs. Walker, taking her hand pleadingly,
"don't walk off to the Pincio at this hour to meet a beautiful Italian."

"Well, he speaks English," said Mrs. Miller.

"Gracious me!" Daisy exclaimed, "I don't to do anything improper.
There's an easy way to settle it." She continued to glance at
Winterbourne. "The Pincio is only a hundred yards distant; and if Mr.
Winterbourne were as polite as he pretends, he would offer to walk with
me!"

Winterbourne's politeness hastened to affirm itself, and the young girl
gave him gracious leave to accompany her. They passed downstairs
before her mother, and at the door Winterbourne perceived Mrs. Miller's
carriage drawn up, with the ornamental courier whose acquaintance he had
made at Vevey seated within. "Goodbye, Eugenio!" cried Daisy; "I'm going
to take a walk." The distance from the Via Gregoriana to the beautiful
garden at the other end of the Pincian Hill is, in fact, rapidly
traversed. As the day was splendid, however, and the concourse of
vehicles, walkers, and loungers numerous, the young Americans found
their progress much delayed. This fact was highly agreeable to
Winterbourne, in spite of his consciousness of his singular situation.
The slow-moving, idly gazing Roman crowd bestowed much attention upon
the extremely pretty young foreign lady who was passing through it upon
his arm; and he wondered what on earth had been in Daisy's mind when
she proposed to expose herself, unattended, to its appreciation. His own
mission, to her sense, apparently, was to consign her to the hands
of Mr. Giovanelli; but Winterbourne, at once annoyed and gratified,
resolved that he would do no such thing.

"Why haven't you been to see me?" asked Daisy. "You can't get out of
that."

"I have had the honor of telling you that I have only just stepped out
of the train."

"You must have stayed in the train a good while after it stopped!" cried
the young girl with her little laugh. "I suppose you were asleep. You
have had time to go to see Mrs. Walker."

"I knew Mrs. Walker--" Winterbourne began to explain.

"I know where you knew her. You knew her at Geneva. She told me so.
Well, you knew me at Vevey. That's just as good. So you ought to have
come." She asked him no other question than this; she began to prattle
about her own affairs. "We've got splendid rooms at the hotel; Eugenio
says they're the best rooms in Rome. We are going to stay all winter,
if we don't die of the fever; and I guess we'll stay then. It's a great
deal nicer than I thought; I thought it would be fearfully quiet; I was
sure it would be awfully poky. I was sure we should be going round
all the time with one of those dreadful old men that explain about the
pictures and things. But we only had about a week of that, and now
I'm enjoying myself. I know ever so many people, and they are all so
charming. The society's extremely select. There are all kinds--English,
and Germans, and Italians. I think I like the English best. I like their
style of conversation. But there are some lovely Americans. I never saw
anything so hospitable. There's something or other every day. There's
not much dancing; but I must say I never thought dancing was everything.
I was always fond of conversation. I guess I shall have plenty at Mrs.
Walker's, her rooms are so small." When they had passed the gate of the
Pincian Gardens, Miss Miller began to wonder where Mr. Giovanelli might
be. "We had better go straight to that place in front," she said, "where
you look at the view."

"I certainly shall not help you to find him," Winterbourne declared.

"Then I shall find him without you," cried Miss Daisy.

"You certainly won't leave me!" cried Winterbourne.

She burst into her little laugh. "Are you afraid you'll get lost--or run
over? But there's Giovanelli, leaning against that tree. He's staring at
the women in the carriages: did you ever see anything so cool?"

Winterbourne perceived at some distance a little man standing with
folded arms nursing his cane. He had a handsome face, an artfully poised
hat, a glass in one eye, and a nosegay in his buttonhole. Winterbourne
looked at him a moment and then said, "Do you mean to speak to that
man?"

"Do I mean to speak to him? Why, you don't suppose I mean to communicate
by signs?"

"Pray understand, then," said Winterbourne, "that I intend to remain
with you."

Daisy stopped and looked at him, without a sign of troubled
consciousness in her face, with nothing but the presence of her charming
eyes and her happy dimples. "Well, she's a cool one!" thought the young
man.

"I don't like the way you say that," said Daisy. "It's too imperious."

"I beg your pardon if I say it wrong. The main point is to give you an
idea of my meaning."

The young girl looked at him more gravely, but with eyes that were
prettier than ever. "I have never allowed a gentleman to dictate to me,
or to interfere with anything I do."

"I think you have made a mistake," said Winterbourne. "You should
sometimes listen to a gentleman--the right one."

Daisy began to laugh again. "I do nothing but listen to gentlemen!" she
exclaimed. "Tell me if Mr. Giovanelli is the right one?"

The gentleman with the nosegay in his bosom had now perceived our two
friends, and was approaching the young girl with obsequious rapidity.
He bowed to Winterbourne as well as to the latter's companion; he had
a brilliant smile, an intelligent eye; Winterbourne thought him not a
bad-looking fellow. But he nevertheless said to Daisy, "No, he's not the
right one."

Daisy evidently had a natural talent for performing introductions; she
mentioned the name of each of her companions to the other. She strolled
alone with one of them on each side of her; Mr. Giovanelli, who spoke
English very cleverly--Winterbourne afterward learned that he had
practiced the idiom upon a great many American heiresses--addressed her
a great deal of very polite nonsense; he was extremely urbane, and the
young American, who said nothing, reflected upon that profundity of
Italian cleverness which enables people to appear more gracious in
proportion as they are more acutely disappointed. Giovanelli, of course,
had counted upon something more intimate; he had not bargained for
a party of three. But he kept his temper in a manner which suggested
far-stretching intentions. Winterbourne flattered himself that he had
taken his measure. "He is not a gentleman," said the young American;
"he is only a clever imitation of one. He is a music master, or a
penny-a-liner, or a third-rate artist. D__n his good looks!" Mr.
Giovanelli had certainly a very pretty face; but Winterbourne felt a
superior indignation at his own lovely fellow countrywoman's not knowing
the difference between a spurious gentleman and a real one. Giovanelli
chattered and jested and made himself wonderfully agreeable. It was
true that, if he was an imitation, the imitation was brilliant.
"Nevertheless," Winterbourne said to himself, "a nice girl ought to
know!" And then he came back to the question whether this was, in fact,
a nice girl. Would a nice girl, even allowing for her being a little
American flirt, make a rendezvous with a presumably low-lived foreigner?
The rendezvous in this case, indeed, had been in broad daylight and in
the most crowded corner of Rome, but was it not impossible to regard the
choice of these circumstances as a proof of extreme cynicism? Singular
though it may seem, Winterbourne was vexed that the young girl, in
joining her amoroso, should not appear more impatient of his own
company, and he was vexed because of his inclination. It was impossible
to regard her as a perfectly well-conducted young lady; she was wanting
in a certain indispensable delicacy. It would therefore simplify matters
greatly to be able to treat her as the object of one of those sentiments
which are called by romancers "lawless passions." That she should seem
to wish to get rid of him would help him to think more lightly of her,
and to be able to think more lightly of her would make her much less
perplexing. But Daisy, on this occasion, continued to present herself as
an inscrutable combination of audacity and innocence.

She had been walking some quarter of an hour, attended by her two
cavaliers, and responding in a tone of very childish gaiety, as it
seemed to Winterbourne, to the pretty speeches of Mr. Giovanelli, when
a carriage that had detached itself from the revolving train drew up
beside the path. At the same moment Winterbourne perceived that his
friend Mrs. Walker--the lady whose house he had lately left--was seated
in the vehicle and was beckoning to him. Leaving Miss Miller's side,
he hastened to obey her summons. Mrs. Walker was flushed; she wore an
excited air. "It is really too dreadful," she said. "That girl must not
do this sort of thing. She must not walk here with you two men. Fifty
people have noticed her."

Winterbourne raised his eyebrows. "I think it's a pity to make too much
fuss about it."

"It's a pity to let the girl ruin herself!"

"She is very innocent," said Winterbourne.

"She's very crazy!" cried Mrs. Walker. "Did you ever see anything so
imbecile as her mother? After you had all left me just now, I could not
sit still for thinking of it. It seemed too pitiful, not even to attempt
to save her. I ordered the carriage and put on my bonnet, and came here
as quickly as possible. Thank Heaven I have found you!"

"What do you propose to do with us?" asked Winterbourne, smiling.

"To ask her to get in, to drive her about here for half an hour, so that
the world may see she is not running absolutely wild, and then to take
her safely home."

"I don't think it's a very happy thought," said Winterbourne; "but you
can try."

Mrs. Walker tried. The young man went in pursuit of Miss Miller, who
had simply nodded and smiled at his interlocutor in the carriage and
had gone her way with her companion. Daisy, on learning that Mrs. Walker
wished to speak to her, retraced her steps with a perfect good grace and
with Mr. Giovanelli at her side. She declared that she was delighted to
have a chance to present this gentleman to Mrs. Walker. She immediately
achieved the introduction, and declared that she had never in her life
seen anything so lovely as Mrs. Walker's carriage rug.

"I am glad you admire it," said this lady, smiling sweetly. "Will you
get in and let me put it over you?"

"Oh, no, thank you," said Daisy. "I shall admire it much more as I see
you driving round with it."

"Do get in and drive with me!" said Mrs. Walker.

"That would be charming, but it's so enchanting just as I am!" and Daisy
gave a brilliant glance at the gentlemen on either side of her.

"It may be enchanting, dear child, but it is not the custom here," urged
Mrs. Walker, leaning forward in her victoria, with her hands devoutly
clasped.

"Well, it ought to be, then!" said Daisy. "If I didn't walk I should
expire."

"You should walk with your mother, dear," cried the lady from Geneva,
losing patience.

"With my mother dear!" exclaimed the young girl. Winterbourne saw that
she scented interference. "My mother never walked ten steps in her life.
And then, you know," she added with a laugh, "I am more than five years
old."

"You are old enough to be more reasonable. You are old enough, dear Miss
Miller, to be talked about."

Daisy looked at Mrs. Walker, smiling intensely. "Talked about? What do
you mean?"

"Come into my carriage, and I will tell you."

Daisy turned her quickened glance again from one of the gentlemen beside
her to the other. Mr. Giovanelli was bowing to and fro, rubbing down
his gloves and laughing very agreeably; Winterbourne thought it a most
unpleasant scene. "I don't think I want to know what you mean," said
Daisy presently. "I don't think I should like it."

Winterbourne wished that Mrs. Walker would tuck in her carriage rug and
drive away, but this lady did not enjoy being defied, as she afterward
told him. "Should you prefer being thought a very reckless girl?" she
demanded.

"Gracious!" exclaimed Daisy. She looked again at Mr. Giovanelli, then
she turned to Winterbourne. There was a little pink flush in her cheek;
she was tremendously pretty. "Does Mr. Winterbourne think," she asked
slowly, smiling, throwing back her head, and glancing at him from
head to foot, "that, to save my reputation, I ought to get into the
carriage?"

Winterbourne colored; for an instant he hesitated greatly. It seemed so
strange to hear her speak that way of her "reputation." But he himself,
in fact, must speak in accordance with gallantry. The finest gallantry,
here, was simply to tell her the truth; and the truth, for Winterbourne,
as the few indications I have been able to give have made him known to
the reader, was that Daisy Miller should take Mrs. Walker's advice. He
looked at her exquisite prettiness, and then he said, very gently, "I
think you should get into the carriage."

Daisy gave a violent laugh. "I never heard anything so stiff! If this
is improper, Mrs. Walker," she pursued, "then I am all improper, and you
must give me up. Goodbye; I hope you'll have a lovely ride!" and, with
Mr. Giovanelli, who made a triumphantly obsequious salute, she turned
away.

Mrs. Walker sat looking after her, and there were tears in Mrs. Walker's
eyes. "Get in here, sir," she said to Winterbourne, indicating the place
beside her. The young man answered that he felt bound to accompany Miss
Miller, whereupon Mrs. Walker declared that if he refused her this
favor she would never speak to him again. She was evidently in earnest.
Winterbourne overtook Daisy and her companion, and, offering the young
girl his hand, told her that Mrs. Walker had made an imperious claim
upon his society. He expected that in answer she would say something
rather free, something to commit herself still further to that
"recklessness" from which Mrs. Walker had so charitably endeavored to
dissuade her. But she only shook his hand, hardly looking at him, while
Mr. Giovanelli bade him farewell with a too emphatic flourish of the
hat.

Winterbourne was not in the best possible humor as he took his seat in
Mrs. Walker's victoria. "That was not clever of you," he said candidly,
while the vehicle mingled again with the throng of carriages.

"In such a case," his companion answered, "I don't wish to be clever; I
wish to be EARNEST!"

"Well, your earnestness has only offended her and put her off."

"It has happened very well," said Mrs. Walker. "If she is so perfectly
determined to compromise herself, the sooner one knows it the better;
one can act accordingly."

"I suspect she meant no harm," Winterbourne rejoined.

"So I thought a month ago. But she has been going too far."

"What has she been doing?"

"Everything that is not done here. Flirting with any man she could pick
up; sitting in corners with mysterious Italians; dancing all the evening
with the same partners; receiving visits at eleven o'clock at night. Her
mother goes away when visitors come."

"But her brother," said Winterbourne, laughing, "sits up till midnight."

"He must be edified by what he sees. I'm told that at their hotel
everyone is talking about her, and that a smile goes round among all the
servants when a gentleman comes and asks for Miss Miller."

"The servants be hanged!" said Winterbourne angrily. "The poor girl's
only fault," he presently added, "is that she is very uncultivated."

"She is naturally indelicate," Mrs. Walker declared.

"Take that example this morning. How long had you known her at Vevey?"

"A couple of days."

"Fancy, then, her making it a personal matter that you should have left
the place!"

Winterbourne was silent for some moments; then he said, "I suspect, Mrs.
Walker, that you and I have lived too long at Geneva!" And he added a
request that she should inform him with what particular design she had
made him enter her carriage.

"I wished to beg you to cease your relations with Miss Miller--not to
flirt with her--to give her no further opportunity to expose herself--to
let her alone, in short."

"I'm afraid I can't do that," said Winterbourne. "I like her extremely."

"All the more reason that you shouldn't help her to make a scandal."

"There shall be nothing scandalous in my attentions to her."

"There certainly will be in the way she takes them. But I have said what
I had on my conscience," Mrs. Walker pursued. "If you wish to rejoin the
young lady I will put you down. Here, by the way, you have a chance."

The carriage was traversing that part of the Pincian Garden that
overhangs the wall of Rome and overlooks the beautiful Villa Borghese.
It is bordered by a large parapet, near which there are several seats.
One of the seats at a distance was occupied by a gentleman and a lady,
toward whom Mrs. Walker gave a toss of her head. At the same moment
these persons rose and walked toward the parapet. Winterbourne had asked
the coachman to stop; he now descended from the carriage. His companion
looked at him a moment in silence; then, while he raised his hat, she
drove majestically away. Winterbourne stood there; he had turned his
eyes toward Daisy and her cavalier. They evidently saw no one; they were
too deeply occupied with each other. When they reached the low garden
wall, they stood a moment looking off at the great flat-topped pine
clusters of the Villa Borghese; then Giovanelli seated himself,
familiarly, upon the broad ledge of the wall. The western sun in the
opposite sky sent out a brilliant shaft through a couple of cloud bars,
whereupon Daisy's companion took her parasol out of her hands and opened
it. She came a little nearer, and he held the parasol over her; then,
still holding it, he let it rest upon her shoulder, so that both of
their heads were hidden from Winterbourne. This young man lingered a
moment, then he began to walk. But he walked--not toward the couple with
the parasol; toward the residence of his aunt, Mrs. Costello.

He flattered himself on the following day that there was no smiling
among the servants when he, at least, asked for Mrs. Miller at her
hotel. This lady and her daughter, however, were not at home; and on
the next day after, repeating his visit, Winterbourne again had the
misfortune not to find them. Mrs. Walker's party took place on the
evening of the third day, and, in spite of the frigidity of his last
interview with the hostess, Winterbourne was among the guests. Mrs.
Walker was one of those American ladies who, while residing abroad, make
a point, in their own phrase, of studying European society, and she
had on this occasion collected several specimens of her diversely born
fellow mortals to serve, as it were, as textbooks. When Winterbourne
arrived, Daisy Miller was not there, but in a few moments he saw her
mother come in alone, very shyly and ruefully. Mrs. Miller's hair
above her exposed-looking temples was more frizzled than ever. As she
approached Mrs. Walker, Winterbourne also drew near.

"You see, I've come all alone," said poor Mrs. Miller. "I'm so
frightened; I don't know what to do. It's the first time I've ever been
to a party alone, especially in this country. I wanted to bring Randolph
or Eugenio, or someone, but Daisy just pushed me off by myself. I ain't
used to going round alone."

"And does not your daughter intend to favor us with her society?"
demanded Mrs. Walker impressively.

"Well, Daisy's all dressed," said Mrs. Miller with that accent of the
dispassionate, if not of the philosophic, historian with which she
always recorded the current incidents of her daughter's career. "She got
dressed on purpose before dinner. But she's got a friend of hers there;
that gentleman--the Italian--that she wanted to bring. They've got going
at the piano; it seems as if they couldn't leave off. Mr. Giovanelli
sings splendidly. But I guess they'll come before very long," concluded
Mrs. Miller hopefully.

"I'm sorry she should come in that way," said Mrs. Walker.

"Well, I told her that there was no use in her getting dressed before
dinner if she was going to wait three hours," responded Daisy's mamma.
"I didn't see the use of her putting on such a dress as that to sit
round with Mr. Giovanelli."

"This is most horrible!" said Mrs. Walker, turning away and addressing
herself to Winterbourne. "Elle s'affiche. It's her revenge for my having
ventured to remonstrate with her. When she comes, I shall not speak to
her."

Daisy came after eleven o'clock; but she was not, on such an occasion,
a young lady to wait to be spoken to. She rustled forward in radiant
loveliness, smiling and chattering, carrying a large bouquet, and
attended by Mr. Giovanelli. Everyone stopped talking and turned and
looked at her. She came straight to Mrs. Walker. "I'm afraid you thought
I never was coming, so I sent mother off to tell you. I wanted to make
Mr. Giovanelli practice some things before he came; you know he sings
beautifully, and I want you to ask him to sing. This is Mr. Giovanelli;
you know I introduced him to you; he's got the most lovely voice, and
he knows the most charming set of songs. I made him go over them this
evening on purpose; we had the greatest time at the hotel." Of all
this Daisy delivered herself with the sweetest, brightest audibleness,
looking now at her hostess and now round the room, while she gave a
series of little pats, round her shoulders, to the edges of her dress.
"Is there anyone I know?" she asked.

"I think every one knows you!" said Mrs. Walker pregnantly, and she gave
a very cursory greeting to Mr. Giovanelli. This gentleman bore himself
gallantly. He smiled and bowed and showed his white teeth; he curled his
mustaches and rolled his eyes and performed all the proper functions
of a handsome Italian at an evening party. He sang very prettily half
a dozen songs, though Mrs. Walker afterward declared that she had been
quite unable to find out who asked him. It was apparently not Daisy who
had given him his orders. Daisy sat at a distance from the piano, and
though she had publicly, as it were, professed a high admiration for his
singing, talked, not inaudibly, while it was going on.

"It's a pity these rooms are so small; we can't dance," she said to
Winterbourne, as if she had seen him five minutes before.

"I am not sorry we can't dance," Winterbourne answered; "I don't dance."

"Of course you don't dance; you're too stiff," said Miss Daisy. "I hope
you enjoyed your drive with Mrs. Walker!"

"No. I didn't enjoy it; I preferred walking with you."

"We paired off: that was much better," said Daisy. "But did you ever
hear anything so cool as Mrs. Walker's wanting me to get into her
carriage and drop poor Mr. Giovanelli, and under the pretext that it was
proper? People have different ideas! It would have been most unkind; he
had been talking about that walk for ten days."

"He should not have talked about it at all," said Winterbourne; "he
would never have proposed to a young lady of this country to walk about
the streets with him."

"About the streets?" cried Daisy with her pretty stare. "Where, then,
would he have proposed to her to walk? The Pincio is not the streets,
either; and I, thank goodness, am not a young lady of this country. The
young ladies of this country have a dreadfully poky time of it, so far
as I can learn; I don't see why I should change my habits for THEM."

"I am afraid your habits are those of a flirt," said Winterbourne
gravely.

"Of course they are," she cried, giving him her little smiling stare
again. "I'm a fearful, frightful flirt! Did you ever hear of a nice girl
that was not? But I suppose you will tell me now that I am not a nice
girl."

"You're a very nice girl; but I wish you would flirt with me, and me
only," said Winterbourne.

"Ah! thank you--thank you very much; you are the last man I should think
of flirting with. As I have had the pleasure of informing you, you are
too stiff."

"You say that too often," said Winterbourne.

Daisy gave a delighted laugh. "If I could have the sweet hope of making
you angry, I should say it again."

"Don't do that; when I am angry I'm stiffer than ever. But if you won't
flirt with me, do cease, at least, to flirt with your friend at the
piano; they don't understand that sort of thing here."

"I thought they understood nothing else!" exclaimed Daisy.

"Not in young unmarried women."

"It seems to me much more proper in young unmarried women than in old
married ones," Daisy declared.

"Well," said Winterbourne, "when you deal with natives you must go
by the custom of the place. Flirting is a purely American custom;
it doesn't exist here. So when you show yourself in public with Mr.
Giovanelli, and without your mother--"

"Gracious! poor Mother!" interposed Daisy.

"Though you may be flirting, Mr. Giovanelli is not; he means something
else."

"He isn't preaching, at any rate," said Daisy with vivacity. "And if you
want very much to know, we are neither of us flirting; we are too good
friends for that: we are very intimate friends."

"Ah!" rejoined Winterbourne, "if you are in love with each other, it is
another affair."

She had allowed him up to this point to talk so frankly that he had no
expectation of shocking her by this ejaculation; but she immediately got
up, blushing visibly, and leaving him to exclaim mentally that
little American flirts were the queerest creatures in the world. "Mr.
Giovanelli, at least," she said, giving her interlocutor a single
glance, "never says such very disagreeable things to me."

Winterbourne was bewildered; he stood, staring. Mr. Giovanelli had
finished singing. He left the piano and came over to Daisy. "Won't you
come into the other room and have some tea?" he asked, bending before
her with his ornamental smile.

Daisy turned to Winterbourne, beginning to smile again. He was still
more perplexed, for this inconsequent smile made nothing clear, though
it seemed to prove, indeed, that she had a sweetness and softness that
reverted instinctively to the pardon of offenses. "It has never occurred
to Mr. Winterbourne to offer me any tea," she said with her little
tormenting manner.

"I have offered you advice," Winterbourne rejoined.

"I prefer weak tea!" cried Daisy, and she went off with the brilliant
Giovanelli. She sat with him in the adjoining room, in the embrasure
of the window, for the rest of the evening. There was an interesting
performance at the piano, but neither of these young people gave heed
to it. When Daisy came to take leave of Mrs. Walker, this lady
conscientiously repaired the weakness of which she had been guilty at
the moment of the young girl's arrival. She turned her back straight
upon Miss Miller and left her to depart with what grace she might.
Winterbourne was standing near the door; he saw it all. Daisy turned
very pale and looked at her mother, but Mrs. Miller was humbly
unconscious of any violation of the usual social forms. She appeared,
indeed, to have felt an incongruous impulse to draw attention to her own
striking observance of them. "Good night, Mrs. Walker," she said; "we've
had a beautiful evening. You see, if I let Daisy come to parties without
me, I don't want her to go away without me." Daisy turned away, looking
with a pale, grave face at the circle near the door; Winterbourne saw
that, for the first moment, she was too much shocked and puzzled even
for indignation. He on his side was greatly touched.

"That was very cruel," he said to Mrs. Walker.

"She never enters my drawing room again!" replied his hostess.

Since Winterbourne was not to meet her in Mrs. Walker's drawing room, he
went as often as possible to Mrs. Miller's hotel. The ladies were rarely
at home, but when he found them, the devoted Giovanelli was always
present. Very often the brilliant little Roman was in the drawing room
with Daisy alone, Mrs. Miller being apparently constantly of the opinion
that discretion is the better part of surveillance. Winterbourne
noted, at first with surprise, that Daisy on these occasions was never
embarrassed or annoyed by his own entrance; but he very presently began
to feel that she had no more surprises for him; the unexpected in her
behavior was the only thing to expect. She showed no displeasure at
her tete-a-tete with Giovanelli being interrupted; she could chatter as
freshly and freely with two gentlemen as with one; there was always,
in her conversation, the same odd mixture of audacity and puerility.
Winterbourne remarked to himself that if she was seriously interested in
Giovanelli, it was very singular that she should not take more trouble
to preserve the sanctity of their interviews; and he liked her the more
for her innocent-looking indifference and her apparently inexhaustible
good humor. He could hardly have said why, but she seemed to him a girl
who would never be jealous. At the risk of exciting a somewhat derisive
smile on the reader's part, I may affirm that with regard to the women
who had hitherto interested him, it very often seemed to Winterbourne
among the possibilities that, given certain contingencies, he should be
afraid--literally afraid--of these ladies; he had a pleasant sense that
he should never be afraid of Daisy Miller. It must be added that this
sentiment was not altogether flattering to Daisy; it was part of his
conviction, or rather of his apprehension, that she would prove a very
light young person.

But she was evidently very much interested in Giovanelli. She looked at
him whenever he spoke; she was perpetually telling him to do this and
to do that; she was constantly "chaffing" and abusing him. She appeared
completely to have forgotten that Winterbourne had said anything to
displease her at Mrs. Walker's little party. One Sunday afternoon,
having gone to St. Peter's with his aunt, Winterbourne perceived
Daisy strolling about the great church in company with the inevitable
Giovanelli. Presently he pointed out the young girl and her cavalier to
Mrs. Costello. This lady looked at them a moment through her eyeglass,
and then she said:

"That's what makes you so pensive in these days, eh?"

"I had not the least idea I was pensive," said the young man.

"You are very much preoccupied; you are thinking of something."

"And what is it," he asked, "that you accuse me of thinking of?"

"Of that young lady's--Miss Baker's, Miss Chandler's--what's her
name?--Miss Miller's intrigue with that little barber's block."

"Do you call it an intrigue," Winterbourne asked--"an affair that goes
on with such peculiar publicity?"

"That's their folly," said Mrs. Costello; "it's not their merit."

"No," rejoined Winterbourne, with something of that pensiveness to which
his aunt had alluded. "I don't believe that there is anything to be
called an intrigue."

"I have heard a dozen people speak of it; they say she is quite carried
away by him."

"They are certainly very intimate," said Winterbourne.

Mrs. Costello inspected the young couple again with her optical
instrument. "He is very handsome. One easily sees how it is. She thinks
him the most elegant man in the world, the finest gentleman. She has
never seen anything like him; he is better, even, than the courier.
It was the courier probably who introduced him; and if he succeeds in
marrying the young lady, the courier will come in for a magnificent
commission."

"I don't believe she thinks of marrying him," said Winterbourne, "and I
don't believe he hopes to marry her."

"You may be very sure she thinks of nothing. She goes on from day to
day, from hour to hour, as they did in the Golden Age. I can imagine
nothing more vulgar. And at the same time," added Mrs. Costello, "depend
upon it that she may tell you any moment that she is 'engaged.'"

"I think that is more than Giovanelli expects," said Winterbourne.

"Who is Giovanelli?"

"The little Italian. I have asked questions about him and learned
something. He is apparently a perfectly respectable little man. I
believe he is, in a small way, a cavaliere avvocato. But he doesn't
move in what are called the first circles. I think it is really not
absolutely impossible that the courier introduced him. He is evidently
immensely charmed with Miss Miller. If she thinks him the finest
gentleman in the world, he, on his side, has never found himself in
personal contact with such splendor, such opulence, such expensiveness
as this young lady's. And then she must seem to him wonderfully pretty
and interesting. I rather doubt that he dreams of marrying her. That
must appear to him too impossible a piece of luck. He has nothing but
his handsome face to offer, and there is a substantial Mr. Miller in
that mysterious land of dollars. Giovanelli knows that he hasn't a title
to offer. If he were only a count or a marchese! He must wonder at his
luck, at the way they have taken him up."

"He accounts for it by his handsome face and thinks Miss Miller a young
lady qui se passe ses fantaisies!" said Mrs. Costello.

"It is very true," Winterbourne pursued, "that Daisy and her mamma have
not yet risen to that stage of--what shall I call it?--of culture at
which the idea of catching a count or a marchese begins. I believe that
they are intellectually incapable of that conception."

"Ah! but the avvocato can't believe it," said Mrs. Costello.

Of the observation excited by Daisy's "intrigue," Winterbourne gathered
that day at St. Peter's sufficient evidence. A dozen of the American
colonists in Rome came to talk with Mrs. Costello, who sat on a little
portable stool at the base of one of the great pilasters. The vesper
service was going forward in splendid chants and organ tones in the
adjacent choir, and meanwhile, between Mrs. Costello and her friends,
there was a great deal said about poor little Miss Miller's going really
"too far." Winterbourne was not pleased with what he heard, but when,
coming out upon the great steps of the church, he saw Daisy, who had
emerged before him, get into an open cab with her accomplice and roll
away through the cynical streets of Rome, he could not deny to himself
that she was going very far indeed. He felt very sorry for her--not
exactly that he believed that she had completely lost her head, but
because it was painful to hear so much that was pretty, and undefended,
and natural assigned to a vulgar place among the categories of disorder.
He made an attempt after this to give a hint to Mrs. Miller. He met one
day in the Corso a friend, a tourist like himself, who had just come
out of the Doria Palace, where he had been walking through the beautiful
gallery. His friend talked for a moment about the superb portrait
of Innocent X by Velasquez which hangs in one of the cabinets of the
palace, and then said, "And in the same cabinet, by the way, I had the
pleasure of contemplating a picture of a different kind--that pretty
American girl whom you pointed out to me last week." In answer to
Winterbourne's inquiries, his friend narrated that the pretty American
girl--prettier than ever--was seated with a companion in the secluded
nook in which the great papal portrait was enshrined.

"Who was her companion?" asked Winterbourne.

"A little Italian with a bouquet in his buttonhole. The girl is
delightfully pretty, but I thought I understood from you the other day
that she was a young lady du meilleur monde."

"So she is!" answered Winterbourne; and having assured himself that his
informant had seen Daisy and her companion but five minutes before, he
jumped into a cab and went to call on Mrs. Miller. She was at home; but
she apologized to him for receiving him in Daisy's absence.

"She's gone out somewhere with Mr. Giovanelli," said Mrs. Miller. "She's
always going round with Mr. Giovanelli."

"I have noticed that they are very intimate," Winterbourne observed.

"Oh, it seems as if they couldn't live without each other!" said Mrs.
Miller. "Well, he's a real gentleman, anyhow. I keep telling Daisy she's
engaged!"

"And what does Daisy say?"

"Oh, she says she isn't engaged. But she might as well be!" this
impartial parent resumed; "she goes on as if she was. But I've made Mr.
Giovanelli promise to tell me, if SHE doesn't. I should want to write to
Mr. Miller about it--shouldn't you?"

Winterbourne replied that he certainly should; and the state of mind of
Daisy's mamma struck him as so unprecedented in the annals of parental
vigilance that he gave up as utterly irrelevant the attempt to place her
upon her guard.

After this Daisy was never at home, and Winterbourne ceased to meet her
at the houses of their common acquaintances, because, as he perceived,
these shrewd people had quite made up their minds that she was going too
far. They ceased to invite her; and they intimated that they desired to
express to observant Europeans the great truth that, though Miss
Daisy Miller was a young American lady, her behavior was not
representative--was regarded by her compatriots as abnormal.
Winterbourne wondered how she felt about all the cold shoulders that
were turned toward her, and sometimes it annoyed him to suspect that
she did not feel at all. He said to himself that she was too light and
childish, too uncultivated and unreasoning, too provincial, to have
reflected upon her ostracism, or even to have perceived it. Then at
other moments he believed that she carried about in her elegant and
irresponsible little organism a defiant, passionate, perfectly observant
consciousness of the impression she produced. He asked himself whether
Daisy's defiance came from the consciousness of innocence, or from her
being, essentially, a young person of the reckless class. It must be
admitted that holding one's self to a belief in Daisy's "innocence" came
to seem to Winterbourne more and more a matter of fine-spun gallantry.
As I have already had occasion to relate, he was angry at finding
himself reduced to chopping logic about this young lady; he was vexed at
his want of instinctive certitude as to how far her eccentricities were
generic, national, and how far they were personal. From either view
of them he had somehow missed her, and now it was too late. She was
"carried away" by Mr. Giovanelli.

A few days after his brief interview with her mother, he encountered her
in that beautiful abode of flowering desolation known as the Palace of
the Caesars. The early Roman spring had filled the air with bloom and
perfume, and the rugged surface of the Palatine was muffled with tender
verdure. Daisy was strolling along the top of one of those great mounds
of ruin that are embanked with mossy marble and paved with monumental
inscriptions. It seemed to him that Rome had never been so lovely as
just then. He stood, looking off at the enchanting harmony of line and
color that remotely encircles the city, inhaling the softly humid odors,
and feeling the freshness of the year and the antiquity of the place
reaffirm themselves in mysterious interfusion. It seemed to him also
that Daisy had never looked so pretty, but this had been an observation
of his whenever he met her. Giovanelli was at her side, and Giovanelli,
too, wore an aspect of even unwonted brilliancy.

"Well," said Daisy, "I should think you would be lonesome!"

"Lonesome?" asked Winterbourne.

"You are always going round by yourself. Can't you get anyone to walk
with you?"

"I am not so fortunate," said Winterbourne, "as your companion."

Giovanelli, from the first, had treated Winterbourne with distinguished
politeness. He listened with a deferential air to his remarks; he
laughed punctiliously at his pleasantries; he seemed disposed to testify
to his belief that Winterbourne was a superior young man. He carried
himself in no degree like a jealous wooer; he had obviously a great deal
of tact; he had no objection to your expecting a little humility of him.
It even seemed to Winterbourne at times that Giovanelli would find a
certain mental relief in being able to have a private understanding with
him--to say to him, as an intelligent man, that, bless you, HE knew
how extraordinary was this young lady, and didn't flatter himself with
delusive--or at least TOO delusive--hopes of matrimony and dollars. On
this occasion he strolled away from his companion to pluck a sprig of
almond blossom, which he carefully arranged in his buttonhole.

"I know why you say that," said Daisy, watching Giovanelli. "Because you
think I go round too much with HIM." And she nodded at her attendant.

"Every one thinks so--if you care to know," said Winterbourne.

"Of course I care to know!" Daisy exclaimed seriously. "But I don't
believe it. They are only pretending to be shocked. They don't really
care a straw what I do. Besides, I don't go round so much."

"I think you will find they do care. They will show it disagreeably."

Daisy looked at him a moment. "How disagreeably?"

"Haven't you noticed anything?" Winterbourne asked.

"I have noticed you. But I noticed you were as stiff as an umbrella the
first time I saw you."

"You will find I am not so stiff as several others," said Winterbourne,
smiling.

"How shall I find it?"

"By going to see the others."

"What will they do to me?"

"They will give you the cold shoulder. Do you know what that means?"

Daisy was looking at him intently; she began to color. "Do you mean as
Mrs. Walker did the other night?"

"Exactly!" said Winterbourne.

She looked away at Giovanelli, who was decorating himself with his
almond blossom. Then looking back at Winterbourne, "I shouldn't think
you would let people be so unkind!" she said.

"How can I help it?" he asked.

"I should think you would say something."

"I do say something;" and he paused a moment. "I say that your mother
tells me that she believes you are engaged."

"Well, she does," said Daisy very simply.

Winterbourne began to laugh. "And does Randolph believe it?" he asked.

"I guess Randolph doesn't believe anything," said Daisy. Randolph's
skepticism excited Winterbourne to further hilarity, and he observed
that Giovanelli was coming back to them. Daisy, observing it too,
addressed herself again to her countryman. "Since you have mentioned
it," she said, "I AM engaged." * * * Winterbourne looked at her; he had
stopped laughing. "You don't believe!" she added.

He was silent a moment; and then, "Yes, I believe it," he said.

"Oh, no, you don't!" she answered. "Well, then--I am not!"

The young girl and her cicerone were on their way to the gate of the
enclosure, so that Winterbourne, who had but lately entered, presently
took leave of them. A week afterward he went to dine at a beautiful
villa on the Caelian Hill, and, on arriving, dismissed his hired
vehicle. The evening was charming, and he promised himself the
satisfaction of walking home beneath the Arch of Constantine and past
the vaguely lighted monuments of the Forum. There was a waning moon in
the sky, and her radiance was not brilliant, but she was veiled in a
thin cloud curtain which seemed to diffuse and equalize it. When, on his
return from the villa (it was eleven o'clock), Winterbourne approached
the dusky circle of the Colosseum, it recurred to him, as a lover of
the picturesque, that the interior, in the pale moonshine, would be well
worth a glance. He turned aside and walked to one of the empty arches,
near which, as he observed, an open carriage--one of the little Roman
streetcabs--was stationed. Then he passed in, among the cavernous
shadows of the great structure, and emerged upon the clear and silent
arena. The place had never seemed to him more impressive. One-half of
the gigantic circus was in deep shade, the other was sleeping in the
luminous dusk. As he stood there he began to murmur Byron's famous
lines, out of "Manfred," but before he had finished his quotation
he remembered that if nocturnal meditations in the Colosseum are
recommended by the poets, they are deprecated by the doctors. The
historic atmosphere was there, certainly; but the historic atmosphere,
scientifically considered, was no better than a villainous miasma.
Winterbourne walked to the middle of the arena, to take a more general
glance, intending thereafter to make a hasty retreat. The great cross in
the center was covered with shadow; it was only as he drew near it that
he made it out distinctly. Then he saw that two persons were stationed
upon the low steps which formed its base. One of these was a woman,
seated; her companion was standing in front of her.

Presently the sound of the woman's voice came to him distinctly in the
warm night air. "Well, he looks at us as one of the old lions or tigers
may have looked at the Christian martyrs!" These were the words he
heard, in the familiar accent of Miss Daisy Miller.

"Let us hope he is not very hungry," responded the ingenious Giovanelli.
"He will have to take me first; you will serve for dessert!"

Winterbourne stopped, with a sort of horror, and, it must be added, with
a sort of relief. It was as if a sudden illumination had been flashed
upon the ambiguity of Daisy's behavior, and the riddle had become easy
to read. She was a young lady whom a gentleman need no longer be
at pains to respect. He stood there, looking at her--looking at her
companion and not reflecting that though he saw them vaguely, he himself
must have been more brightly visible. He felt angry with himself that he
had bothered so much about the right way of regarding Miss Daisy Miller.
Then, as he was going to advance again, he checked himself, not from the
fear that he was doing her injustice, but from a sense of the danger
of appearing unbecomingly exhilarated by this sudden revulsion from
cautious criticism. He turned away toward the entrance of the place,
but, as he did so, he heard Daisy speak again.

"Why, it was Mr. Winterbourne! He saw me, and he cuts me!"

What a clever little reprobate she was, and how smartly she played at
injured innocence! But he wouldn't cut her. Winterbourne came forward
again and went toward the great cross. Daisy had got up; Giovanelli
lifted his hat. Winterbourne had now begun to think simply of the
craziness, from a sanitary point of view, of a delicate young girl
lounging away the evening in this nest of malaria. What if she WERE
a clever little reprobate? that was no reason for her dying of the
perniciosa. "How long have you been here?" he asked almost brutally.

Daisy, lovely in the flattering moonlight, looked at him a moment.
Then--"All the evening," she answered, gently. * * * "I never saw
anything so pretty."

"I am afraid," said Winterbourne, "that you will not think Roman fever
very pretty. This is the way people catch it. I wonder," he added,
turning to Giovanelli, "that you, a native Roman, should countenance
such a terrible indiscretion."

"Ah," said the handsome native, "for myself I am not afraid."

"Neither am I--for you! I am speaking for this young lady."

Giovanelli lifted his well-shaped eyebrows and showed his brilliant
teeth. But he took Winterbourne's rebuke with docility. "I told the
signorina it was a grave indiscretion, but when was the signorina ever
prudent?"

"I never was sick, and I don't mean to be!" the signorina declared. "I
don't look like much, but I'm healthy! I was bound to see the Colosseum
by moonlight; I shouldn't have wanted to go home without that; and we
have had the most beautiful time, haven't we, Mr. Giovanelli? If there
has been any danger, Eugenio can give me some pills. He has got some
splendid pills."

"I should advise you," said Winterbourne, "to drive home as fast as
possible and take one!"

"What you say is very wise," Giovanelli rejoined. "I will go and make
sure the carriage is at hand." And he went forward rapidly.

Daisy followed with Winterbourne. He kept looking at her; she seemed
not in the least embarrassed. Winterbourne said nothing; Daisy chattered
about the beauty of the place. "Well, I HAVE seen the Colosseum by
moonlight!" she exclaimed. "That's one good thing." Then, noticing
Winterbourne's silence, she asked him why he didn't speak. He made
no answer; he only began to laugh. They passed under one of the dark
archways; Giovanelli was in front with the carriage. Here Daisy stopped
a moment, looking at the young American. "DID you believe I was engaged,
the other day?" she asked.

"It doesn't matter what I believed the other day," said Winterbourne,
still laughing.

"Well, what do you believe now?"

"I believe that it makes very little difference whether you are engaged
or not!"

He felt the young girl's pretty eyes fixed upon him through the thick
gloom of the archway; she was apparently going to answer. But Giovanelli
hurried her forward. "Quick! quick!" he said; "if we get in by midnight
we are quite safe."

Daisy took her seat in the carriage, and the fortunate Italian placed
himself beside her. "Don't forget Eugenio's pills!" said Winterbourne as
he lifted his hat.

"I don't care," said Daisy in a little strange tone, "whether I have
Roman fever or not!" Upon this the cab driver cracked his whip, and they
rolled away over the desultory patches of the antique pavement.

Winterbourne, to do him justice, as it were, mentioned to no one that
he had encountered Miss Miller, at midnight, in the Colosseum with a
gentleman; but nevertheless, a couple of days later, the fact of her
having been there under these circumstances was known to every member
of the little American circle, and commented accordingly. Winterbourne
reflected that they had of course known it at the hotel, and that, after
Daisy's return, there had been an exchange of remarks between the porter
and the cab driver. But the young man was conscious, at the same moment,
that it had ceased to be a matter of serious regret to him that the
little American flirt should be "talked about" by low-minded menials.
These people, a day or two later, had serious information to give: the
little American flirt was alarmingly ill. Winterbourne, when the rumor
came to him, immediately went to the hotel for more news. He found that
two or three charitable friends had preceded him, and that they were
being entertained in Mrs. Miller's salon by Randolph.

"It's going round at night," said Randolph--"that's what made her sick.
She's always going round at night. I shouldn't think she'd want to,
it's so plaguy dark. You can't see anything here at night, except when
there's a moon. In America there's always a moon!" Mrs. Miller was
invisible; she was now, at least, giving her daughter the advantage of
her society. It was evident that Daisy was dangerously ill.

Winterbourne went often to ask for news of her, and once he saw Mrs.
Miller, who, though deeply alarmed, was, rather to his surprise,
perfectly composed, and, as it appeared, a most efficient and judicious
nurse. She talked a good deal about Dr. Davis, but Winterbourne paid her
the compliment of saying to himself that she was not, after all, such
a monstrous goose. "Daisy spoke of you the other day," she said to him.
"Half the time she doesn't know what she's saying, but that time I think
she did. She gave me a message she told me to tell you. She told me to
tell you that she never was engaged to that handsome Italian. I am sure
I am very glad; Mr. Giovanelli hasn't been near us since she was taken
ill. I thought he was so much of a gentleman; but I don't call that
very polite! A lady told me that he was afraid I was angry with him for
taking Daisy round at night. Well, so I am, but I suppose he knows I'm a
lady. I would scorn to scold him. Anyway, she says she's not engaged. I
don't know why she wanted you to know, but she said to me three times,
'Mind you tell Mr. Winterbourne.' And then she told me to ask if you
remembered the time you went to that castle in Switzerland. But I said
I wouldn't give any such messages as that. Only, if she is not engaged,
I'm sure I'm glad to know it."

But, as Winterbourne had said, it mattered very little. A week after
this, the poor girl died; it had been a terrible case of the fever.
Daisy's grave was in the little Protestant cemetery, in an angle of
the wall of imperial Rome, beneath the cypresses and the thick spring
flowers. Winterbourne stood there beside it, with a number of other
mourners, a number larger than the scandal excited by the young lady's
career would have led you to expect. Near him stood Giovanelli, who came
nearer still before Winterbourne turned away. Giovanelli was very pale:
on this occasion he had no flower in his buttonhole; he seemed to wish
to say something. At last he said, "She was the most beautiful young
lady I ever saw, and the most amiable;" and then he added in a moment,
"and she was the most innocent."

Winterbourne looked at him and presently repeated his words, "And the
most innocent?"

"The most innocent!"

Winterbourne felt sore and angry. "Why the devil," he asked, "did you
take her to that fatal place?"

Mr. Giovanelli's urbanity was apparently imperturbable. He looked on the
ground a moment, and then he said, "For myself I had no fear; and she
wanted to go."

"That was no reason!" Winterbourne declared.

The subtle Roman again dropped his eyes. "If she had lived, I should
have got nothing. She would never have married me, I am sure."

"She would never have married you?"

"For a moment I hoped so. But no. I am sure."

Winterbourne listened to him: he stood staring at the raw protuberance
among the April daisies. When he turned away again, Mr. Giovanelli, with
his light, slow step, had retired.

Winterbourne almost immediately left Rome; but the following summer he
again met his aunt, Mrs. Costello at Vevey. Mrs. Costello was fond of
Vevey. In the interval Winterbourne had often thought of Daisy Miller
and her mystifying manners. One day he spoke of her to his aunt--said it
was on his conscience that he had done her injustice.

"I am sure I don't know," said Mrs. Costello. "How did your injustice
affect her?"

"She sent me a message before her death which I didn't understand at the
time; but I have understood it since. She would have appreciated one's
esteem."

"Is that a modest way," asked Mrs. Costello, "of saying that she would
have reciprocated one's affection?"

Winterbourne offered no answer to this question; but he presently said,
"You were right in that remark that you made last summer. I was booked
to make a mistake. I have lived too long in foreign parts."

Nevertheless, he went back to live at Geneva, whence there continue to
come the most contradictory accounts of his motives of sojourn: a report
that he is "studying" hard--an intimation that he is much interested in
a very clever foreign lady.


