
PREFACE


Why is it that a little spice of deviltry lends not an unpleasantly
titillating twang to the great mass of respectable flour that goes to
make up the pudding of our modern civilization? And pertinent to this
question another--Why is it that the pirate has, and always has had, a
certain lurid glamour of the heroical enveloping him round about? Is
there, deep under the accumulated debris of culture, a hidden
groundwork of the old-time savage? Is there even in these
well-regulated times an unsubdued nature in the respectable mental
household of every one of us that still kicks against the pricks of
law and order? To make my meaning more clear, would not every boy, for
instance--that is, every boy of any account--rather be a pirate
captain than a Member of Parliament? And we ourselves--would we not
rather read such a story as that of Captain Avery's capture of the
East Indian treasure ship, with its beautiful princess and load of
jewels (which gems he sold by the handful, history sayeth, to a
Bristol merchant), than, say, one of Bishop Atterbury's sermons, or
the goodly Master Robert Boyle's religious romance of "Theodora and
Didymus"? It is to be apprehended that to the unregenerate nature of
most of us there can be but one answer to such a query.

In the pleasurable warmth the heart feels in answer to tales of
derring-do Nelson's battles are all mightily interesting, but, even
in spite of their romance of splendid courage, I fancy that the
majority of us would rather turn back over the leaves of history to
read how Drake captured the Spanish treasure ship in the South Sea,
and of how he divided such a quantity of booty in the Island of Plate
(so named because of the tremendous dividend there declared) that it
had to be measured in quart bowls, being too considerable to be
counted.

Courage and daring, no matter how mad and ungodly, have always a
redundancy of _vim_ and life to recommend them to the nether man that
lies within us, and no doubt his desperate courage, his battle against
the tremendous odds of all the civilized world of law and order, have
had much to do in making a popular hero of our friend of the black
flag. But it is not altogether courage and daring that endear him to
our hearts. There is another and perhaps a greater kinship in that
lust for wealth that makes one's fancy revel more pleasantly in the
story of the division of treasure in the pirate's island retreat, the
hiding of his godless gains somewhere in the sandy stretch of tropic
beach, there to remain hidden until the time should come to rake the
doubloons up again and to spend them like a lord in polite society,
than in the most thrilling tales of his wonderful escapes from
commissioned cruisers through tortuous channels between the coral
reefs.

And what a life of adventure is his, to be sure! A life of constant
alertness, constant danger, constant escape! An ocean Ishmaelite, he
wanders forever aimlessly, homelessly; now unheard of for months, now
careening his boat on some lonely uninhabited shore, now appearing
suddenly to swoop down on some merchant vessel with rattle of
musketry, shouting, yells, and a hell of unbridled passions let loose
to rend and tear. What a Carlislean hero! What a setting of blood and
lust and flame and rapine for such a hero!

Piracy, such as was practiced in the flower of its days--that is,
during the early eighteenth century--was no sudden growth. It was an
evolution, from the semilawful buccaneering of the sixteenth century,
just as buccaneering was upon its part, in a certain sense, an
evolution from the unorganized, unauthorized warfare of the Tudor
period.

For there was a deal of piratical smack in the anti-Spanish ventures
of Elizabethan days. Many of the adventurers--of the Sir Francis Drake
school, for instance--actually overstepped again and again the bounds
of international law, entering into the realms of _de facto_ piracy.
Nevertheless, while their doings were not recognized officially by the
government, the perpetrators were neither punished nor reprimanded for
their excursions against Spanish commerce at home or in the West
Indies; rather were they commended, and it was considered not
altogether a discreditable thing for men to get rich upon the spoils
taken from Spanish galleons in times of nominal peace. Many of the
most reputable citizens and merchants of London, when they felt that
the queen failed in her duty of pushing the fight against the great
Catholic Power, fitted out fleets upon their own account and sent them
to levy good Protestant war of a private nature upon the Pope's
anointed.

Some of the treasures captured in such ventures were immense,
stupendous, unbelievable. For an example, one can hardly credit the
truth of the "purchase" gained by Drake in the famous capture of the
plate ship in the South Sea.

One of the old buccaneer writers of a century later says: "The
Spaniards affirm to this day that he took at that time twelvescore
tons of plate and sixteen bowls of coined money a man (his number
being then forty-five men in all), insomuch that they were forced to
heave much of it overboard, because his ship could not carry it all."

Maybe this was a very greatly exaggerated statement put by the author
and his Spanish authorities, nevertheless there was enough truth in it
to prove very conclusively to the bold minds of the age that
tremendous profits--"purchases" they called them--were to be made from
piracy. The Western World is filled with the names of daring mariners
of those old days, who came flitting across the great trackless ocean
in their little tublike boats of a few hundred tons burden, partly to
explore unknown seas, partly--largely, perhaps--in pursuit of Spanish
treasure: Frobisher, Davis, Drake, and a score of others.

In this left-handed war against Catholic Spain many of the adventurers
were, no doubt, stirred and incited by a grim, Calvinistic,
puritanical zeal for Protestantism. But equally beyond doubt the gold
and silver and plate of the "Scarlet Woman" had much to do with the
persistent energy with which these hardy mariners braved the
mysterious, unknown terrors of the great unknown ocean that stretched
away to the sunset, there in far-away waters to attack the huge,
unwieldy, treasure-laden galleons that sailed up and down the
Caribbean Sea and through the Bahama Channel.

Of all ghastly and terrible things old-time religious war was the most
ghastly and terrible. One can hardly credit nowadays the cold, callous
cruelty of those times. Generally death was the least penalty that
capture entailed. When the Spaniards made prisoners of the English,
the Inquisition took them in hand, and what that meant all the world
knows. When the English captured a Spanish vessel the prisoners were
tortured, either for the sake of revenge or to compel them to disclose
where treasure lay hidden. Cruelty begat cruelty, and it would be hard
to say whether the Anglo-Saxon or the Latin showed himself to be most
proficient in torturing his victim.

When Cobham, for instance, captured the Spanish ship in the Bay of
Biscay, after all resistance was over and the heat of the battle had
cooled, he ordered his crew to bind the captain and all of the crew
and every Spaniard aboard--whether in arms or not--to sew them up in
the mainsail and to fling them overboard. There were some twenty dead
bodies in the sail when a few days later it was washed up on the
shore.

Of course such acts were not likely to go unavenged, and many an
innocent life was sacrificed to pay the debt of Cobham's cruelty.

Nothing could be more piratical than all this. Nevertheless, as was
said, it was winked at, condoned, if not sanctioned, by the law; and
it was not beneath people of family and respectability to take part in
it. But by and by Protestantism and Catholicism began to be at
somewhat less deadly enmity with each other; religious wars were still
far enough from being ended, but the scabbard of the sword was no
longer flung away when the blade was drawn. And so followed a time of
nominal peace, and a generation arose with whom it was no longer
respectable and worthy--one might say a matter of duty--to fight a
country with which one's own land was not at war. Nevertheless, the
seed had been sown; it had been demonstrated that it was feasible to
practice piracy against Spain and not to suffer therefor. Blood had
been shed and cruelty practiced, and, once indulged, no lust seems
stronger than that of shedding blood and practicing cruelty.

Though Spain might be ever so well grounded in peace at home, in the
West Indies she was always at war with the whole world--English,
French, Dutch. It was almost a matter of life or death with her to
keep her hold upon the New World. At home she was bankrupt and, upon
the earthquake of the Reformation, her power was already beginning to
totter and to crumble to pieces. America was her treasure house, and
from it alone could she hope to keep her leaking purse full of gold
and silver. So it was that she strove strenuously, desperately, to
keep out the world from her American possessions--a bootless task, for
the old order upon which her power rested was broken and crumbled
forever. But still she strove, fighting against fate, and so it was
that in the tropical America it was one continual war between her and
all the world. Thus it came that, long after piracy ceased to be
allowed at home, it continued in those far-away seas with unabated
vigor, recruiting to its service all that lawless malign element which
gathers together in every newly opened country where the only law is
lawlessness, where might is right and where a living is to be gained
with no more trouble than cutting a throat.

[Illustration: Howard Pyle,
His mark]





Howard Pyle's
Book of Pirates


[Illustration]

Ye Pirate Bold.

It is not because of his life of adventure and daring that I admire
this one of my favorite heroes; nor is it because of blowing winds nor
blue ocean nor balmy islands which he knew so well; nor is it because
of gold he spent nor treasure he hid. He was a man who knew his own
mind and what he wanted.

Howard Pyle

[Illustration]




Chapter I

BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN


Just above the northwestern shore of the old island of Hispaniola--the
Santo Domingo of our day--and separated from it only by a narrow
channel of some five or six miles in width, lies a queer little hunch
of an island, known, because of a distant resemblance to that animal,
as the Tortuga de Mar, or sea turtle. It is not more than twenty miles
in length by perhaps seven or eight in breadth; it is only a little
spot of land, and as you look at it upon the map a pin's head would
almost cover it; yet from that spot, as from a center of inflammation,
a burning fire of human wickedness and ruthlessness and lust overran
the world, and spread terror and death throughout the Spanish West
Indies, from St. Augustine to the island of Trinidad, and from Panama
to the coasts of Peru.

About the middle of the seventeenth century certain French adventurers
set out from the fortified island of St. Christopher in longboats and
hoys, directing their course to the westward, there to discover new
islands. Sighting Hispaniola "with abundance of joy," they landed, and
went into the country, where they found great quantities of wild
cattle, horses, and swine.

Now vessels on the return voyage to Europe from the West Indies needed
revictualing, and food, especially flesh, was at a premium in the
islands of the Spanish Main; wherefore a great profit was to be turned
in preserving beef and pork, and selling the flesh to homeward-bound
vessels.

The northwestern shore of Hispaniola, lying as it does at the eastern
outlet of the old Bahama Channel, running between the island of Cuba
and the great Bahama Banks, lay almost in the very main stream of
travel. The pioneer Frenchmen were not slow to discover the double
advantage to be reaped from the wild cattle that cost them nothing to
procure, and a market for the flesh ready found for them. So down upon
Hispaniola they came by boatloads and shiploads, gathering like a
swarm of mosquitoes, and overrunning the whole western end of the
island. There they established themselves, spending the time
alternately in hunting the wild cattle and buccanning[1] the meat, and
squandering their hardly earned gains in wild debauchery, the
opportunities for which were never lacking in the Spanish West Indies.

[Footnote 1: Buccanning, by which the "buccaneers" gained their name,
was a process of curing thin strips of meat by salting, smoking, and
drying in the sun.]

At first the Spaniards thought nothing of the few travel-worn
Frenchmen who dragged their longboats and hoys up on the beach, and
shot a wild bullock or two to keep body and soul together; but when
the few grew to dozens, and the dozens to scores, and the scores to
hundreds, it was a very different matter, and wrathful grumblings and
mutterings began to be heard among the original settlers.

But of this the careless buccaneers thought never a whit, the only
thing that troubled them being the lack of a more convenient shipping
point than the main island afforded them.

This lack was at last filled by a party of hunters who ventured across
the narrow channel that separated the main island from Tortuga. Here
they found exactly what they needed--a good harbor, just at the
junction of the Windward Channel with the old Bahama Channel--a spot
where four-fifths of the Spanish-Indian trade would pass by their very
wharves.

There were a few Spaniards upon the island, but they were a quiet
folk, and well disposed to make friends with the strangers; but when
more Frenchmen and still more Frenchmen crossed the narrow channel,
until they overran the Tortuga and turned it into one great curing
house for the beef which they shot upon the neighboring island, the
Spaniards grew restive over the matter, just as they had done upon the
larger island.

Accordingly, one fine day there came half a dozen great boatloads of
armed Spaniards, who landed upon the Turtle's Back and sent the
Frenchmen flying to the woods and fastnesses of rocks as the chaff
flies before the thunder gust. That night the Spaniards drank
themselves mad and shouted themselves hoarse over their victory, while
the beaten Frenchmen sullenly paddled their canoes back to the main
island again, and the Sea Turtle was Spanish once more.

But the Spaniards were not contented with such a petty triumph as that
of sweeping the island of Tortuga free from the obnoxious strangers;
down upon Hispaniola they came, flushed with their easy victory, and
determined to root out every Frenchman, until not one single buccaneer
remained. For a time they had an easy thing of it, for each French
hunter roamed the woods by himself, with no better company than his
half-wild dogs, so that when two or three Spaniards would meet such a
one, he seldom if ever came out of the woods again, for even his
resting place was lost.

But the very success of the Spaniards brought their ruin along with
it, for the buccaneers began to combine together for self-protection,
and out of that combination arose a strange union of lawless man with
lawless man, so near, so close, that it can scarce be compared to any
other than that of husband and wife. When two entered upon this
comradeship, articles were drawn up and signed by both parties, a
common stock was made of all their possessions, and out into the woods
they went to seek their fortunes; thenceforth they were as one man;
they lived together by day, they slept together by night; what one
suffered, the other suffered; what one gained, the other gained. The
only separation that came betwixt them was death, and then the
survivor inherited all that the other left. And now it was another
thing with Spanish buccaneer hunting, for two buccaneers, reckless of
life, quick of eye, and true of aim, were worth any half dozen of
Spanish islanders.

By and by, as the French became more strongly organized for mutual
self-protection, they assumed the offensive. Then down they came upon
Tortuga, and now it was the turn of the Spanish to be hunted off the
island like vermin, and the turn of the French to shout their victory.

Having firmly established themselves, a governor was sent to the
French of Tortuga, one M. le Passeur, from the island of St.
Christopher; the Sea Turtle was fortified, and colonists, consisting
of men of doubtful character and women of whose character there could
be no doubt whatever, began pouring in upon the island, for it was
said that the buccaneers thought no more of a doubloon than of a Lima
bean, so that this was the place for the brothel and the brandy shop
to reap their golden harvest, and the island remained French.

[Illustration: On the Tortugas

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September_, 1887]

Hitherto the Tortugans had been content to gain as much as possible
from the homeward-bound vessels through the orderly channels of
legitimate trade. It was reserved for Pierre le Grand to introduce
piracy as a quicker and more easy road to wealth than the semihonest
exchange they had been used to practice.

Gathering together eight-and-twenty other spirits as hardy and
reckless as himself, he put boldly out to sea in a boat hardly large
enough to hold his crew, and running down the Windward Channel and out
into the Caribbean Sea, he lay in wait for such a prize as might be
worth the risks of winning.

For a while their luck was steadily against them; their provisions and
water began to fail, and they saw nothing before them but starvation
or a humiliating return. In this extremity they sighted a Spanish ship
belonging to a "flota" which had become separated from her consorts.

The boat in which the buccaneers sailed might, perhaps, have served
for the great ship's longboat; the Spaniards outnumbered them three to
one, and Pierre and his men were armed only with pistols and
cutlasses; nevertheless this was their one and their only chance, and
they determined to take the Spanish ship or to die in the attempt.
Down upon the Spaniard they bore through the dusk of the night, and
giving orders to the "chirurgeon" to scuttle their craft under them as
they were leaving it, they swarmed up the side of the unsuspecting
ship and upon its decks in a torrent--pistol in one hand and cutlass
in the other. A part of them ran to the gun room and secured the arms
and ammunition, pistoling or cutting down all such as stood in their
way or offered opposition; the other party burst into the great cabin
at the heels of Pierre le Grand, found the captain and a party of his
friends at cards, set a pistol to his breast, and demanded him to
deliver up the ship. Nothing remained for the Spaniard but to yield,
for there was no alternative between surrender and death. And so the
great prize was won.

It was not long before the news of this great exploit and of the vast
treasure gained reached the ears of the buccaneers of Tortuga and
Hispaniola. Then what a hubbub and an uproar and a tumult there was!
Hunting wild cattle and buccanning the meat was at a discount, and the
one and only thing to do was to go a-pirating; for where one such
prize had been won, others were to be had.

In a short time freebooting assumed all of the routine of a regular
business. Articles were drawn up betwixt captain and crew, compacts
were sealed, and agreements entered into by the one party and the
other.

In all professions there are those who make their mark, those who
succeed only moderately well, and those who fail more or less
entirely. Nor did pirating differ from this general rule, for in it
were men who rose to distinction, men whose names, something tarnished
and rusted by the lapse of years, have come down even to us of the
present day.

Pierre François, who, with his boatload of six-and-twenty desperadoes,
ran boldly into the midst of the pearl fleet off the coast of South
America, attacked the vice admiral under the very guns of two
men-of-war, captured his ship, though she was armed with eight guns
and manned with threescore men, and would have got her safely away,
only that having to put on sail, their main-mast went by the board,
whereupon the men-of-war came up with them, and the prize was lost.

But even though there were two men-of-war against all that remained of
six-and-twenty buccaneers, the Spaniards were glad enough to make
terms with them for the surrender of the vessel, whereby Pierre
François and his men came off scot-free.

Bartholomew Portuguese was a worthy of even more note. In a boat
manned with thirty fellow adventurers he fell upon a great ship off
Cape Corrientes, manned with threescore and ten men, all told.

Her he assaulted again and again, beaten off with the very pressure of
numbers only to renew the assault, until the Spaniards who survived,
some fifty in all, surrendered to twenty living pirates, who poured
upon their decks like a score of blood-stained, powder-grimed devils.

They lost their vessel by recapture, and Bartholomew Portuguese barely
escaped with his life through a series of almost unbelievable
adventures. But no sooner had he fairly escaped from the clutches of
the Spaniards than, gathering together another band of adventurers, he
fell upon the very same vessel in the gloom of the night, recaptured
her when she rode at anchor in the harbor of Campeche under the guns
of the fort, slipped the cable, and was away without the loss of a
single man. He lost her in a hurricane soon afterward, just off the
Isle of Pines; but the deed was none the less daring for all that.

Another notable no less famous than these two worthies was Roch
Braziliano, the truculent Dutchman who came up from the coast of
Brazil to the Spanish Main with a name ready-made for him. Upon the
very first adventure which he undertook he captured a plate ship of
fabulous value, and brought her safely into Jamaica; and when at last
captured by the Spaniards, he fairly frightened them into letting him
go by truculent threats of vengeance from his followers.

Such were three of the pirate buccaneers who infested the Spanish
Main. There were hundreds no less desperate, no less reckless, no less
insatiate in their lust for plunder, than they.

The effects of this freebooting soon became apparent. The risks to be
assumed by the owners of vessels and the shippers of merchandise
became so enormous that Spanish commerce was practically swept away
from these waters. No vessel dared to venture out of port excepting
under escort of powerful men-of-war, and even then they were not
always secure from molestation. Exports from Central and South America
were sent to Europe by way of the Strait of Magellan, and little or
none went through the passes between the Bahamas and the Caribbees.

So at last "buccaneering," as it had come to be generically called,
ceased to pay the vast dividends that it had done at first. The cream
was skimmed off, and only very thin milk was left in the dish.
Fabulous fortunes were no longer earned in a ten days' cruise, but
what money was won hardly paid for the risks of the winning. There
must be a new departure, or buccaneering would cease to exist.

Then arose one who showed the buccaneers a new way to squeeze money
out of the Spaniards. This man was an Englishman--Lewis Scot.

The stoppage of commerce on the Spanish Main had naturally tended to
accumulate all the wealth gathered and produced into the chief
fortified cities and towns of the West Indies. As there no longer
existed prizes upon the sea, they must be gained upon the land, if
they were to be gained at all. Lewis Scot was the first to appreciate
this fact.

Gathering together a large and powerful body of men as hungry for
plunder and as desperate as himself, he descended upon the town of
Campeche, which he captured and sacked, stripping it of everything
that could possibly be carried away.

When the town was cleared to the bare walls Scot threatened to set the
torch to every house in the place if it was not ransomed by a large
sum of money which he demanded. With this booty he set sail for
Tortuga, where he arrived safely--and the problem was solved.

After him came one Mansvelt, a buccaneer of lesser note, who first
made a descent upon the isle of Saint Catharine, now Old Providence,
which he took, and, with this as a base, made an unsuccessful descent
upon Neuva Granada and Cartagena. His name might not have been handed
down to us along with others of greater fame had he not been the
master of that most apt of pupils, the great Captain Henry Morgan,
most famous of all the buccaneers, one time governor of Jamaica, and
knighted by King Charles II.

[Illustration: Capture of the Galleon

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September_, 1887]

After Mansvelt followed the bold John Davis, native of Jamaica, where
he sucked in the lust of piracy with his mother's milk. With only
fourscore men, he swooped down upon the great city of Nicaragua in the
darkness of the night, silenced the sentry with the thrust of a knife,
and then fell to pillaging the churches and houses "without any
respect or veneration."

Of course it was but a short time until the whole town was in an
uproar of alarm, and there was nothing left for the little handful of
men to do but to make the best of their way to their boats. They were
in the town but a short time, but in that time they were able to
gather together and to carry away money and jewels to the value of
fifty thousand pieces of eight, besides dragging off with them a dozen
or more notable prisoners, whom they held for ransom.

And now one appeared upon the scene who reached a far greater height
than any had arisen to before. This was François l'Olonoise, who
sacked the great city of Maracaibo and the town of Gibraltar. Cold,
unimpassioned, pitiless, his sluggish blood was never moved by one
single pulse of human warmth, his icy heart was never touched by one
ray of mercy or one spark of pity for the hapless wretches who chanced
to fall into his bloody hands.

Against him the governor of Havana sent out a great war vessel, and
with it a negro executioner, so that there might be no inconvenient
delays of law after the pirates had been captured. But l'Olonoise did
not wait for the coming of the war vessel; he went out to meet it, and
he found it where it lay riding at anchor in the mouth of the river
Estra. At the dawn of the morning he made his attack--sharp,
unexpected, decisive. In a little while the Spaniards were forced
below the hatches, and the vessel was taken. Then came the end. One by
one the poor shrieking wretches were dragged up from below, and one by
one they were butchered in cold blood, while l'Olonoise stood upon the
poop deck and looked coldly down upon what was being done. Among the
rest the negro was dragged upon the deck. He begged and implored that
his life might be spared, promising to tell all that might be asked of
him. L'Olonoise questioned him, and when he had squeezed him dry,
waved his hand coldly, and the poor black went with the rest. Only one
man was spared; him he sent to the governor of Havana with a message
that henceforth he would give no quarter to any Spaniard whom he might
meet in arms--a message which was not an empty threat.

The rise of l'Olonoise was by no means rapid. He worked his way up by
dint of hard labor and through much ill fortune. But by and by, after
many reverses, the tide turned, and carried him with it from one
success to another, without let or stay, to the bitter end.

Cruising off Maracaibo, he captured a rich prize laden with a vast
amount of plate and ready money, and there conceived the design of
descending upon the powerful town of Maracaibo itself. Without loss of
time he gathered together five hundred picked scoundrels from Tortuga,
and taking with him one Michael de Basco as land captain, and two
hundred more buccaneers whom he commanded, down he came into the Gulf
of Venezuela and upon the doomed city like a blast of the plague.
Leaving their vessels, the buccaneers made a land attack upon the fort
that stood at the mouth of the inlet that led into Lake Maracaibo and
guarded the city.

The Spaniards held out well, and fought with all the might that
Spaniards possess; but after a fight of three hours all was given up
and the garrison fled, spreading terror and confusion before them. As
many of the inhabitants of the city as could do so escaped in boats to
Gibraltar, which lies to the southward, on the shores of Lake
Maracaibo, at the distance of some forty leagues or more.

Then the pirates marched into the town, and what followed may be
conceived. It was a holocaust of lust, of passion, and of blood such
as even the Spanish West Indies had never seen before. Houses and
churches were sacked until nothing was left but the bare walls; men
and women were tortured to compel them to disclose where more treasure
lay hidden.

Then, having wrenched all that they could from Maracaibo, they entered
the lake and descended upon Gibraltar, where the rest of the
panic-stricken inhabitants were huddled together in a blind terror.

The governor of Merida, a brave soldier who had served his king in
Flanders, had gathered together a troop of eight hundred men, had
fortified the town, and now lay in wait for the coming of the pirates.
The pirates came all in good time, and then, in spite of the brave
defense, Gibraltar also fell. Then followed a repetition of the scenes
that had been enacted in Maracaibo for the past fifteen days, only
here they remained for four horrible weeks, extorting money--money!
ever money!--from the poor poverty-stricken, pest-ridden souls crowded
into that fever hole of a town.

Then they left, but before they went they demanded still more
money--ten thousand pieces of eight--as a ransom for the town, which
otherwise should be given to the flames. There was some hesitation on
the part of the Spaniards, some disposition to haggle, but there was
no hesitation on the part of l'Olonoise. The torch was set to the town
as he had promised, whereupon the money was promptly paid, and the
pirates were piteously begged to help quench the spreading flames.
This they were pleased to do, but in spite of all their efforts nearly
half of the town was consumed.

After that they returned to Maracaibo again, where they demanded a
ransom of thirty thousand pieces of eight for the city. There was no
haggling here, thanks to the fate of Gibraltar; only it was utterly
impossible to raise that much money in all of the poverty-stricken
region. But at last the matter was compromised, and the town was
redeemed for twenty thousand pieces of eight and five hundred head of
cattle, and tortured Maracaibo was quit of them.

In the Ile de la Vache the buccaneers shared among themselves two
hundred and sixty thousand pieces of eight, besides jewels and bales
of silk and linen and miscellaneous plunder to a vast amount.

Such was the one great deed of l'Olonoise; from that time his star
steadily declined--for even nature seemed fighting against such a
monster--until at last he died a miserable, nameless death at the
hands of an unknown tribe of Indians upon the Isthmus of Darien.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now we come to the greatest of all the buccaneers, he who stands
pre-eminent among them, and whose name even to this day is a charm to
call up his deeds of daring, his dauntless courage, his truculent
cruelty, and his insatiate and unappeasable lust for gold--Capt. Henry
Morgan, the bold Welshman, who brought buccaneering to the height and
flower of its glory.

Having sold himself, after the manner of the times, for his passage
across the seas, he worked out his time of servitude at the Barbados.
As soon as he had regained his liberty he entered upon the trade of
piracy, wherein he soon reached a position of considerable prominence.
He was associated with Mansvelt at the time of the latter's descent
upon Saint Catharine's Isle, the importance of which spot, as a center
of operations against the neighboring coasts, Morgan never lost sight
of.

The first attempt that Capt. Henry Morgan ever made against any town
in the Spanish Indies was the bold descent upon the city of Puerto del
Principe in the island of Cuba, with a mere handful of men. It was a
deed the boldness of which has never been outdone by any of a like
nature--not even the famous attack upon Panama itself. Thence they
returned to their boats in the very face of the whole island of Cuba,
aroused and determined upon their extermination. Not only did they
make good their escape, but they brought away with them a vast
amount of plunder, computed at three hundred thousand pieces of eight,
besides five hundred head of cattle and many prisoners held for
ransom.

[Illustration: Henry Morgan Recruiting for the Attack

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September_, 1887]

But when the division of all this wealth came to be made, lo! there
were only fifty thousand pieces of eight to be found. What had become
of the rest no man could tell but Capt. Henry Morgan himself. Honesty
among thieves was never an axiom with him.

Rude, truculent, and dishonest as Captain Morgan was, he seems to have
had a wonderful power of persuading the wild buccaneers under him to
submit everything to his judgment, and to rely entirely upon his word.
In spite of the vast sum of money that he had very evidently made away
with, recruits poured in upon him, until his band was larger and
better equipped than ever.

And now it was determined that the plunder harvest was ripe at Porto
Bello, and that city's doom was sealed. The town was defended by two
strong castles thoroughly manned, and officered by as gallant a
soldier as ever carried Toledo steel at his side. But strong castles
and gallant soldiers weighed not a barleycorn with the buccaneers when
their blood was stirred by the lust of gold.

Landing at Puerto Naso, a town some ten leagues westward of Porto
Bello, they marched to the latter town, and coming before the castle,
boldly demanded its surrender. It was refused, whereupon Morgan
threatened that no quarter should be given. Still surrender was
refused; and then the castle was attacked, and after a bitter struggle
was captured. Morgan was as good as his word: every man in the castle
was shut in the guard room, the match was set to the powder magazine,
and soldiers, castle, and all were blown into the air, while through
all the smoke and the dust the buccaneers poured into the town. Still
the governor held out in the other castle, and might have made good
his defense, but that he was betrayed by the soldiers under him. Into
the castle poured the howling buccaneers. But still the governor
fought on, with his wife and daughter clinging to his knees and
beseeching him to surrender, and the blood from his wounded forehead
trickling down over his white collar, until a merciful bullet put an
end to the vain struggle.

Here were enacted the old scenes. Everything plundered that could be
taken, and then a ransom set upon the town itself.

This time an honest, or an apparently honest, division was made of the
spoils, which amounted to two hundred and fifty thousand pieces of
eight, besides merchandise and jewels.

The next towns to suffer were poor Maracaibo and Gibraltar, now just
beginning to recover from the desolation wrought by l'Olonoise. Once
more both towns were plundered of every bale of merchandise and of
every piaster, and once more both were ransomed until everything was
squeezed from the wretched inhabitants.

Here affairs were like to have taken a turn, for when Captain Morgan
came up from Gibraltar he found three great men-of-war lying in the
entrance to the lake awaiting his coming. Seeing that he was hemmed in
in the narrow sheet of water, Captain Morgan was inclined to
compromise matters, even offering to relinquish all the plunder he had
gained if he were allowed to depart in peace. But no; the Spanish
admiral would hear nothing of this. Having the pirates, as he thought,
securely in his grasp, he would relinquish nothing, but would sweep
them from the face of the sea once and forever.

That was an unlucky determination for the Spaniards to reach, for
instead of paralyzing the pirates with fear, as he expected it would
do, it simply turned their mad courage into as mad desperation.

A great vessel that they had taken with the town of Maracaibo was
converted into a fire ship, manned with logs of wood in montera caps
and sailor jackets, and filled with brimstone, pitch, and palm leaves
soaked in oil. Then out of the lake the pirates sailed to meet the
Spaniards, the fire ship leading the way, and bearing down directly
upon the admiral's vessel. At the helm stood volunteers, the most
desperate and the bravest of all the pirate gang, and at the ports
stood the logs of wood in montera caps. So they came up with the
admiral, and grappled with his ship in spite of the thunder of all his
great guns, and then the Spaniard saw, all too late, what his opponent
really was.

[Illustration: Morgan at Porto Bello

_Illustration from_
MORGAN

_by_ E. C. Stedman

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _December, 1888_]

He tried to swing loose, but clouds of smoke and almost instantly a
mass of roaring flames enveloped both vessels, and the admiral was
lost. The second vessel, not wishing to wait for the coming of the
pirates, bore down upon the fort, under the guns of which the cowardly
crew sank her, and made the best of their way to the shore. The third
vessel, not having an opportunity to escape, was taken by the pirates
without the slightest resistance, and the passage from the lake was
cleared. So the buccaneers sailed away, leaving Maracaibo and
Gibraltar prostrate a second time.

And now Captain Morgan determined to undertake another venture, the
like of which had never been equaled in all of the annals of
buccaneering. This was nothing less than the descent upon and the
capture of Panama, which was, next to Cartagena, perhaps, the most
powerful and the most strongly fortified city in the West Indies.

In preparation for this venture he obtained letters of marque from the
governor of Jamaica, by virtue of which elastic commission he began
immediately to gather around him all material necessary for the
undertaking.

When it became known abroad that the great Captain Morgan was about
undertaking an adventure that was to eclipse all that was ever done
before, great numbers came flocking to his standard, until he had
gathered together an army of two thousand or more desperadoes and
pirates wherewith to prosecute his adventure, albeit the venture
itself was kept a total secret from everyone. Port Couillon, in the
island of Hispaniola, over against the Ile de la Vache, was the place
of muster, and thither the motley band gathered from all quarters.
Provisions had been plundered from the mainland wherever they could be
obtained, and by the 24th of October, 1670 (O. S.), everything was in
readiness.

The island of Saint Catharine, as it may be remembered, was at one
time captured by Mansvelt, Morgan's master in his trade of piracy. It
had been retaken by the Spaniards, and was now thoroughly fortified by
them. Almost the first attempt that Morgan had made as a master pirate
was the retaking of Saint Catharine's Isle. In that undertaking he had
failed; but now, as there was an absolute need of some such place as a
base of operations, he determined that the place _must_ be taken. And
it was taken.

The Spaniards, during the time of their possession, had fortified it
most thoroughly and completely, and had the governor thereof been as
brave as he who met his death in the castle of Porto Bello, there
might have been a different tale to tell. As it was, he surrendered it
in a most cowardly fashion, merely stipulating that there should be a
sham attack by the buccaneers, whereby his credit might be saved. And
so Saint Catharine was won.

The next step to be taken was the capture of the castle of Chagres,
which guarded the mouth of the river of that name, up which river the
buccaneers would be compelled to transport their troops and provisions
for the attack upon the city of Panama. This adventure was undertaken
by four hundred picked men under command of Captain Morgan himself.

The castle of Chagres, known as San Lorenzo by the Spaniards, stood
upon the top of an abrupt rock at the mouth of the river, and was one
of the strongest fortresses for its size in all of the West Indies.
This stronghold Morgan must have if he ever hoped to win Panama.

The attack of the castle and the defense of it were equally fierce,
bloody, and desperate. Again and again the buccaneers assaulted, and
again and again they were beaten back. So the morning came, and it
seemed as though the pirates had been baffled this time. But just at
this juncture the thatch of palm leaves on the roofs of some of the
buildings inside the fortifications took fire, a conflagration
followed, which caused the explosion of one of the magazines, and in
the paralysis of terror that followed, the pirates forced their way
into the fortifications, and the castle was won. Most of the Spaniards
flung themselves from the castle walls into the river or upon the
rocks beneath, preferring death to capture and possible torture; many
who were left were put to the sword, and some few were spared and held
as prisoners.

So fell the castle of Chagres, and nothing now lay between the
buccaneers and the city of Panama but the intervening and trackless
forests.

And now the name of the town whose doom was sealed was no secret.

Up the river of Chagres went Capt. Henry Morgan and twelve hundred
men, packed closely in their canoes; they never stopped, saving now
and then to rest their stiffened legs, until they had come to a place
known as Cruz de San Juan Gallego, where they were compelled to leave
their boats on account of the shallowness of the water.

Leaving a guard of one hundred and sixty men to protect their boats as
a place of refuge in case they should be worsted before Panama, they
turned and plunged into the wilderness before them.

There a more powerful foe awaited them than a host of Spaniards with
match, powder, and lead--starvation. They met but little or no
opposition in their progress; but wherever they turned they found
every fiber of meat, every grain of maize, every ounce of bread or
meal, swept away or destroyed utterly before them. Even when the
buccaneers had successfully overcome an ambuscade or an attack, and
had sent the Spaniards flying, the fugitives took the time to strip
their dead comrades of every grain of food in their leathern sacks,
leaving nothing but the empty bags.

Says the narrator of these events, himself one of the expedition,
"They afterward fell to eating those leathern bags, as affording
something to the ferment of their stomachs."

Ten days they struggled through this bitter privation, doggedly
forcing their way onward, faint with hunger and haggard with weakness
and fever. Then, from the high hill and over the tops of the forest
trees, they saw the steeples of Panama, and nothing remained between
them and their goal but the fighting of four Spaniards to every one of
them--a simple thing which they had done over and over again.

Down they poured upon Panama, and out came the Spaniards to meet them;
four hundred horse, two thousand five hundred foot, and two thousand
wild bulls which had been herded together to be driven over the
buccaneers so that their ranks might be disordered and broken. The
buccaneers were only eight hundred strong; the others had either
fallen in battle or had dropped along the dreary pathway through the
wilderness; but in the space of two hours the Spaniards were flying
madly over the plain, minus six hundred who lay dead or dying behind
them.

As for the bulls, as many of them as were shot served as food there
and then for the half-famished pirates, for the buccaneers were never
more at home than in the slaughter of cattle.

Then they marched toward the city. Three hours' more fighting and they
were in the streets, howling, yelling, plundering, gorging,
dram-drinking, and giving full vent to all the vile and nameless lusts
that burned in their hearts like a hell of fire. And now followed the
usual sequence of events--rapine, cruelty, and extortion; only this
time there was no town to ransom, for Morgan had given orders that it
should be destroyed. The torch was set to it, and Panama, one of the
greatest cities in the New World, was swept from the face of the
earth. Why the deed was done, no man but Morgan could tell. Perhaps
it was that all the secret hiding places for treasure might be brought
to light; but whatever the reason was, it lay hidden in the breast of
the great buccaneer himself. For three weeks Morgan and his men abode
in this dreadful place; and they marched away with _one hundred and
seventy-five_ beasts of burden loaded with treasures of gold and
silver and jewels, besides great quantities of merchandise, and six
hundred prisoners held for ransom.

[Illustration: The Sacking of Panama

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September, 1887_]

Whatever became of all that vast wealth, and what it amounted to, no
man but Morgan ever knew, for when a division was made it was found
that there was only _two hundred pieces of eight to each man_.

When this dividend was declared, a howl of execration went up, under
which even Capt. Henry Morgan quailed. At night he and four other
commanders slipped their cables and ran out to sea, and it was said
that these divided the greater part of the booty among themselves. But
the wealth plundered at Panama could hardly have fallen short of a
million and a half of dollars. Computing it at this reasonable figure,
the various prizes won by Henry Morgan in the West Indies would stand
as follows: Panama, $1,500,000; Porto Bello, $800,000; Puerto del
Principe, $700,000; Maracaibo and Gibraltar, $400,000; various
piracies, $250,000--making a grand total of $3,650,000 as the vast
harvest of plunder. With this fabulous wealth, wrenched from the
Spaniards by means of the rack and the cord, and pilfered from his
companions by the meanest of thieving, Capt. Henry Morgan retired from
business, honored of all, rendered famous by his deeds, knighted by
the good King Charles II, and finally appointed governor of the rich
island of Jamaica.

Other buccaneers followed him. Campeche was taken and sacked, and even
Cartagena itself fell; but with Henry Morgan culminated the glory of
the buccaneers, and from that time they declined in power and wealth
and wickedness until they were finally swept away.

The buccaneers became bolder and bolder. In fact, so daring were their
crimes that the home governments, stirred at last by these outrageous
barbarities, seriously undertook the suppression of the freebooters,
lopping and trimming the main trunk until its members were scattered
hither and thither, and it was thought that the organization was
exterminated. But, so far from being exterminated, the individual
members were merely scattered north, south, east, and west, each
forming a nucleus around which gathered and clustered the very worst
of the offscouring of humanity.

The result was that when the seventeenth century was fairly packed
away with its lavender in the store chest of the past, a score or more
bands of freebooters were cruising along the Atlantic seaboard in
armed vessels, each with a black flag with its skull and crossbones at
the fore, and with a nondescript crew made up of the tags and remnants
of civilized and semicivilized humanity (white, black, red, and
yellow), known generally as marooners, swarming upon the decks below.

Nor did these offshoots from the old buccaneer stem confine their
depredations to the American seas alone; the East Indies and the
African coast also witnessed their doings, and suffered from them, and
even the Bay of Biscay had good cause to remember more than one visit
from them.

Worthy sprigs from so worthy a stem improved variously upon the parent
methods; for while the buccaneers were content to prey upon the
Spaniards alone, the marooners reaped the harvest from the commerce of
all nations.

So up and down the Atlantic seaboard they cruised, and for the fifty
years that marooning was in the flower of its glory it was a sorrowful
time for the coasters of New England, the middle provinces, and the
Virginias, sailing to the West Indies with their cargoes of salt fish,
grain, and tobacco. Trading became almost as dangerous as
privateering, and sea captains were chosen as much for their
knowledge of the flintlock and the cutlass as for their seamanship.

As by far the largest part of the trading in American waters was
conducted by these Yankee coasters, so by far the heaviest blows, and
those most keenly felt, fell upon them. Bulletin after bulletin came
to port with its doleful tale of this vessel burned or that vessel
scuttled, this one held by the pirates for their own use or that one
stripped of its goods and sent into port as empty as an eggshell from
which the yolk had been sucked. Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and
Charleston suffered alike, and worthy ship owners had to leave off
counting their losses upon their fingers and take to the slate to keep
the dismal record.

"Maroon--to put ashore on a desert isle, as a sailor, under pretense
of having committed some great crime." Thus our good Noah Webster
gives us the dry bones, the anatomy, upon which the imagination may
construct a specimen to suit itself.

It is thence that the marooners took their name, for marooning was one
of their most effective instruments of punishment or revenge. If a
pirate broke one of the many rules which governed the particular band
to which he belonged, he was marooned; did a captain defend his ship
to such a degree as to be unpleasant to the pirates attacking it, he
was marooned; even the pirate captain himself, if he displeased his
followers by the severity of his rule, was in danger of having the
same punishment visited upon him which he had perhaps more than once
visited upon another.

The process of marooning was as simple as terrible. A suitable place
was chosen (generally some desert isle as far removed as possible from
the pathway of commerce), and the condemned man was rowed from the
ship to the beach. Out he was bundled upon the sand spit; a gun, a
half dozen bullets, a few pinches of powder, and a bottle of water
were chucked ashore after him, and away rowed the boat's crew back to
the ship, leaving the poor wretch alone to rave away his life in
madness, or to sit sunken in his gloomy despair till death mercifully
released him from torment. It rarely if ever happened that anything
was known of him after having been marooned. A boat's crew from some
vessel, sailing by chance that way, might perhaps find a few chalky
bones bleaching upon the white sand in the garish glare of the
sunlight, but that was all. And such were marooners.

By far the largest number of pirate captains were Englishmen, for,
from the days of good Queen Bess, English sea captains seemed to have
a natural turn for any species of venture that had a smack of piracy
in it, and from the great Admiral Drake of the old, old days, to the
truculent Morgan of buccaneering times, the Englishman did the boldest
and wickedest deeds, and wrought the most damage.

First of all upon the list of pirates stands the bold Captain Avary,
one of the institutors of marooning. Him we see but dimly, half hidden
by the glamouring mists of legends and tradition. Others who came
afterward outstripped him far enough in their doings, but he stands
pre-eminent as the first of marooners of whom actual history has been
handed down to us of the present day.

When the English, Dutch, and Spanish entered into an alliance to
suppress buccaneering in the West Indies, certain worthies of Bristol,
in old England, fitted out two vessels to assist in this laudable
project; for doubtless Bristol trade suffered smartly from the Morgans
and the l'Olonoises of that old time. One of these vessels was named
the _Duke_, of which a certain Captain Gibson was the commander and
Avary the mate.

Away they sailed to the West Indies, and there Avary became impressed
by the advantages offered by piracy, and by the amount of good things
that were to be gained by very little striving.

One night the captain (who was one of those fellows mightily addicted
to punch), instead of going ashore to saturate himself with rum at the
ordinary, had his drink in his cabin in private. While he lay snoring
away the effects of his rum in the cabin, Avary and a few other
conspirators heaved the anchor very leisurely, and sailed out of the
harbor of Corunna, and through the midst of the allied fleet riding at
anchor in the darkness.

By and by, when the morning came, the captain was awakened by the
pitching and tossing of the vessel, the rattle and clatter of the
tackle overhead, and the noise of footsteps passing and repassing
hither and thither across the deck. Perhaps he lay for a while turning
the matter over and over in his muddled head, but he presently rang
the bell, and Avary and another fellow answered the call.

"What's the matter?" bawls the captain from his berth.

"Nothing," says Avary, coolly.

"Something's the matter with the ship," says the captain. "Does she
drive? What weather is it?"

"Oh no," says Avary; "we are at sea."

"At sea?"

"Come, come!" says Avary: "I'll tell you; you must know that I'm the
captain of the ship now, and you must be packing from this here cabin.
We are bound to Madagascar, to make all of our fortunes, and if you're
a mind to ship for the cruise, why, we'll be glad to have you, if you
will be sober and mind your own business; if not, there is a boat
alongside, and I'll have you set ashore."

The poor half-tipsy captain had no relish to go a-pirating under the
command of his backsliding mate, so out of the ship he bundled, and
away he rowed with four or five of the crew, who, like him, refused to
join with their jolly shipmates.

The rest of them sailed away to the East Indies, to try their fortunes
in those waters, for our Captain Avary was of a high spirit, and had
no mind to fritter away his time in the West Indies, squeezed dry by
buccaneer Morgan and others of lesser note. No, he would make a bold
stroke for it at once, and make or lose at a single cast.

On his way he picked up a couple of like kind with himself--two
sloops off Madagascar. With these he sailed away to the coast of
India, and for a time his name was lost in the obscurity of uncertain
history. But only for a time, for suddenly it flamed out in a blaze of
glory. It was reported that a vessel belonging to the Great Mogul,
laden with treasure and bearing the monarch's own daughter upon a holy
pilgrimage to Mecca (they being Mohammedans), had fallen in with the
pirates, and after a short resistance had been surrendered, with the
damsel, her court, and all the diamonds, pearls, silk, silver, and
gold aboard. It was rumored that the Great Mogul, raging at the insult
offered to him through his own flesh and blood, had threatened to wipe
out of existence the few English settlements scattered along the
coast; whereat the honorable East India Company was in a pretty state
of fuss and feathers. Rumor, growing with the telling, has it that
Avary is going to marry the Indian princess, willy-nilly, and will
turn rajah, and eschew piracy as indecent. As for the treasure itself,
there was no end to the extent to which it grew as it passed from
mouth to mouth.

Cracking the nut of romance and exaggeration, we come to the kernel of
the story--that Avary did fall in with an Indian vessel laden with
great treasure (and possibly with the Mogul's daughter), which he
captured, and thereby gained a vast prize.

Having concluded that he had earned enough money by the trade he had
undertaken, he determined to retire and live decently for the rest of
his life upon what he already had. As a step toward this object, he
set about cheating his Madagascar partners out of their share of what
had been gained. He persuaded them to store all the treasure in his
vessel, it being the largest of the three; and so, having it safely in
hand, he altered the course of his ship one fine night, and when the
morning came the Madagascar sloops found themselves floating upon a
wide ocean without a farthing of the treasure for which they had
fought so hard, and for which they might whistle for all the good it
would do them.

[Illustration: Marooned

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September, 1887_]

At first Avary had a great part of a mind to settle at Boston, in
Massachusetts, and had that little town been one whit less bleak and
forbidding, it might have had the honor of being the home of this
famous man. As it was, he did not like the looks of it, so he sailed
away to the eastward, to Ireland, where he settled himself at
Biddeford, in hopes of an easy life of it for the rest of his days.

Here he found himself the possessor of a plentiful stock of jewels,
such as pearls, diamonds, rubies, etc., but with hardly a score of
honest farthings to jingle in his breeches pocket. He consulted with a
certain merchant of Bristol concerning the disposal of the stones--a
fellow not much more cleanly in his habits of honesty than Avary
himself. This worthy undertook to act as Avary's broker. Off he
marched with the jewels, and that was the last that the pirate saw of
his Indian treasure.

Perhaps the most famous of all the piratical names to American ears
are those of Capt. Robert Kidd and Capt. Edward Teach, or
"Blackbeard."

Nothing will be ventured in regard to Kidd at this time, nor in regard
to the pros and cons as to whether he really was or was not a pirate,
after all. For many years he was the very hero of heroes of piratical
fame; there was hardly a creek or stream or point of land along our
coast, hardly a convenient bit of good sandy beach, or hump of rock,
or water-washed cave, where fabulous treasures were not said to have
been hidden by this worthy marooner. Now we are assured that he never
was a pirate, and never did bury any treasure, excepting a certain
chest, which he was compelled to hide upon Gardiner's Island--and
perhaps even it was mythical.

So poor Kidd must be relegated to the dull ranks of simply respectable
people, or semirespectable people at best.

But with "Blackbeard" it is different, for in him we have a real,
ranting, raging, roaring pirate _per se_--one who really did bury
treasure, who made more than one captain walk the plank, and who
committed more private murders than he could number on the fingers of
both hands; one who fills, and will continue to fill, the place to
which he has been assigned for generations, and who may be depended
upon to hold his place in the confidence of others for generations to
come.

Captain Teach was a Bristol man born, and learned his trade on board
of sundry privateers in the East Indies during the old French
war--that of 1702--and a better apprenticeship could no man serve. At
last, somewhere about the latter part of the year 1716, a privateering
captain, one Benjamin Hornigold, raised him from the ranks and put him
in command of a sloop--a lately captured prize--and Blackbeard's
fortune was made. It was a very slight step, and but the change of a
few letters, to convert "privateer" into "pirate," and it was a very
short time before Teach made that change. Not only did he make it
himself, but he persuaded his old captain to join with him.

And now fairly began that series of bold and lawless depredations
which have made his name so justly famous, and which placed him among
the very greatest of marooning freebooters.

"Our hero," says the old historian who sings of the arms and bravery
of this great man--"our hero assumed the cognomen of Blackbeard from
that large quantity of hair which, like a frightful meteor, covered
his whole face, and frightened America more than any comet that
appeared there in a long time. He was accustomed to twist it with
ribbons into small tails, after the manner of our Ramillies wig, and
turn them about his ears. In time of action he wore a sling over his
shoulders, with three brace of pistols, hanging in holsters like
bandoleers; he stuck lighted matches under his hat, which, appearing
on each side of his face, and his eyes naturally looking fierce and
wild, made him altogether such a figure that imagination cannot form
an idea of a Fury from hell to look more frightful."

The night before the day of the action in which he was killed he sat
up drinking with some congenial company until broad daylight. One of
them asked him if his poor young wife knew where his treasure was
hidden. "No," says Blackbeard; "nobody but the devil and I knows where
it is, and the longest liver shall have all."

As for that poor young wife of his, the life that he and his rum-crazy
shipmates led her was too terrible to be told.

For a time Blackbeard worked at his trade down on the Spanish Main,
gathering, in the few years he was there, a very neat little fortune
in the booty captured from sundry vessels; but by and by he took it
into his head to try his luck along the coast of the Carolinas; so off
he sailed to the northward, with quite a respectable little fleet,
consisting of his own vessel and two captured sloops. From that time
he was actively engaged in the making of American history in his small
way.

He first appeared off the bar of Charleston Harbor, to the no small
excitement of the worthy town of that ilk, and there he lay for five
or six days, blockading the port, and stopping incoming and outgoing
vessels at his pleasure, so that, for the time, the commerce of the
province was entirely paralyzed. All the vessels so stopped he held as
prizes, and all the crews and passengers (among the latter of whom was
more than one provincial worthy of the day) he retained as though they
were prisoners of war.

And it was a mightily awkward thing for the good folk of Charleston to
behold day after day a black flag with its white skull and crossbones
fluttering at the fore of the pirate captain's craft, over across the
level stretch of green salt marshes; and it was mightily unpleasant,
too, to know that this or that prominent citizen was crowded down with
the other prisoners under the hatches.

One morning Captain Blackbeard finds that his stock of medicine is
low. "Tut!" says he, "we'll turn no hair gray for that." So up he
calls the bold Captain Richards, the commander of his consort the
_Revenge_ sloop, and bids him take Mr. Marks (one of his prisoners),
and go up to Charleston and get the medicine. There was no task that
suited our Captain Richards better than that. Up to the town he rowed,
as bold as brass. "Look ye," says he to the governor, rolling his quid
of tobacco from one cheek to another--"look ye, we're after this and
that, and if we don't get it, why, I'll tell you plain, we'll burn
them bloody crafts of yours that we've took over yonder, and cut the
weasand of every clodpoll aboard of 'em."

There was no answering an argument of such force as this, and the
worshipful governor and the good folk of Charleston knew very well
that Blackbeard and his crew were the men to do as they promised. So
Blackbeard got his medicine, and though it cost the colony two
thousand dollars, it was worth that much to the town to be quit of
him.

They say that while Captain Richards was conducting his negotiations
with the governor his boat's crew were stumping around the streets of
the town, having a glorious time of it, while the good folk glowered
wrathfully at them, but dared venture nothing in speech or act.

Having gained a booty of between seven and eight thousand dollars from
the prizes captured, the pirates sailed away from Charleston Harbor to
the coast of North Carolina.

And now Blackbeard, following the plan adopted by so many others of
his kind, began to cudgel his brains for means to cheat his fellows
out of their share of the booty.

At Topsail Inlet he ran his own vessel aground, as though by accident.
Hands, the captain of one of the consorts, pretending to come to his
assistance, also grounded _his_ sloop. Nothing now remained but for
those who were able to get away in the other craft, which was all that
was now left of the little fleet. This did Blackbeard with some forty
of his favorites. The rest of the pirates were left on the sand spit
to await the return of their companions--which never happened.

As for Blackbeard and those who were with him, they were that much
richer, for there were so many the fewer pockets to fill. But even yet
there were too many to share the booty, in Blackbeard's opinion, and
so he marooned a parcel more of them--some eighteen or twenty--upon a
naked sand bank, from which they were afterward mercifully rescued by
another freebooter who chanced that way--a certain Major Stede Bonnet,
of whom more will presently be said. About that time a royal
proclamation had been issued offering pardon to all pirates in arms
who would surrender to the king's authority before a given date. So up
goes Master Blackbeard to the Governor of North Carolina and makes his
neck safe by surrendering to the proclamation--albeit he kept tight
clutch upon what he had already gained.

And now we find our bold Captain Blackbeard established in the good
province of North Carolina, where he and His Worship the Governor
struck up a vast deal of intimacy, as profitable as it was pleasant.
There is something very pretty in the thought of the bold sea rover
giving up his adventurous life (excepting now and then an excursion
against a trader or two in the neighboring sound, when the need of
money was pressing); settling quietly down into the routine of old
colonial life, with a young wife of sixteen at his side, who made the
fourteenth that he had in various ports here and there in the world.

Becoming tired of an inactive life, Blackbeard afterward resumed his
piratical career. He cruised around in the rivers and inlets and
sounds of North Carolina for a while, ruling the roost and with never
a one to say him nay, until there was no bearing with such a pest any
longer. So they sent a deputation up to the Governor of Virginia
asking if he would be pleased to help them in their trouble.

There were two men-of-war lying at Kicquetan, in the James River, at
the time. To them the Governor of Virginia applies, and plucky
Lieutenant Maynard, of the _Pearl_, was sent to Ocracoke Inlet to
fight this pirate who ruled it down there so like the cock of a walk.
There he found Blackbeard waiting for him, and as ready for a fight as
ever the lieutenant himself could be. Fight they did, and while it
lasted it was as pretty a piece of business of its kind as one could
wish to see. Blackbeard drained a glass of grog, wishing the
lieutenant luck in getting aboard of him, fired a broadside, blew some
twenty of the lieutenant's men out of existence, and totally crippled
one of his little sloops for the balance of the fight. After that, and
under cover of the smoke, the pirate and his men boarded the other
sloop, and then followed a fine old-fashioned hand-to-hand conflict
betwixt him and the lieutenant. First they fired their pistols, and
then they took to it with cutlasses--right, left, up and down, cut and
slash--until the lieutenant's cutlass broke short off at the hilt.
Then Blackbeard would have finished him off handsomely, only up steps
one of the lieutenant's men and fetches him a great slash over the
neck, so that the lieutenant came off with no more hurt than a cut
across the knuckles.

At the very first discharge of their pistols Blackbeard had been shot
through the body, but he was not for giving up for that--not he. As
said before, he was of the true roaring, raging breed of pirates, and
stood up to it until he received twenty more cutlass cuts and five
additional shots, and then fell dead while trying to fire off an empty
pistol. After that the lieutenant cut off the pirate's head, and
sailed away in triumph, with the bloody trophy nailed to the bow of
his battered sloop.

Those of Blackbeard's men who were not killed were carried off to
Virginia, and all of them tried and hanged but one or two, their
names, no doubt, still standing in a row in the provincial records.

But did Blackbeard really bury treasures, as tradition says, along the
sandy shores he haunted?

[Illustration: Blackbeard Buries His Treasure

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September, 1887_]

Master Clement Downing, midshipman aboard the _Salisbury_, wrote a
book after his return from the cruise to Madagascar, whither the
_Salisbury_ had been ordered, to put an end to the piracy with which
those waters were infested. He says:

     "At Guzarat I met with a Portuguese named Anthony de
     Sylvestre; he came with two other Portuguese and two
     Dutchmen to take on in the Moor's service, as many Europeans
     do. This Anthony told me he had been among the pirates, and
     that he belonged to one of the sloops in Virginia when
     Blackbeard was taken. He informed me that if it should be my
     lot ever to go to York River or Maryland, near an island
     called Mulberry Island, provided we went on shore at the
     watering place, where the shipping used most commonly to
     ride, that there the pirates had buried considerable sums of
     money in great chests well clamped with iron plates. As to
     my part, I never was that way, nor much acquainted with any
     that ever used those parts; but I have made inquiry, and am
     informed that there is such a place as Mulberry Island. If
     any person who uses those parts should think it worth while
     to dig a little way at the upper end of a small cove, where
     it is convenient to land, he would soon find whether the
     information I had was well grounded. Fronting the landing
     place are five trees, among which, he said, the money was
     hid. I cannot warrant the truth of this account; but if I
     was ever to go there, I should find some means or other to
     satisfy myself, as it could not be a great deal out of my
     way. If anybody should obtain the benefit of this account,
     if it please God that they ever come to England, 'tis hoped
     they will remember whence they had this information."

Another worthy was Capt. Edward Low, who learned his trade of
sail-making at good old Boston town, and piracy at Honduras. No one
stood higher in the trade than he, and no one mounted to more lofty
altitudes of bloodthirsty and unscrupulous wickedness. 'Tis strange
that so little has been written and sung of this man of might, for he
was as worthy of story and of song as was Blackbeard.

It was under a Yankee captain that he made his first cruise--down to
Honduras, for a cargo of logwood, which in those times was no better
than stolen from the Spanish folk.

One day, lying off the shore, in the Gulf of Honduras, comes Master
Low and the crew of the whaleboat rowing across from the beach, where
they had been all morning chopping logwood.

"What are you after?" says the captain, for they were coming back with
nothing but themselves in the boat.

"We're after our dinner," says Low, as spokesman of the party.

"You'll have no dinner," says the captain, "until you fetch off
another load."

"Dinner or no dinner, we'll pay for it," says Low, wherewith he up
with a musket, squinted along the barrel, and pulled the trigger.

Luckily the gun hung fire, and the Yankee captain was spared to steal
logwood a while longer.

All the same, that was no place for Ned Low to make a longer stay, so
off he and his messmates rowed in a whaleboat, captured a brig out at
sea, and turned pirates.

He presently fell in with the notorious Captain Lowther, a fellow
after his own kidney, who put the finishing touches to his education
and taught him what wickedness he did not already know.

And so he became a master pirate, and a famous hand at his craft, and
thereafter forever bore an inveterate hatred of all Yankees because of
the dinner he had lost, and never failed to smite whatever one of them
luck put within his reach. Once he fell in with a ship off South
Carolina--the _Amsterdam Merchant_, Captain Williamson, commander--a
Yankee craft and a Yankee master. He slit the nose and cropped the
ears of the captain, and then sailed merrily away, feeling the better
for having marred a Yankee.

New York and New England had more than one visit from the doughty
captain, each of which visits they had good cause to remember, for he
made them smart for it.

Along in the year 1722 thirteen vessels were riding at anchor in front
of the good town of Marblehead. Into the harbor sailed a strange
craft. "Who is she?" say the townsfolk, for the coming of a new vessel
was no small matter in those days.

Who the strangers were was not long a matter of doubt. Up goes the
black flag, and the skull and crossbones to the fore.

"'Tis the bloody Low," say one and all; and straightway all was
flutter and commotion, as in a duck pond when a hawk pitches and
strikes in the midst.

It was a glorious thing for our captain, for here were thirteen Yankee
crafts at one and the same time. So he took what he wanted, and then
sailed away, and it was many a day before Marblehead forgot that
visit.

Some time after this he and his consort fell foul of an English sloop
of war, the _Greyhound_, whereby they were so roughly handled that Low
was glad enough to slip away, leaving his consort and her crew behind
him, as a sop to the powers of law and order. And lucky for them if no
worse fate awaited them than to walk the dreadful plank with a bandage
around the blinded eyes and a rope around the elbows. So the consort
was taken, and the crew tried and hanged in chains, and Low sailed off
in as pretty a bit of rage as ever a pirate fell into.

The end of this worthy is lost in the fogs of the past: some say that
he died of a yellow fever down in New Orleans; it was not at the end
of a hempen cord, more's the pity.

Here fittingly with our strictly American pirates should stand Major
Stede Bonnet along with the rest. But in truth he was only a poor
half-and-half fellow of his kind, and even after his hand was fairly
turned to the business he had undertaken, a qualm of conscience would
now and then come across him, and he would make vast promises to
forswear his evil courses.

However, he jogged along in his course of piracy snugly enough until
he fell foul of the gallant Colonel Rhett, off Charleston Harbor,
whereupon his luck and his courage both were suddenly snuffed out with
a puff of powder smoke and a good rattling broadside. Down came the
"Black Roger" with its skull and crossbones from the fore, and Colonel
Rhett had the glory of fetching back as pretty a cargo of scoundrels
and cutthroats as the town ever saw.

After the next assizes they were strung up, all in a row--evil apples
ready for the roasting.

"Ned" England was a fellow of different blood--only he snapped his
whip across the back of society over in the East Indies and along the
hot shores of Hindustan.

The name of Capt. Howel Davis stands high among his fellows. He was
the Ulysses of pirates, the beloved not only of Mercury, but of
Minerva.

He it was who hoodwinked the captain of a French ship of double the
size and strength of his own, and fairly cheated him into the
surrender of his craft without the firing of a single pistol or the
striking of a single blow; he it was who sailed boldly into the port
of Gambia, on the coast of Guinea, and under the guns of the castle,
proclaiming himself as a merchant trading for slaves.

The cheat was kept up until the fruit of mischief was ripe for the
picking; then, when the governor and the guards of the castle were
lulled into entire security, and when Davis's band was scattered about
wherever each man could do the most good, it was out pistol, up
cutlass, and death if a finger moved. They tied the soldiers back to
back, and the governor to his own armchair, and then rifled wherever
it pleased them. After that they sailed away, and though they had not
made the fortune they had hoped to glean, it was a good snug round sum
that they shared among them.

[Illustration: Walking the Plank

_Illustration from_
BUCCANEERS AND MAROONERS OF THE SPANISH MAIN

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _August and September, 1887_]

Their courage growing high with success, they determined to attempt
the island of Del Principe--a prosperous Portuguese settlement on the
coast. The plan for taking the place was cleverly laid, and would have
succeeded, only that a Portuguese negro among the pirate crew turned
traitor and carried the news ashore to the governor of the fort.
Accordingly, the next day, when Captain Davis came ashore, he found
there a good strong guard drawn up as though to honor his coming. But
after he and those with him were fairly out of their boat, and well
away from the water side, there was a sudden rattle of musketry, a
cloud of smoke, and a dull groan or two. Only one man ran out from
under that pungent cloud, jumped into the boat, and rowed away; and
when it lifted, there lay Captain Davis and his companions all of a
heap, like a pile of old clothes.

Capt. Bartholomew Roberts was the particular and especial pupil of
Davis, and when that worthy met his death so suddenly and so
unexpectedly in the unfortunate manner above narrated, he was chosen
unanimously as the captain of the fleet, and he was a worthy pupil of
a worthy master. Many were the poor fluttering merchant ducks that
this sea hawk swooped upon and struck; and cleanly and cleverly were
they plucked before his savage clutch loosened its hold upon them.

"He made a gallant figure," says the old narrator, "being dressed in a
rich crimson waistcoat and breeches and red feather in his hat, a gold
chain around his neck, with a diamond cross hanging to it, a sword in
his hand, and two pair of pistols hanging at the end of a silk sling
flung over his shoulders according to the fashion of the pyrates."
Thus he appeared in the last engagement which he fought--that with the
_Swallow_--a royal sloop of war. A gallant fight they made of it,
those bulldog pirates, for, finding themselves caught in a trap
betwixt the man-of-war and the shore, they determined to bear down
upon the king's vessel, fire a slapping broadside into her, and then
try to get away, trusting to luck in the doing, and hoping that their
enemy might be crippled by their fire.

Captain Roberts himself was the first to fall at the return fire of
the _Swallow_; a grapeshot struck him in the neck, and he fell forward
across the gun near to which he was standing at the time. A certain
fellow named Stevenson, who was at the helm, saw him fall, and
thought he was wounded. At the lifting of the arm the body rolled over
upon the deck, and the man saw that the captain was dead. "Whereupon,"
says the old history, "he" [Stevenson] "gushed into tears, and wished
that the next shot might be his portion." After their captain's death
the pirate crew had no stomach for more fighting; the "Black Roger"
was struck, and one and all surrendered to justice and the gallows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such is a brief and bald account of the most famous of these pirates.
But they are only a few of a long list of notables, such as Captain
Martel, Capt. Charles Vane (who led the gallant Colonel Rhett, of
South Carolina, such a wild-goose chase in and out among the sluggish
creeks and inlets along the coast), Capt. John Rackam, and Captain
Anstis, Captain Worley, and Evans, and Philips, and others--a score or
more of wild fellows whose very names made ship captains tremble in
their shoes in those good old times.

And such is that black chapter of history of the past--an evil
chapter, lurid with cruelty and suffering, stained with blood and
smoke. Yet it is a written chapter, and it must be read. He who
chooses may read betwixt the lines of history this great truth: Evil
itself is an instrument toward the shaping of good. Therefore the
history of evil as well as the history of good should be read,
considered, and digested.




Chapter II

THE GHOST OF CAPTAIN BRAND

[Illustration]


It is not so easy to tell why discredit should be cast upon a man
because of something that his grandfather may have done amiss, but the
world, which is never overnice in its discrimination as to where to
lay the blame, is often pleased to make the innocent suffer in the
place of the guilty.

Barnaby True was a good, honest, biddable lad, as boys go, but yet he
was not ever allowed altogether to forget that his grandfather had
been that very famous pirate, Capt. William Brand, who, after so many
marvelous adventures (if one may believe the catchpenny stories and
ballads that were written about him), was murdered in Jamaica by Capt.
John Malyoe, the commander of his own consort, the _Adventure_ galley.

It has never been denied, that ever I heard, that up to the time of
Captain Brand's being commissioned against the South Sea pirates he
had always been esteemed as honest, reputable a sea captain as could
be.

When he started out upon that adventure it was with a ship, the
_Royal Sovereign_, fitted out by some of the most decent merchants of
New York. The governor himself had subscribed to the adventure, and
had himself signed Captain Brand's commission. So, if the unfortunate
man went astray, he must have had great temptation to do so, many
others behaving no better when the opportunity offered in those
far-away seas where so many rich purchases might very easily be taken
and no one the wiser.

To be sure, those stories and ballads made our captain to be a most
wicked, profane wretch; and if he were, why, God knows he suffered and
paid for it, for he laid his bones in Jamaica, and never saw his home
or his wife and daughter again after he had sailed away on the _Royal
Sovereign_ on that long misfortunate voyage, leaving them in New York
to the care of strangers.

At the time when he met his fate in Port Royal Harbor he had obtained
two vessels under his command--the _Royal Sovereign_, which was the
boat fitted out for him in New York, and the _Adventure_ galley, which
he was said to have taken somewhere in the South Seas. With these he
lay in those waters of Jamaica for over a month after his return from
the coasts of Africa, waiting for news from home, which, when it came,
was of the very blackest; for the colonial authorities were at that
time stirred up very hot against him to take him and hang him for a
pirate, so as to clear their own skirts for having to do with such a
fellow. So maybe it seemed better to our captain to hide his
ill-gotten treasure there in those far-away parts, and afterward to
try and bargain with it for his life when he should reach New York,
rather than to sail straight for the Americas with what he had earned
by his piracies, and so risk losing life and money both.

[Illustration: "Captain Malyoe Shot Captain Brand Through the Head"

_Illustration from_
THE GHOST OF CAPTAIN BRAND

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S WEEKLY, _December 19, 1896_]

However that might be, the story was that Captain Brand and his
gunner, and Captain Malyoe of the _Adventure_ and the sailing master
of the _Adventure_ all went ashore together with a chest of money (no
one of them choosing to trust the other three in so nice an affair),
and buried the treasure somewhere on the beach of Port Royal
Harbor. The story then has it that they fell a-quarreling about a
future division of the money, and that, as a wind-up to the affair,
Captain Malyoe shot Captain Brand through the head, while the sailing
master of the _Adventure_ served the gunner of the _Royal Sovereign_
after the same fashion through the body, and that the murderers then
went away, leaving the two stretched out in their own blood on the
sand in the staring sun, with no one to know where the money was hid
but they two who had served their comrades so.

It is a mighty great pity that anyone should have a grandfather who
ended his days in such a sort as this, but it was no fault of Barnaby
True's, nor could he have done anything to prevent it, seeing that he
was not even born into the world at the time that his grandfather
turned pirate, and was only one year old when he so met his tragical
end. Nevertheless, the boys with whom he went to school never tired of
calling him "Pirate," and would sometimes sing for his benefit that
famous catchpenny song beginning thus:

    Oh, my name was Captain Brand,
          A-sailing,
          And a-sailing;
    Oh, my name was Captain Brand,
          A-sailing free.
    Oh, my name was Captain Brand,
    And I sinned by sea and land,
    For I broke God's just command,
          A-sailing free.

'Twas a vile thing to sing at the grandson of so misfortunate a man,
and oftentimes little Barnaby True would double up his fists and would
fight his tormentors at great odds, and would sometimes go back home
with a bloody nose to have his poor mother cry over him and grieve for
him.

Not that his days were all of teasing and torment, neither; for if his
comrades did treat him so, why, then, there were other times when he
and they were as great friends as could be, and would go in swimming
together where there was a bit of sandy strand along the East River
above Fort George, and that in the most amicable fashion. Or, maybe
the very next day after he had fought so with his fellows, he would go
a-rambling with them up the Bowerie Road, perhaps to help them steal
cherries from some old Dutch farmer, forgetting in such adventure what
a thief his own grandfather had been.

Well, when Barnaby True was between sixteen and seventeen years old he
was taken into employment in the countinghouse of Mr. Roger Hartright,
the well-known West India merchant, and Barnaby's own stepfather.

It was the kindness of this good man that not only found a place for
Barnaby in the countinghouse, but advanced him so fast that against
our hero was twenty-one years old he had made four voyages as
supercargo to the West Indies in Mr. Hartright's ship, the _Belle
Helen_, and soon after he was twenty-one undertook a fifth. Nor was it
in any such subordinate position as mere supercargo that he acted, but
rather as the confidential agent of Mr. Hartright, who, having no
children of his own, was very jealous to advance our hero into a
position of trust and responsibility in the countinghouse, as though
he were indeed a son, so that even the captain of the ship had
scarcely more consideration aboard than he, young as he was in years.

As for the agents and correspondents of Mr. Hartright throughout these
parts, they also, knowing how the good man had adopted his interests,
were very polite and obliging to Master Barnaby--especially, be it
mentioned, Mr. Ambrose Greenfield, of Kingston, Jamaica, who, upon the
occasions of his visits to those parts, did all that he could to make
Barnaby's stay in that town agreeable and pleasant to him.

So much for the history of our hero to the time of the beginning of
this story, without which you shall hardly be able to understand the
purport of those most extraordinary adventures that befell him shortly
after he came of age, nor the logic of their consequence after they
had occurred.

For it was during his fifth voyage to the West Indies that the first
of those extraordinary adventures happened of which I shall have
presently to tell.

At that time he had been in Kingston for the best part of four weeks,
lodging at the house of a very decent, respectable widow, by name Mrs.
Anne Bolles, who, with three pleasant and agreeable daughters, kept a
very clean and well-served lodging house in the outskirts of the town.

One morning, as our hero sat sipping his coffee, clad only in loose
cotton drawers, a shirt, and a jacket, and with slippers upon his
feet, as is the custom in that country, where everyone endeavors to
keep as cool as may be--while he sat thus sipping his coffee Miss
Eliza, the youngest of the three daughters, came and gave him a note,
which, she said, a stranger had just handed in at the door, going away
again without waiting for a reply. You may judge of Barnaby's surprise
when he opened the note and read as follows:

     MR. BARNABY TRUE.

     SIR,--Though you don't know me, I know you, and I tell you
     this: if you will be at Pratt's Ordinary on Harbor Street on
     Friday next at eight o'clock of the evening, and will
     accompany the man who shall say to you, "The _Royal
     Sovereign_ is come in," you shall learn something the most
     to your advantage that ever befell you. Sir, keep this note,
     and show it to him who shall address these words to you, so
     to certify that you are the man he seeks.

Such was the wording of the note, which was without address, and
without any superscription whatever.

The first emotion that stirred Barnaby was one of extreme and profound
amazement. Then the thought came into his mind that some witty fellow,
of whom he knew a good many in that town--and wild, waggish pranks
they were--was attempting to play off some smart jest upon him. But
all that Miss Eliza could tell him when he questioned her concerning
the messenger was that the bearer of the note was a tall, stout man,
with a red neckerchief around his neck and copper buckles to his
shoes, and that he had the appearance of a sailorman, having a great
big queue hanging down his back. But, Lord! what was such a
description as that in a busy seaport town, full of scores of men to
fit such a likeness? Accordingly, our hero put away the note into his
wallet, determining to show it to his good friend Mr. Greenfield that
evening, and to ask his advice upon it. So he did show it, and that
gentleman's opinion was the same as his--that some wag was minded to
play off a hoax upon him, and that the matter of the letter was all
nothing but smoke.

Nevertheless, though Barnaby was thus confirmed in his opinion as to
the nature of the communication he had received, he yet determined in
his own mind that he would see the business through to the end, and
would be at Pratt's Ordinary, as the note demanded, upon the day and
at the time specified therein.

Pratt's Ordinary was at that time a very fine and well-known place of
its sort, with good tobacco and the best rum that ever I tasted, and
had a garden behind it that, sloping down to the harbor front, was
planted pretty thick with palms and ferns grouped into clusters with
flowers and plants. Here were a number of little tables, some in
little grottoes, like our Vauxhall in New York, and with red and blue
and white paper lanterns hung among the foliage, whither gentlemen and
ladies used sometimes to go of an evening to sit and drink lime juice
and sugar and water (and sometimes a taste of something stronger), and
to look out across the water at the shipping in the cool of the night.

Thither, accordingly, our hero went, a little before the time
appointed in the note, and passing directly through the Ordinary and
the garden beyond, chose a table at the lower end of the garden and
close to the water's edge, where he would not be easily seen by
anyone coming into the place. Then, ordering some rum and water and a
pipe of tobacco, he composed himself to watch for the appearance of
those witty fellows whom he suspected would presently come thither to
see the end of their prank and to enjoy his confusion.

The spot was pleasant enough; for the land breeze, blowing strong and
full, set the leaves of the palm tree above his head to rattling and
clattering continually against the sky, where, the moon then being
about full, they shone every now and then like blades of steel. The
waves also were splashing up against the little landing place at the
foot of the garden, sounding very cool in the night, and sparkling all
over the harbor where the moon caught the edges of the water. A great
many vessels were lying at anchor in their ridings, with the dark,
prodigious form of a man-of-war looming up above them in the
moonlight.

There our hero sat for the best part of an hour, smoking his pipe of
tobacco and sipping his grog, and seeing not so much as a single thing
that might concern the note he had received.

It was not far from half an hour after the time appointed in the note,
when a rowboat came suddenly out of the night and pulled up to the
landing place at the foot of the garden above mentioned, and three or
four men came ashore in the darkness. Without saying a word among
themselves they chose a near-by table and, sitting down, ordered rum
and water, and began drinking their grog in silence. They might have
sat there about five minutes, when, by and by, Barnaby True became
aware that they were observing him very curiously; and then almost
immediately one, who was plainly the leader of the party, called out
to him:

"How now, messmate! Won't you come and drink a dram of rum with us?"

"Why, no," says Barnaby, answering very civilly; "I have drunk enough
already, and more would only heat my blood."

"All the same," quoth the stranger, "I think you will come and drink
with us; for, unless I am mistook, you are Mr. Barnaby True, and I am
come here to tell you that the _Royal Sovereign is come in_."

Now I may honestly say that Barnaby True was never more struck aback
in all his life than he was at hearing these words uttered in so
unexpected a manner. He had been looking to hear them under such
different circumstances that, now that his ears heard them addressed
to him, and that so seriously, by a perfect stranger, who, with
others, had thus mysteriously come ashore out of the darkness, he
could scarce believe that his ears heard aright. His heart suddenly
began beating at a tremendous rate, and had he been an older and wiser
man, I do believe he would have declined the adventure, instead of
leaping blindly, as he did, into that of which he could see neither
the beginning nor the ending. But being barely one-and-twenty years of
age, and having an adventurous disposition that would have carried him
into almost anything that possessed a smack of uncertainty or danger
about it, he contrived to say, in a pretty easy tone (though God knows
how it was put on for the occasion):

"Well, then, if that be so, and if the _Royal Sovereign_ is indeed
come in, why, I'll join you, since you are so kind as to ask me." And
therewith he went across to the other table, carrying his pipe with
him, and sat down and began smoking, with all the appearance of ease
he could assume upon the occasion.

"Well, Mr. Barnaby True," said the man who had before addressed him,
so soon as Barnaby had settled himself, speaking in a low tone of
voice, so there would be no danger of any others hearing the
words--"Well, Mr. Barnaby True--for I shall call you by your name, to
show you that though I know you, you don't know me--I am glad to see
that you are man enough to enter thus into an affair, though you can't
see to the bottom of it. For it shows me that you are a man of mettle,
and are deserving of the fortune that is to befall you to-night.
Nevertheless, first of all, I am bid to say that you must show me a
piece of paper that you have about you before we go a step farther."

"Very well," said Barnaby; "I have it here safe and sound, and see it
you shall." And thereupon and without more ado he fetched out his
wallet, opened it, and handed his interlocutor the mysterious note he
had received the day or two before. Whereupon the other, drawing to
him the candle, burning there for the convenience of those who would
smoke tobacco, began immediately reading it.

This gave Barnaby True a moment or two to look at him. He was a tall,
stout man, with a red handkerchief tied around his neck, and with
copper buckles on his shoes, so that Barnaby True could not but wonder
whether he was not the very same man who had given the note to Miss
Eliza Bolles at the door of his lodging house.

"'Tis all right and straight as it should be," the other said, after
he had so glanced his eyes over the note. "And now that the paper is
read" (suiting his action to his words), "I'll just burn it, for
safety's sake."

And so he did, twisting it up and setting it to the flame of the
candle.

"And now," he said, continuing his address, "I'll tell you what I am
here for. I was sent to ask you if you're man enough to take your life
in your own hands and to go with me in that boat down there? Say
'Yes,' and we'll start away without wasting more time, for the devil
is ashore here at Jamaica--though you don't know what that means--and
if he gets ahead of us, why, then we may whistle for what we are
after. Say 'No,' and I go away again, and I promise you you shall
never be troubled again in this sort. So now speak up plain, young
gentleman, and tell us what is your mind in this business, and whether
you will adventure any farther or not."

If our hero hesitated it was not for long. I cannot say that his
courage did not waver for a moment; but if it did, it was, I say, not
for long, and when he spoke up it was with a voice as steady as could
be.

"To be sure I'm man enough to go with you," he said; "and if you mean
me any harm I can look out for myself; and if I can't, why, here is
something can look out for me," and therewith he lifted up the flap of
his coat pocket and showed the butt of a pistol he had fetched with
him when he had set out from his lodging house that evening.

At this the other burst out a-laughing. "Come," says he, "you are
indeed of right mettle, and I like your spirit. All the same, no one
in all the world means you less ill than I, and so, if you have to use
that barker, 'twill not be upon us who are your friends, but only upon
one who is more wicked than the devil himself. So come, and let us get
away."

Thereupon he and the others, who had not spoken a single word for all
this time, rose from the table, and he having paid the scores of all,
they all went down together to the boat that still lay at the landing
place at the bottom of the garden.

Thus coming to it, our hero could see that it was a large yawl boat
manned with half a score of black men for rowers, and there were two
lanterns in the stern sheets, and three or four iron shovels.

The man who had conducted the conversation with Barnaby True for all
this time, and who was, as has been said, plainly the captain of the
party, stepped immediately down into the boat; our hero followed, and
the others followed after him; and instantly they were seated the boat
was shoved off and the black men began pulling straight out into the
harbor, and so, at some distance away, around under the stern of the
man-of-war.

Not a word was spoken after they had thus left the shore, and
presently they might all have been ghosts, for the silence of the
party. Barnaby True was too full of his own thoughts to talk--and
serious enough thoughts they were by this time, with crimps to trepan
a man at every turn, and press gangs to carry a man off so that he
might never be heard of again. As for the others, they did not seem to
choose to say anything now that they had him fairly embarked upon
their enterprise.

And so the crew pulled on in perfect silence for the best part of an
hour, the leader of the expedition directing the course of the boat
straight across the harbor, as though toward the mouth of the Rio
Cobra River. Indeed, this was their destination, as Barnaby could
after a while see, by the low point of land with a great long row of
coconut palms upon it (the appearance of which he knew very well),
which by and by began to loom up out of the milky dimness of the
moonlight. As they approached the river they found the tide was
running strong out of it, so that some distance away from the stream
it gurgled and rippled alongside the boat as the crew of black men
pulled strongly against it. Thus they came up under what was either a
point of land or an islet covered with a thick growth of mangrove
trees. But still no one spoke a single word as to their destination,
or what was the business they had in hand.

The night, now that they were close to the shore, was loud with the
noise of running tide-water, and the air was heavy with the smell of
mud and marsh, and over all the whiteness of the moonlight, with a few
stars pricking out here and there in the sky; and all so strange and
silent and mysterious that Barnaby could not divest himself of the
feeling that it was all a dream.

So, the rowers bending to the oars, the boat came slowly around from
under the clump of mangrove bushes and out into the open water again.

Instantly it did so the leader of the expedition called out in a sharp
voice, and the black men instantly lay on their oars.

Almost at the same instant Barnaby True became aware that there was
another boat coming down the river toward where they lay, now drifting
with the strong tide out into the harbor again, and he knew that it
was because of the approach of that boat that the other had called
upon his men to cease rowing.

The other boat, as well as he could see in the distance, was full of
men, some of whom appeared to be armed, for even in the dusk of the
darkness the shine of the moonlight glimmered sharply now and then on
the barrels of muskets or pistols, and in the silence that followed
after their own rowing had ceased Barnaby True could hear the chug!
chug! of the oars sounding louder and louder through the watery
stillness of the night as the boat drew nearer and nearer. But he knew
nothing of what it all meant, nor whether these others were friends or
enemies, or what was to happen next.

The oarsmen of the approaching boat did not for a moment cease their
rowing, not till they had come pretty close to Barnaby and his
companions. Then a man who sat in the stern ordered them to cease
rowing, and as they lay on their oars he stood up. As they passed by,
Barnaby True could see him very plain, the moonlight shining full upon
him--a large, stout gentleman with a round red face, and clad in a
fine laced coat of red cloth. Amidship of the boat was a box or chest
about the bigness of a middle-sized traveling trunk, but covered all
over with cakes of sand and dirt. In the act of passing, the
gentleman, still standing, pointed at it with an elegant gold-headed
cane which he held in his hand. "Are you come after this, Abraham
Dawling?" says he, and thereat his countenance broke into as evil,
malignant a grin as ever Barnaby True saw in all of his life.

The other did not immediately reply so much as a single word, but sat
as still as any stone. Then, at last, the other boat having gone by,
he suddenly appeared to regain his wits, for he bawled out after it,
"Very well, Jack Malyoe! Very well, Jack Malyoe! you've got ahead of
us this time again, but next time is the third, and then it shall be
our turn, even if William Brand must come back from hell to settle
with you."

This he shouted out as the other boat passed farther and farther
away, but to it my fine gentleman made no reply except to burst out
into a great roaring fit of laughter.

There was another man among the armed men in the stern of the passing
boat--a villainous, lean man with lantern jaws, and the top of his
head as bald as the palm of my hand. As the boat went away into the
night with the tide and the headway the oars had given it, he grinned
so that the moonlight shone white on his big teeth. Then, flourishing
a great big pistol, he said, and Barnaby could hear every word he
spoke, "Do but give me the word, Your Honor, and I'll put another
bullet through the son of a sea cook."

But the gentleman said some words to forbid him, and therewith the
boat was gone away into the night, and presently Barnaby could hear
that the men at the oars had begun rowing again, leaving them lying
there, without a single word being said for a long time.

By and by one of those in Barnaby's boat spoke up. "Where shall you go
now?" he said.

At this the leader of the expedition appeared suddenly to come back to
himself, and to find his voice again. "Go?" he roared out. "Go to the
devil! Go? Go where you choose! Go? Go back again--that's where we'll
go!" and therewith he fell a-cursing and swearing until he foamed at
the lips, as though he had gone clean crazy, while the black men began
rowing back again across the harbor as fast as ever they could lay
oars into the water.

They put Barnaby True ashore below the old custom house; but so
bewildered and shaken was he by all that had happened, and by what he
had seen, and by the names that he heard spoken, that he was scarcely
conscious of any of the familiar things among which he found himself
thus standing. And so he walked up the moonlit street toward his
lodging like one drunk or bewildered; for "John Malyoe" was the name
of the captain of the _Adventure_ galley--he who had shot Barnaby's
own grandfather--and "Abraham Dawling" was the name of the gunner of
the _Royal Sovereign_ who had been shot at the same time with the
pirate captain, and who, with him, had been left stretched out in the
staring sun by the murderers.

The whole business had occupied hardly two hours, but it was as though
that time was no part of Barnaby's life, but all a part of some other
life, so dark and strange and mysterious that it in no wise belonged
to him.

As for that box covered all over with mud, he could only guess at that
time what it contained and what the finding of it signified.

But of this our hero said nothing to anyone, nor did he tell a single
living soul what he had seen that night, but nursed it in his own
mind, where it lay so big for a while that he could think of little or
nothing else for days after.

Mr. Greenfield, Mr. Hartright's correspondent and agent in these
parts, lived in a fine brick house just out of the town, on the Mona
Road, his family consisting of a wife and two daughters--brisk, lively
young ladies with black hair and eyes, and very fine bright teeth that
shone whenever they laughed, and with a plenty to say for themselves.
Thither Barnaby True was often asked to a family dinner; and, indeed,
it was a pleasant home to visit, and to sit upon the veranda and smoke
a cigarro with the good old gentleman and look out toward the
mountains, while the young ladies laughed and talked, or played upon
the guitar and sang. And oftentimes so it was strongly upon Barnaby's
mind to speak to the good gentleman and tell him what he had beheld
that night out in the harbor; but always he would think better of it
and hold his peace, falling to thinking, and smoking away upon his
cigarro at a great rate.

A day or two before the _Belle Helen_ sailed from Kingston Mr.
Greenfield stopped Barnaby True as he was going through the office to
bid him to come to dinner that night (for there within the tropics
they breakfast at eleven o'clock and take dinner in the cool of the
evening, because of the heat, and not at midday, as we do in more
temperate latitudes). "I would have you meet," says Mr. Greenfield,
"your chief passenger for New York, and his granddaughter, for whom
the state cabin and the two staterooms are to be fitted as here
ordered [showing a letter]--Sir John Malyoe and Miss Marjorie Malyoe.
Did you ever hear tell of Capt. Jack Malyoe, Master Barnaby?"

Now I do believe that Mr. Greenfield had no notion at all that old
Captain Brand was Barnaby True's own grandfather and Capt. John Malyoe
his murderer, but when he so thrust at him the name of that man, what
with that in itself and the late adventure through which he himself
had just passed, and with his brooding upon it until it was so
prodigiously big in his mind, it was like hitting him a blow to so
fling the questions at him. Nevertheless, he was able to reply, with a
pretty straight face, that he had heard of Captain Malyoe and who he
was.

"Well," says Mr. Greenfield, "if Jack Malyoe was a desperate pirate
and a wild, reckless blade twenty years ago, why, he is Sir John
Malyoe now and the owner of a fine estate in Devonshire. Well, Master
Barnaby, when one is a baronet and come into the inheritance of a fine
estate (though I do hear it is vastly cumbered with debts), the world
will wink its eye to much that he may have done twenty years ago. I do
hear say, though, that his own kin still turn the cold shoulder to
him."

To this address Barnaby answered nothing, but sat smoking away at his
cigarro at a great rate.

And so that night Barnaby True came face to face for the first time
with the man who murdered his own grandfather--the greatest beast of a
man that ever he met in all of his life.

That time in the harbor he had seen Sir John Malyoe at a distance and
in the darkness; now that he beheld him near by it seemed to him that
he had never looked at a more evil face in all his life. Not that the
man was altogether ugly, for he had a good nose and a fine double
chin; but his eyes stood out like balls and were red and watery, and
he winked them continually, as though they were always smarting; and
his lips were thick and purple-red, and his fat, red cheeks were
mottled here and there with little clots of purple veins; and when he
spoke his voice rattled so in his throat that it made one wish to
clear one's own throat to listen to him. So, what with a pair of fat,
white hands, and that hoarse voice, and his swollen face, and his
thick lips sticking out, it seemed to Barnaby True he had never seen a
countenance so distasteful to him as that one into which he then
looked.

But if Sir John Malyoe was so displeasing to our hero's taste, why,
the granddaughter, even this first time he beheld her, seemed to him
to be the most beautiful, lovely young lady that ever he saw. She had
a thin, fair skin, red lips, and yellow hair--though it was then
powdered pretty white for the occasion--and the bluest eyes that
Barnaby beheld in all of his life. A sweet, timid creature, who seemed
not to dare so much as to speak a word for herself without looking to
Sir John for leave to do so, and would shrink and shudder whenever he
would speak of a sudden to her or direct a sudden glance upon her.
When she did speak, it was in so low a voice that one had to bend his
head to hear her, and even if she smiled would catch herself and look
up as though to see if she had leave to be cheerful.

As for Sir John, he sat at dinner like a pig, and gobbled and ate and
drank, smacking his lips all the while, but with hardly a word to
either her or Mrs. Greenfield or to Barnaby True; but with a sour,
sullen air, as though he would say, "Your damned victuals and drink
are no better than they should be, but I must eat 'em or nothing." A
great bloated beast of a man!

Only after dinner was over and the young lady and the two misses sat
off in a corner together did Barnaby hear her talk with any ease.
Then, to be sure, her tongue became loose, and she prattled away at a
great rate, though hardly above her breath, until of a sudden her
grandfather called out, in his hoarse, rattling voice, that it was
time to go. Whereupon she stopped short in what she was saying and
jumped up from her chair, looking as frightened as though she had been
caught in something amiss, and was to be punished for it.

Barnaby True and Mr. Greenfield both went out to see the two into
their coach, where Sir John's man stood holding the lantern. And who
should he be, to be sure, but that same lean villain with bald head
who had offered to shoot the leader of our hero's expedition out on
the harbor that night! For, one of the circles of light from the
lantern shining up into his face, Barnaby True knew him the moment he
clapped eyes upon him. Though he could not have recognized our hero,
he grinned at him in the most impudent, familiar fashion, and never so
much as touched his hat either to him or to Mr. Greenfield; but as
soon as his master and his young mistress had entered the coach,
banged to the door and scrambled up on the seat alongside the driver,
and so away without a word, but with another impudent grin, this time
favoring both Barnaby and the old gentleman.

Such were these two, master and man, and what Barnaby saw of them then
was only confirmed by further observation--the most hateful couple he
ever knew; though, God knows, what they afterward suffered should wipe
out all complaint against them.

The next day Sir John Malyoe's belongings began to come aboard the
_Belle Helen_, and in the afternoon that same lean, villainous
manservant comes skipping across the gangplank as nimble as a goat,
with two black men behind him lugging a great sea chest. "What!" he
cried out, "and so you is the supercargo, is you? Why, I thought you
was more account when I saw you last night a-sitting talking with His
Honor like his equal. Well, no matter; 'tis something to have a brisk,
genteel young fellow for a supercargo. So come, my hearty, lend a
hand, will you, and help me set His Honor's cabin to rights."

What a speech was this to endure from such a fellow, to be sure! and
Barnaby so high in his own esteem, and holding himself a gentleman!
Well, what with his distaste for the villain, and what with such
odious familiarity, you can guess into what temper so impudent an
address must have cast him. "You'll find the steward in yonder," he
said, "and he'll show you the cabin," and therewith turned and walked
away with prodigious dignity, leaving the other standing where he was.

As he entered his own cabin he could not but see, out of the tail of
his eye, that the fellow was still standing where he had left him,
regarding him with a most evil, malevolent countenance, so that he had
the satisfaction of knowing that he had made one enemy during that
voyage who was not very likely to forgive or forget what he must
regard as a slight put upon him.

The next day Sir John Malyoe himself came aboard, accompanied by his
granddaughter, and followed by this man, and he followed again by four
black men, who carried among them two trunks, not large in size, but
prodigious heavy in weight, and toward which Sir John and his follower
devoted the utmost solicitude and care to see that they were properly
carried into the state cabin he was to occupy. Barnaby True was
standing in the great cabin as they passed close by him; but though
Sir John Malyoe looked hard at him and straight in the face, he never
so much as spoke a single word, or showed by a look or a sign that he
knew who our hero was. At this the serving man, who saw it all with
eyes as quick as a cat's, fell to grinning and chuckling to see
Barnaby in his turn so slighted.

The young lady, who also saw it all, flushed up red, then in the
instant of passing looked straight at our hero, and bowed and smiled
at him with a most sweet and gracious affability, then the next moment
recovering herself, as though mightily frightened at what she had
done.

The same day the _Belle Helen_ sailed, with as beautiful, sweet
weather as ever a body could wish for.

There were only two other passengers aboard, the Rev. Simon Styles,
the master of a flourishing academy in Spanish Town, and his wife, a
good, worthy old couple, but very quiet, and would sit in the great
cabin by the hour together reading, so that, what with Sir John Malyoe
staying all the time in his own cabin with those two trunks he held so
precious, it fell upon Barnaby True in great part to show attention to
the young lady; and glad enough he was of the opportunity, as anyone
may guess. For when you consider a brisk, lively young man of
one-and-twenty and a sweet, beautiful miss of seventeen so thrown
together day after day for two weeks, the weather being very fair, as
I have said, and the ship tossing and bowling along before a fine
humming breeze that sent white caps all over the sea, and with nothing
to do but sit and look at that blue sea and the bright sky overhead,
it is not hard to suppose what was to befall, and what pleasure it was
to Barnaby True to show attention to her.

But, oh! those days when a man is young, and, whether wisely or no,
fallen in love! How often during that voyage did our hero lie awake in
his berth at night, tossing this way and that without sleep--not that
he wanted to sleep if he could, but would rather lie so awake thinking
about her and staring into the darkness!

Poor fool! He might have known that the end must come to such a fool's
paradise before very long. For who was he to look up to Sir John
Malyoe's granddaughter, he, the supercargo of a merchant ship, and she
the granddaughter of a baronet.

Nevertheless, things went along very smooth and pleasant, until one
evening, when all came of a sudden to an end. At that time he and the
young lady had been standing for a long while together, leaning over
the rail and looking out across the water through the dusk toward the
westward, where the sky was still of a lingering brightness. She had
been mightily quiet and dull all that evening, but now of a sudden she
began, without any preface whatever, to tell Barnaby about herself and
her affairs. She said that she and her grandfather were going to New
York that they might take passage thence to Boston town, there to meet
her cousin Captain Malyoe, who was stationed in garrison at that
place. Then she went on to say that Captain Malyoe was the next heir
to the Devonshire estate, and that she and he were to be married in
the fall.

But, poor Barnaby! what a fool was he, to be sure! Methinks when she
first began to speak about Captain Malyoe he knew what was coming. But
now that she had told him, he could say nothing, but stood there
staring across the ocean, his breath coming hot and dry as ashes in
his throat. She, poor thing, went on to say, in a very low voice, that
she had liked him from the very first moment she had seen him, and had
been very happy for these days, and would always think of him as a
dear friend who had been very kind to her, who had so little pleasure
in life, and so would always remember him.

Then they were both silent, until at last Barnaby made shift to say,
though in a hoarse and croaking voice, that Captain Malyoe must be a
very happy man, and that if he were in Captain Malyoe's place he would
be the happiest man in the world. Thus, having spoken, and so found
his tongue, he went on to tell her, with his head all in a whirl, that
he, too, loved her, and that what she had told him struck him to the
heart, and made him the most miserable, unhappy wretch in the whole
world.

She was not angry at what he said, nor did she turn to look at him,
but only said, in a low voice, he should not talk so, for that it
could only be a pain to them both to speak of such things, and that
whether she would or no, she must do everything as her grandfather
bade her, for that he was indeed a terrible man.

To this poor Barnaby could only repeat that he loved her with all his
heart, that he had hoped for nothing in his love, but that he was now
the most miserable man in the world.

It was at this moment, so tragic for him, that some one who had been
hiding nigh them all the while suddenly moved away, and Barnaby True
could see in the gathering darkness that it was that villain
manservant of Sir John Malyoe's and knew that he must have overheard
all that had been said.

The man went straight to the great cabin, and poor Barnaby, his brain
all atingle, stood looking after him, feeling that now indeed the last
drop of bitterness had been added to his trouble to have such a wretch
overhear what he had said.

The young lady could not have seen the fellow, for she continued
leaning over the rail, and Barnaby True, standing at her side, not
moving, but in such a tumult of many passions that he was like one
bewildered, and his heart beating as though to smother him.

So they stood for I know not how long when, of a sudden, Sir John
Malyoe comes running out of the cabin, without his hat, but carrying
his gold-headed cane, and so straight across the deck to where Barnaby
and the young lady stood, that spying wretch close at his heels,
grinning like an imp.

"You hussy!" bawled out Sir John, so soon as he had come pretty near
them, and in so loud a voice that all on deck might have heard the
words; and as he spoke he waved his cane back and forth as though he
would have struck the young lady, who, shrinking back almost upon the
deck, crouched as though to escape such a blow. "You hussy!" he bawled
out with vile oaths, too horrible here to be set down. "What do you do
here with this Yankee supercargo, not fit for a gentlewoman to wipe
her feet upon? Get to your cabin, you hussy" (only it was something
worse he called her this time), "before I lay this cane across your
shoulders!"

What with the whirling of Barnaby's brains and the passion into which
he was already melted, what with his despair and his love, and his
anger at this address, a man gone mad could scarcely be less
accountable for his actions than was he at that moment. Hardly knowing
what he did, he put his hand against Sir John Malyoe's breast and
thrust him violently back, crying out upon him in a great, loud,
hoarse voice for threatening a young lady, and saying that for a
farthing he would wrench the stick out of his hand and throw it
overboard.

Sir John went staggering back with the push Barnaby gave him, and then
caught himself up again. Then, with a great bellow, ran roaring at our
hero, whirling his cane about, and I do believe would have struck him
(and God knows then what might have happened) had not his manservant
caught him and held him back.

"Keep back!" cried out our hero, still mighty hoarse. "Keep back! If
you strike me with that stick I'll fling you overboard!"

By this time, what with the sound of loud voices and the stamping of
feet, some of the crew and others aboard were hurrying up, and the
next moment Captain Manly and the first mate, Mr. Freesden, came
running out of the cabin. But Barnaby, who was by this fairly set
agoing, could not now stop himself.

"And who are you, anyhow," he cried out, "to threaten to strike me and
to insult me, who am as good as you? You dare not strike me! You may
shoot a man from behind, as you shot poor Captain Brand on the Rio
Cobra River, but you won't dare strike me face to face. I know who you
are and what you are!"

By this time Sir John Malyoe had ceased to endeavor to strike him, but
stood stock-still, his great bulging eyes staring as though they would
pop out of his head.

"What's all this?" cries Captain Manly, bustling up to them with Mr.
Freesden. "What does all this mean?"

But, as I have said, our hero was too far gone now to contain himself
until all that he had to say was out.

"The damned villain insulted me and insulted the young lady," he
cried out, panting in the extremity of his passion, "and then he
threatened to strike me with his cane. But I know who he is and what
he is. I know what he's got in his cabin in those two trunks, and
where he found it, and whom it belongs to. He found it on the shores
of the Rio Cobra River, and I have only to open my mouth and tell what
I know about it."

At this Captain Manly clapped his hand upon our hero's shoulder and
fell to shaking him so that he could scarcely stand, calling out to
him the while to be silent. "What do you mean?" he cried. "An officer
of this ship to quarrel with a passenger of mine! Go straight to your
cabin, and stay there till I give you leave to come out again."

At this Master Barnaby came somewhat back to himself and into his wits
again with a jump. "But he threatened to strike me with his cane,
Captain," he cried out, "and that I won't stand from any man!"

"No matter what he did," said Captain Manly, very sternly. "Go to your
cabin, as I bid you, and stay there till I tell you to come out again,
and when we get to New York I'll take pains to tell your stepfather of
how you have behaved. I'll have no such rioting as this aboard my
ship."

Barnaby True looked around him, but the young lady was gone. Nor, in
the blindness of his frenzy, had he seen when she had gone nor whither
she went. As for Sir John Malyoe, he stood in the light of a lantern,
his face gone as white as ashes, and I do believe if a look could
kill, the dreadful malevolent stare he fixed upon Barnaby True would
have slain him where he stood.

After Captain Manly had so shaken some wits into poor Barnaby he,
unhappy wretch, went to his cabin, as he was bidden to do, and there,
shutting the door upon himself, and flinging himself down, all dressed
as he was, upon his berth, yielded himself over to the profoundest
passion of humiliation and despair.

There he lay for I know not how long, staring into the darkness,
until by and by, in spite of his suffering and his despair, he dozed
off into a loose sleep, that was more like waking than sleep, being
possessed continually by the most vivid and distasteful dreams, from
which he would awaken only to doze off and to dream again.

It was from the midst of one of these extravagant dreams that he was
suddenly aroused by the noise of a pistol shot, and then the noise of
another and another, and then a great bump and a grinding jar, and
then the sound of many footsteps running across the deck and down into
the great cabin. Then came a tremendous uproar of voices in the great
cabin, the struggling as of men's bodies being tossed about, striking
violently against the partitions and bulkheads. At the same instant
arose a screaming of women's voices, and one voice, and that Sir John
Malyoe's, crying out as in the greatest extremity: "You villains! You
damned villains!" and with the sudden detonation of a pistol fired
into the close space of the great cabin.

Barnaby was out in the middle of his cabin in a moment, and taking
only time enough to snatch down one of the pistols that hung at the
head of his berth, flung out into the great cabin, to find it as black
as night, the lantern slung there having been either blown out or
dashed out into darkness. The prodigiously dark space was full of
uproar, the hubbub and confusion pierced through and through by that
keen sound of women's voices screaming, one in the cabin and the other
in the stateroom beyond. Almost immediately Barnaby pitched headlong
over two or three struggling men scuffling together upon the deck,
falling with a great clatter and the loss of his pistol, which,
however, he regained almost immediately.

What all the uproar meant he could not tell, but he presently heard
Captain Manly's voice from somewhere suddenly calling out, "You bloody
pirate, would you choke me to death?" wherewith some notion of what
had happened came to him like a flash, and that they had been attacked
in the night by pirates.

Looking toward the companionway, he saw, outlined against the darkness
of the night without, the blacker form of a man's figure, standing
still and motionless as a statue in the midst of all this hubbub, and
so by some instinct he knew in a moment that that must be the master
maker of all this devil's brew. Therewith, still kneeling upon the
deck, he covered the bosom of that shadowy figure point-blank, as he
thought, with his pistol, and instantly pulled the trigger.

In the flash of red light, and in the instant stunning report of the
pistol shot, Barnaby saw, as stamped upon the blackness, a broad, flat
face with fishy eyes, a lean, bony forehead with what appeared to be a
great blotch of blood upon the side, a cocked hat trimmed with gold
lace, a red scarf across the breast, and the gleam of brass buttons.
Then the darkness, very thick and black, swallowed everything again.

But in the instant Sir John Malyoe called out, in a great loud voice:
"My God! 'Tis William Brand!" Therewith came the sound of some one
falling heavily down.

The next moment, Barnaby's sight coming back to him again in the
darkness, he beheld that dark and motionless figure still standing
exactly where it had stood before, and so knew either that he had
missed it or else that it was of so supernatural a sort that a leaden
bullet might do it no harm. Though if it was indeed an apparition that
Barnaby beheld in that moment, there is this to say, that he saw it as
plain as ever he saw a living man in all of his life.

This was the last our hero knew, for the next moment somebody--whether
by accident or design he never knew--struck him such a terrible
violent blow upon the side of the head that he saw forty thousand
stars flash before his eyeballs, and then, with a great humming in his
head, swooned dead away.

When Barnaby True came back to his senses again it was to find himself
being cared for with great skill and nicety, his head bathed with
cold water, and a bandage being bound about it as carefully as though
a chirurgeon was attending to him.

He could not immediately recall what had happened to him, nor until he
had opened his eyes to find himself in a strange cabin, extremely well
fitted and painted with white and gold, the light of a lantern shining
in his eyes, together with the gray of the early daylight through the
dead-eye. Two men were bending over him--one, a negro in a striped
shirt, with a yellow handkerchief around his head and silver earrings
in his ears; the other, a white man, clad in a strange outlandish
dress of a foreign make, and with great mustachios hanging down, and
with gold earrings in his ears.

It was the latter who was attending to Barnaby's hurt with such
extreme care and gentleness.

All this Barnaby saw with his first clear consciousness after his
swoon. Then remembering what had befallen him, and his head beating as
though it would split asunder, he shut his eyes again, contriving with
great effort to keep himself from groaning aloud, and wondering as to
what sort of pirates these could be who would first knock a man in the
head so terrible a blow as that which he had suffered, and then take
such care to fetch him back to life again, and to make him easy and
comfortable.

Nor did he open his eyes again, but lay there gathering his wits
together and wondering thus until the bandage was properly tied about
his head and sewed together. Then once more he opened his eyes, and
looked up to ask where he was.

Either they who were attending to him did not choose to reply, or else
they could not speak English, for they made no answer, excepting by
signs; for the white man, seeing that he was now able to speak, and so
was come back into his senses again, nodded his head three or four
times, and smiled with a grin of his white teeth, and then pointed, as
though toward a saloon beyond. At the same time the negro held up our
hero's coat and beckoned for him to put it on, so that Barnaby,
seeing that it was required of him to meet some one without, arose,
though with a good deal of effort, and permitted the negro to help him
on with his coat, still feeling mightily dizzy and uncertain upon his
legs, his head beating fit to split, and the vessel rolling and
pitching at a great rate, as though upon a heavy ground swell.

So, still sick and dizzy, he went out into what was indeed a fine
saloon beyond, painted in white and gilt like the cabin he had just
quitted, and fitted in the nicest fashion, a mahogany table, polished
very bright, extending the length of the room, and a quantity of
bottles, together with glasses of clear crystal, arranged in a hanging
rack above.

Here at the table a man was sitting with his back to our hero, clad in
a rough pea-jacket, and with a red handkerchief tied around his
throat, his feet stretched out before him, and he smoking a pipe of
tobacco with all the ease and comfort in the world.

As Barnaby came in he turned round, and, to the profound astonishment
of our hero, presented toward him in the light of the lantern, the
dawn shining pretty strong through the skylight, the face of that very
man who had conducted the mysterious expedition that night across
Kingston Harbor to the Rio Cobra River.

This man looked steadily at Barnaby True for a moment or two, and then
burst out laughing; and, indeed, Barnaby, standing there with the
bandage about his head, must have looked a very droll picture of that
astonishment he felt so profoundly at finding who was this pirate into
whose hands he had fallen.

"Well," says the other, "and so you be up at last, and no great harm
done, I'll be bound. And how does your head feel by now, my young
master?"

To this Barnaby made no reply, but, what with wonder and the dizziness
of his head, seated himself at the table over against the speaker, who
pushed a bottle of rum toward him, together with a glass from the
swinging shelf above.

He watched Barnaby fill his glass, and so soon as he had done so began
immediately by saying: "I do suppose you think you were treated
mightily ill to be so handled last night. Well, so you were treated
ill enough--though who hit you that crack upon the head I know no more
than a child unborn. Well, I am sorry for the way you were handled,
but there is this much to say, and of that you may believe me, that
nothing was meant to you but kindness, and before you are through with
us all you will believe that well enough."

Here he helped himself to a taste of grog, and sucking in his lips,
went on again with what he had to say. "Do you remember," said he,
"that expedition of ours in Kingston Harbor, and how we were all of us
balked that night?"

"Why, yes," said Barnaby True, "nor am I likely to forget it."

"And do you remember what I said to that villain, Jack Malyoe, that
night as his boat went by us?"

"As to that," said Barnaby True, "I do not know that I can say yes or
no, but if you will tell me, I will maybe answer you in kind."

"Why, I mean this," said the other. "I said that the villain had got
the better of us once again, but that next time it would be our turn,
even if William Brand himself had to come back from hell to put the
business through."

"I remember something of the sort," said Barnaby, "now that you speak
of it, but still I am all in the dark as to what you are driving at."

The other looked at him very cunningly for a little while, his head on
one side, and his eyes half shut. Then, as if satisfied, he suddenly
burst out laughing. "Look hither," said he, "and I'll show you
something," and therewith, moving to one side, disclosed a couple of
traveling cases or small trunks with brass studs, so exactly like
those that Sir John Malyoe had fetched aboard at Jamaica that
Barnaby, putting this and that together, knew that they must be the
same.

Our hero had a strong enough suspicion as to what those two cases
contained, and his suspicions had become a certainty when he saw Sir
John Malyoe struck all white at being threatened about them, and his
face lowering so malevolently as to look murder had he dared do it.
But, Lord! what were suspicions or even certainty to what Barnaby
True's two eyes beheld when that man lifted the lids of the two
cases--the locks thereof having already been forced--and, flinging
back first one lid and then the other, displayed to Barnaby's
astonished sight a great treasure of gold and silver! Most of it tied
up in leathern bags, to be sure, but many of the coins, big and
little, yellow and white, lying loose and scattered about like so many
beans, brimming the cases to the very top.

Barnaby sat dumb-struck at what he beheld; as to whether he breathed
or no, I cannot tell; but this I know, that he sat staring at that
marvelous treasure like a man in a trance, until, after a few seconds
of this golden display, the other banged down the lids again and burst
out laughing, whereupon he came back to himself with a jump.

"Well, and what do you think of that?" said the other. "Is it not
enough for a man to turn pirate for? But," he continued, "it is not
for the sake of showing you this that I have been waiting for you here
so long a while, but to tell you that you are not the only passenger
aboard, but that there is another, whom I am to confide to your care
and attention, according to orders I have received; so, if you are
ready, Master Barnaby, I'll fetch her in directly." He waited for a
moment, as though for Barnaby to speak, but our hero not replying, he
arose and, putting away the bottle of rum and the glasses, crossed the
saloon to a door like that from which Barnaby had come a little while
before. This he opened, and after a moment's delay and a few words
spoken to some one within, ushered thence a young lady, who came out
very slowly into the saloon where Barnaby still sat at the table.

It was Miss Marjorie Malyoe, very white, and looking as though stunned
or bewildered by all that had befallen her.

Barnaby True could never tell whether the amazing strange voyage that
followed was of long or of short duration; whether it occupied three
days or ten days. For conceive, if you choose, two people of flesh and
blood moving and living continually in all the circumstances and
surroundings as of a nightmare dream, yet they two so happy together
that all the universe beside was of no moment to them! How was anyone
to tell whether in such circumstances any time appeared to be long or
short? Does a dream appear to be long or to be short?

The vessel in which they sailed was a brigantine of good size and
build, but manned by a considerable crew, the most strange and
outlandish in their appearance that Barnaby had ever beheld--some
white, some yellow, some black, and all tricked out with gay colors,
and gold earrings in their ears, and some with great long mustachios,
and others with handkerchiefs tied around their heads, and all talking
a language together of which Barnaby True could understand not a
single word, but which might have been Portuguese from one or two
phrases he caught. Nor did this strange, mysterious crew, of God knows
what sort of men, seem to pay any attention whatever to Barnaby or to
the young lady. They might now and then have looked at him and her out
of the corners of their yellow eyes, but that was all; otherwise they
were indeed like the creatures of a nightmare dream. Only he who was
the captain of this outlandish crew would maybe speak to Barnaby a few
words as to the weather or what not when he would come down into the
saloon to mix a glass of grog or to light a pipe of tobacco, and then
to go on deck again about his business. Otherwise our hero and the
young lady were left to themselves, to do as they pleased, with no one
to interfere with them.

[Illustration: "She Would Sit Quite Still, Permitting Barnaby to Gaze"

_Illustration from_
THE GHOST OF CAPTAIN BRAND

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S WEEKLY, _December 19, 1896_]

As for her, she at no time showed any great sign of terror or of fear,
only for a little while was singularly numb and quiet, as though dazed
with what had happened to her. Indeed, methinks that wild beast, her
grandfather, had so crushed her spirit by his tyranny and his violence
that nothing that happened to her might seem sharp and keen, as it
does to others of an ordinary sort.

But this was only at first, for afterward her face began to grow
singularly clear, as with a white light, and she would sit quite
still, permitting Barnaby to gaze, I know not how long, into her eyes,
her face so transfigured and her lips smiling, and they, as it were,
neither of them breathing, but hearing, as in another far-distant
place, the outlandish jargon of the crew talking together in the warm,
bright sunlight, or the sound of creaking block and tackle as they
hauled upon the sheets.

Is it, then, any wonder that Barnaby True could never remember whether
such a voyage as this was long or short?

It was as though they might have sailed so upon that wonderful voyage
forever. You may guess how amazed was Barnaby True when, coming upon
deck one morning, he found the brigantine riding upon an even keel, at
anchor off Staten Island, a small village on the shore, and the
well-known roofs and chimneys of New York town in plain sight across
the water.

'Twas the last place in the world he had expected to see.

And, indeed, it did seem strange to lie there alongside Staten Island
all that day, with New York town so nigh at hand and yet so impossible
to reach. For whether he desired to escape or no, Barnaby True could
not but observe that both he and the young lady were so closely
watched that they might as well have been prisoners, tied hand and
foot and laid in the hold, so far as any hope of getting away was
concerned.

All that day there was a deal of mysterious coming and going aboard
the brigantine, and in the afternoon a sailboat went up to the town,
carrying the captain, and a great load covered over with a tarpaulin
in the stern. What was so taken up to the town Barnaby did not then
guess, but the boat did not return again till about sundown.

For the sun was just dropping below the water when the captain came
aboard once more and, finding Barnaby on deck, bade him come down into
the saloon, where they found the young lady sitting, the broad light
of the evening shining in through the skylight, and making it all
pretty bright within.

The captain commanded Barnaby to be seated, for he had something of
moment to say to him; whereupon, as soon as Barnaby had taken his
place alongside the young lady, he began very seriously, with a
preface somewhat thus: "Though you may think me the captain of this
brigantine, young gentleman, I am not really so, but am under orders,
and so have only carried out those orders of a superior in all these
things that I have done." Having so begun, he went on to say that
there was one thing yet remaining for him to do, and that the greatest
thing of all. He said that Barnaby and the young lady had not been
fetched away from the _Belle Helen_ as they were by any mere chance of
accident, but that 'twas all a plan laid by a head wiser than his, and
carried out by one whom he must obey in all things. He said that he
hoped that both Barnaby and the young lady would perform willingly
what they would be now called upon to do, but that whether they did it
willingly or no, they must, for that those were the orders of one who
was not to be disobeyed.

You may guess how our hero held his breath at all this; but whatever
might have been his expectations, the very wildest of them all did not
reach to that which was demanded of him. "My orders are these," said
the other, continuing: "I am to take you and the young lady ashore,
and to see that you are married before I quit you; and to that end a
very good, decent, honest minister who lives ashore yonder in the
village was chosen and hath been spoken to and is now, no doubt,
waiting for you to come. Such are my orders, and this is the last
thing I am set to do; so now I will leave you alone together for five
minutes to talk it over, but be quick about it, for whether willing or
not, this thing must be done."

Thereupon he went away, as he had promised, leaving those two alone
together, Barnaby like one turned into stone, and the young lady, her
face turned away, flaming as red as fire in the fading light.

Nor can I tell what Barnaby said to her, nor what words he used, but
only, all in a tumult, with neither beginning nor end he told her that
God knew he loved her, and that with all his heart and soul, and that
there was nothing in all the world for him but her; but, nevertheless,
if she would not have it as had been ordered, and if she were not
willing to marry him as she was bidden to do, he would rather die than
lend himself to forcing her to do such a thing against her will.
Nevertheless, he told her she must speak up and tell him yes or no,
and that God knew he would give all the world if she would say "yes."

All this and more he said in such a tumult of words that there was no
order in their speaking, and she sitting there, her bosom rising and
falling as though her breath stifled her. Nor may I tell what she
replied to him, only this, that she said she would marry him. At this
he took her into his arms and set his lips to hers, his heart all
melting away in his bosom.

So presently came the captain back into the saloon again, to find
Barnaby sitting there holding her hand, she with her face turned away,
and his heart beating like a trip hammer, and so saw that all was
settled as he would have it. Wherewith he wished them both joy, and
gave Barnaby his hand.

The yawlboat belonging to the brigantine was ready and waiting
alongside when they came upon deck, and immediately they descended to
it and took their seats. So they landed, and in a little while were
walking up the village street in the darkness, she clinging to his
arm as though she would swoon, and the captain of the brigantine and
two other men from aboard following after them. And so to the
minister's house, finding him waiting for them, smoking his pipe in
the warm evening, and walking up and down in front of his own door. He
immediately conducted them into the house, where, his wife having
fetched a candle, and two others of the village folk being present,
the good man having asked several questions as to their names and
their age and where they were from, the ceremony was performed, and
the certificate duly signed by those present--excepting the men who
had come ashore from the brigantine, and who refused to set their
hands to any paper.

The same sailboat that had taken the captain up to the town in the
afternoon was waiting for them at the landing place, whence, the
captain, having wished them Godspeed, and having shaken Barnaby very
heartily by the hand, they pushed off, and, coming about, ran away
with the slant of the wind, dropping the shore and those strange
beings alike behind them into the night.

As they sped away through the darkness they could hear the creaking of
the sails being hoisted aboard of the brigantine, and so knew that she
was about to put to sea once more. Nor did Barnaby True ever set eyes
upon those beings again, nor did anyone else that I ever heard tell
of.

It was nigh midnight when they made Mr. Hartright's wharf at the foot
of Wall Street, and so the streets were all dark and silent and
deserted as they walked up to Barnaby's home.

You may conceive of the wonder and amazement of Barnaby's dear
stepfather when, clad in a dressing gown and carrying a lighted candle
in his hand, he unlocked and unbarred the door, and so saw who it was
had aroused him at such an hour of the night, and the young and
beautiful lady whom Barnaby had fetched with him.

The first thought of the good man was that the _Belle Helen_ had come
into port; nor did Barnaby undeceive him as he led the way into the
house, but waited until they were all safe and sound in privity
together before he should unfold his strange and wonderful story.

"This was left for you by two foreign sailors this afternoon,
Barnaby," the good old man said, as he led the way through the hall,
holding up the candle at the same time, so that Barnaby might see an
object that stood against the wainscoting by the door of the dining
room.

Nor could Barnaby refrain from crying out with amazement when he saw
that it was one of the two chests of treasure that Sir John Malyoe had
fetched from Jamaica, and which the pirates had taken from the _Belle
Helen_. As for Mr. Hartright, he guessed no more what was in it than
the man in the moon.

The next day but one brought the _Belle Helen_ herself into port, with
the terrible news not only of having been attacked at night by
pirates, but also that Sir John Malyoe was dead. For whether it was
the sudden shock of the sight of his old captain's face--whom he
himself had murdered and thought dead and buried--flashing so out
against the darkness, or whether it was the strain of passion that
overset his brains, certain it is that when the pirates left the
_Belle Helen_, carrying with them the young lady and Barnaby and the
traveling trunks, those left aboard the _Belle Helen_ found Sir John
Malyoe lying in a fit upon the floor, frothing at the mouth and black
in the face, as though he had been choked, and so took him away to his
berth, where, the next morning about ten o'clock, he died, without
once having opened his eyes or spoken a single word.

As for the villain manservant, no one ever saw him afterward; though
whether he jumped overboard, or whether the pirates who so attacked
the ship had carried him away bodily, who shall say?

Mr. Hartright, after he had heard Barnaby's story, had been very
uncertain as to the ownership of the chest of treasure that had been
left by those men for Barnaby, but the news of the death of Sir John
Malyoe made the matter very easy for him to decide. For surely if
that treasure did not belong to Barnaby, there could be no doubt that
it must belong to his wife, she being Sir John Malyoe's legal heir.
And so it was that that great fortune (in actual computation amounting
to upward of sixty-three thousand pounds) came to Barnaby True, the
grandson of that famous pirate, William Brand; the English estate in
Devonshire, in default of male issue of Sir John Malyoe, descended to
Captain Malyoe, whom the young lady was to have married.

As for the other case of treasure, it was never heard of again, nor
could Barnaby ever guess whether it was divided as booty among the
pirates, or whether they had carried it away with them to some strange
and foreign land, there to share it among themselves.

And so the ending of the story, with only this to observe, that
whether that strange appearance of Captain Brand's face by the light
of the pistol was a ghostly and spiritual appearance, or whether he
was present in flesh and blood, there is only to say that he was never
heard of again; nor had he ever been heard of till that time since the
day he was so shot from behind by Capt. John Malyoe on the banks of
the Rio Cobra River in the year 1733.




Chapter III

WITH THE BUCCANEERS

_Being an Account of Certain Adventures that Befell Henry Mostyn Under
Capt. H. Morgan in the Year 1665-66_

[Illustration]


I

Although this narration has more particularly to do with the taking of
the Spanish vice admiral in the harbor of Porto Bello, and of the
rescue therefrom of Le Sieur Simon, his wife and daughter (the
adventure of which was successfully achieved by Captain Morgan, the
famous buccaneer), we shall, nevertheless, premise something of the
earlier history of Master Harry Mostyn, whom you may, if you please,
consider as the hero of the several circumstances recounted in these
pages.

In the year 1664 our hero's father embarked from Portsmouth, in
England, for the Barbados, where he owned a considerable sugar
plantation. Thither to those parts of America he transported with
himself his whole family, of whom our Master Harry was the fifth of
eight children--a great lusty fellow as little fitted for the Church
(for which he was designed) as could be. At the time of this story,
though not above sixteen years old, Master Harry Mostyn was as big and
well-grown as many a man of twenty, and of such a reckless and
dare-devil spirit that no adventure was too dangerous or too
mischievous for him to embark upon.

At this time there was a deal of talk in those parts of the Americas
concerning Captain Morgan, and the prodigious successes he was having
pirating against the Spaniards.

This man had once been an indentured servant with Mr. Rolls, a sugar
factor at the Barbados. Having served out his time, and being of
lawless disposition, possessing also a prodigious appetite for
adventure, he joined with others of his kidney, and, purchasing a
caravel of three guns, embarked fairly upon that career of piracy the
most successful that ever was heard of in the world.

Master Harry had known this man very well while he was still with Mr.
Rolls, serving as a clerk at that gentleman's sugar wharf, a tall,
broad-shouldered, strapping fellow, with red cheeks, and thick red
lips, and rolling blue eyes, and hair as red as any chestnut. Many
knew him for a bold, gruff-spoken man, but no one at that time
suspected that he had it in him to become so famous and renowned as he
afterward grew to be.

The fame of his exploits had been the talk of those parts for above a
twelvemonth, when, in the latter part of the year 1665, Captain
Morgan, having made a very successful expedition against the Spaniards
into the Gulf of Campeche--where he took several important purchases
from the plate fleet--came to the Barbados, there to fit out another
such venture, and to enlist recruits.

He and certain other adventurers had purchased a vessel of some five
hundred tons, which they proposed to convert into a pirate by cutting
portholes for cannon, and running three or four carronades across her
main deck. The name of this ship, be it mentioned, was the _Good
Samaritan_, as ill-fitting a name as could be for such a craft, which,
instead of being designed for the healing of wounds, was intended
to inflict such devastation as those wicked men proposed.

[Illustration: BURIED TREASURE]

Here was a piece of mischief exactly fitted to our hero's tastes;
wherefore, having made up a bundle of clothes, and with not above a
shilling in his pocket, he made an excursion into the town to seek for
Captain Morgan. There he found the great pirate established at an
ordinary, with a little court of ragamuffins and swashbucklers
gathered about him, all talking very loud, and drinking healths in raw
rum as though it were sugared water.

And what a fine figure our buccaneer had grown, to be sure! How
different from the poor, humble clerk upon the sugar wharf! What a
deal of gold braid! What a fine, silver-hilted Spanish sword! What a
gay velvet sling, hung with three silver-mounted pistols! If Master
Harry's mind had not been made up before, to be sure such a spectacle
of glory would have determined it.

This figure of war our hero asked to step aside with him, and when
they had come into a corner, proposed to the other what he intended,
and that he had a mind to enlist as a gentleman adventurer upon this
expedition. Upon this our rogue of a buccaneer captain burst out
a-laughing, and fetching Master Harry a great thump upon the back,
swore roundly that he would make a man of him, and that it was a pity
to make a parson out of so good a piece of stuff.

Nor was Captain Morgan less good than his word, for when the _Good
Samaritan_ set sail with a favoring wind for the island of Jamaica,
Master Harry found himself established as one of the adventurers
aboard.


II

Could you but have seen the town of Port Royal as it appeared in the
year 1665 you would have beheld a sight very well worth while looking
upon. There were no fine houses at that time, and no great counting
houses built of brick, such as you may find nowadays, but a crowd of
board and wattled huts huddled along the streets, and all so gay with
flags and bits of color that Vanity Fair itself could not have been
gayer. To this place came all the pirates and buccaneers that infested
those parts, and men shouted and swore and gambled, and poured out
money like water, and then maybe wound up their merrymaking by dying
of fever. For the sky in these torrid latitudes is all full of clouds
overhead, and as hot as any blanket, and when the sun shone forth it
streamed down upon the smoking sands so that the houses were ovens and
the streets were furnaces; so it was little wonder that men died like
rats in a hole. But little they appeared to care for that; so that
everywhere you might behold a multitude of painted women and Jews and
merchants and pirates, gaudy with red scarfs and gold braid and all
sorts of odds and ends of foolish finery, all fighting and gambling
and bartering for that ill-gotten treasure of the be-robbed Spaniard.

Here, arriving, Captain Morgan found a hearty welcome, and a message
from the governor awaiting him, the message bidding him attend His
Excellency upon the earliest occasion that offered. Whereupon, taking
our hero (of whom he had grown prodigiously fond) along with him, our
pirate went, without any loss of time, to visit Sir Thomas Modiford,
who was then the royal governor of all this devil's brew of
wickedness.

They found His Excellency seated in a great easy-chair, under the
shadow of a slatted veranda, the floor whereof was paved with brick.
He was clad, for the sake of coolness, only in his shirt, breeches,
and stockings, and he wore slippers on his feet. He was smoking a
great cigarro of tobacco, and a goblet of lime juice and water and rum
stood at his elbow on a table. Here, out of the glare of the heat, it
was all very cool and pleasant, with a sea breeze blowing violently in
through the slats, setting them a-rattling now and then, and stirring
Sir Thomas's long hair, which he had pushed back for the sake of
coolness.

The purport of this interview, I may tell you, concerned the rescue of
one Le Sieur Simon, who, together with his wife and daughter, was held
captive by the Spaniards.

[Illustration]

This gentleman adventurer (Le Sieur Simon) had, a few years before,
been set up by the buccaneers as governor of the island of Santa
Catharina. This place, though well fortified by the Spaniards, the
buccaneers had seized upon, establishing themselves thereon, and so
infesting the commerce of those seas that no Spanish fleet was safe
from them. At last the Spaniards, no longer able to endure these
assaults against their commerce, sent a great force against the
freebooters to drive them out of their island stronghold. This they
did, retaking Santa Catharina, together with its governor, his wife,
and daughter, as well as the whole garrison of buccaneers.

This garrison was sent by their conquerors, some to the galleys, some
to the mines, some to no man knows where. The governor himself--Le
Sieur Simon--was to be sent to Spain, there to stand his trial for
piracy.

The news of all this, I may tell you, had only just been received in
Jamaica, having been brought thither by a Spanish captain, one Don
Roderiguez Sylvia, who was, besides, the bearer of dispatches to the
Spanish authorities relating the whole affair.

Such, in fine, was the purport of this interview, and as our hero and
his captain walked back together from the governor's house to the
ordinary where they had taken up their inn, the buccaneer assured his
companion that he purposed to obtain those dispatches from the Spanish
captain that very afternoon, even if he had to use force to seize
them.

All this, you are to understand, was undertaken only because of the
friendship that the governor and Captain Morgan entertained for Le
Sieur Simon. And, indeed, it was wonderful how honest and how faithful
were these wicked men in their dealings with one another. For you must
know that Governor Modiford and Le Sieur Simon and the buccaneers were
all of one kidney--all taking a share in the piracies of those times,
and all holding by one another as though they were the honestest men
in the world. Hence it was they were all so determined to rescue Le
Sieur Simon from the Spaniards.


III

Having reached his ordinary after his interview with the governor,
Captain Morgan found there a number of his companions, such as usually
gathered at that place to be in attendance upon him--some, those
belonging to the _Good Samaritan_; others, those who hoped to obtain
benefits from him; others, those ragamuffins who gathered around him
because he was famous, and because it pleased them to be of his court
and to be called his followers. For nearly always your successful
pirate had such a little court surrounding him.

Finding a dozen or more of these rascals gathered there, Captain
Morgan informed them of his present purpose--that he was going to find
the Spanish captain to demand his papers of him, and calling upon them
to accompany him.

With this following at his heels, our buccaneer started off down the
street, his lieutenant, a Cornishman named Bartholomew Davis, upon one
hand and our hero upon the other. So they paraded the streets for the
best part of an hour before they found the Spanish captain. For
whether he had got wind that Captain Morgan was searching for him, or
whether, finding himself in a place so full of his enemies, he had
buried himself in some place of hiding, it is certain that the
buccaneers had traversed pretty nearly the whole town before they
discovered that he was lying at a certain auberge kept by a Portuguese
Jew. Thither they went, and thither Captain Morgan entered with the
utmost coolness and composure of demeanor, his followers crowding
noisily in at his heels.

The space within was very dark, being lighted only by the doorway and
by two large slatted windows or openings in the front.

In this dark, hot place--not over-roomy at the best--were gathered
twelve or fifteen villainous-appearing men, sitting at tables and
drinking together, waited upon by the Jew and his wife. Our hero had
no trouble in discovering which of this lot of men was Captain Sylvia,
for not only did Captain Morgan direct his glance full of war upon
him, but the Spaniard was clad with more particularity and with more
show of finery than any of the others who were there.

Him Captain Morgan approached and demanded his papers, whereunto the
other replied with such a jabber of Spanish and English that no man
could have understood what he said. To this Captain Morgan in turn
replied that he must have those papers, no matter what it might cost
him to obtain them, and thereupon drew a pistol from his sling and
presented it at the other's head.

At this threatening action the innkeeper's wife fell a-screaming, and
the Jew, as in a frenzy, besought them not to tear the house down
about his ears.

Our hero could hardly tell what followed, only that all of a sudden
there was a prodigious uproar of combat. Knives flashed everywhere,
and then a pistol was fired so close to his head that he stood like
one stunned, hearing some one crying out in a loud voice, but not
knowing whether it was a friend or a foe who had been shot. Then
another pistol shot so deafened what was left of Master Harry's
hearing that his ears rang for above an hour afterward. By this time
the whole place was full of gunpowder smoke, and there was the sound
of blows and oaths and outcrying and the clashing of knives.

As Master Harry, who had no great stomach for such a combat, and no
very particular interest in the quarrel, was making for the door, a
little Portuguese, as withered and as nimble as an ape, came ducking
under the table and plunged at his stomach with a great long knife,
which, had it effected its object, would surely have ended his
adventures then and there. Finding himself in such danger, Master
Harry snatched up a heavy chair, and, flinging it at his enemy, who
was preparing for another attack, he fairly ran for it out of the
door, expecting every instant to feel the thrust of the blade betwixt
his ribs.

A considerable crowd had gathered outside, and others, hearing the
uproar, were coming running to join them. With these our hero stood,
trembling like a leaf, and with cold chills running up and down his
back like water at the narrow escape from the danger that had
threatened him.

Nor shall you think him a coward, for you must remember he was hardly
sixteen years old at the time, and that this was the first affair of
the sort he had encountered. Afterward, as you shall learn, he showed
that he could exhibit courage enough at a pinch.

While he stood there, endeavoring to recover his composure, the while
the tumult continued within, suddenly two men came running almost
together out of the door, a crowd of the combatants at their heels.
The first of these men was Captain Sylvia; the other, who was pursuing
him, was Captain Morgan.

As the crowd about the door parted before the sudden appearing of
these, the Spanish captain, perceiving, as he supposed, a way of
escape opened to him, darted across the street with incredible
swiftness toward an alleyway upon the other side. Upon this, seeing
his prey like to get away from him, Captain Morgan snatched a pistol
out of his sling, and resting it for an instant across his arm, fired
at the flying Spaniard, and that with so true an aim that, though the
street was now full of people, the other went tumbling over and over
all of a heap in the kennel, where he lay, after a twitch or two, as
still as a log.

At the sound of the shot and the fall of the man the crowd scattered
upon all sides, yelling and screaming, and the street being thus
pretty clear, Captain Morgan ran across the way to where his victim
lay, his smoking pistol still in his hand, and our hero following
close at his heels.

Our poor Harry had never before beheld a man killed thus in an instant
who a moment before had been so full of life and activity, for when
Captain Morgan turned the body over upon its back he could perceive at
a glance, little as he knew of such matters, that the man was
stone-dead. And, indeed, it was a dreadful sight for him who was
hardly more than a child. He stood rooted for he knew not how long,
staring down at the dead face with twitching fingers and shuddering
limbs. Meantime a great crowd was gathering about them again.

[Illustration]

As for Captain Morgan, he went about his work with the utmost coolness
and deliberation imaginable, unbuttoning the waistcoat and the shirt
of the man he had murdered with fingers that neither twitched nor
shook. There were a gold cross and a bunch of silver medals hung by a
whipcord about the neck of the dead man. This Captain Morgan broke
away with a snap, reaching the jingling baubles to Harry, who took
them in his nerveless hand and fingers that he could hardly close upon
what they held.

The papers Captain Morgan found in a wallet in an inner breast pocket
of the Spaniard's waistcoat. These he examined one by one, and finding
them to his satisfaction, tied them up again, and slipped the wallet
and its contents into his own pocket.

Then for the first time he appeared to observe Master Harry, who,
indeed, must have been standing, the perfect picture of horror and
dismay. Whereupon, bursting out a-laughing, and slipping the pistol he
had used back into its sling again, he fetched poor Harry a great slap
upon the back, bidding him be a man, for that he would see many such
sights as this.

But indeed, it was no laughing matter for poor Master Harry, for it
was many a day before his imagination could rid itself of the image of
the dead Spaniard's face; and as he walked away down the street with
his companions, leaving the crowd behind them, and the dead body where
it lay for its friends to look after, his ears humming and ringing
from the deafening noise of the pistol shots fired in the close room,
and the sweat trickling down his face in drops, he knew not whether
all that had passed had been real, or whether it was a dream from
which he might presently awaken.


IV

The papers Captain Morgan had thus seized upon as the fruit of the
murder he had committed must have been as perfectly satisfactory to
him as could be, for having paid a second visit that evening to
Governor Modiford, the pirate lifted anchor the next morning and made
sail toward the Gulf of Darien. There, after cruising about in those
waters for about a fortnight without falling in with a vessel of
any sort, at the end of that time they overhauled a caravel bound from
Porto Bello to Cartagena, which vessel they took, and finding her
loaded with nothing better than raw hides, scuttled and sank her,
being then about twenty leagues from the main of Cartagena. From the
captain of this vessel they learned that the plate fleet was then
lying in the harbor of Porto Bello, not yet having set sail thence,
but waiting for the change of the winds before embarking for Spain.
Besides this, which was a good deal more to their purpose, the
Spaniards told the pirates that the Sieur Simon, his wife, and
daughter were confined aboard the vice admiral of that fleet, and that
the name of the vice admiral was the _Santa Maria y Valladolid_.

[Illustration: KIDD ON THE DECK OF THE _Adventure Galley_]

So soon as Captain Morgan had obtained the information he desired he
directed his course straight for the Bay of Santo Blaso, where he
might lie safely within the cape of that name without any danger of
discovery (that part of the mainland being entirely uninhabited) and
yet be within twenty or twenty-five leagues of Porto Bello.

Having come safely to this anchorage, he at once declared his
intentions to his companions, which were as follows:

That it was entirely impossible for them to hope to sail their vessel
into the harbor of Porto Bello, and to attack the Spanish vice admiral
where he lay in the midst of the armed flota; wherefore, if anything
was to be accomplished, it must be undertaken by some subtle design
rather than by open-handed boldness. Having so prefaced what he had to
say, he now declared that it was his purpose to take one of the ship's
boats and to go in that to Porto Bello, trusting for some opportunity
to occur to aid him either in the accomplishment of his aims or in the
gaining of some further information. Having thus delivered himself, he
invited any who dared to do so to volunteer for the expedition,
telling them plainly that he would constrain no man to go against his
will, for that at best it was a desperate enterprise, possessing only
the recommendation that in its achievement the few who undertook it
would gain great renown, and perhaps a very considerable booty.

And such was the incredible influence of this bold man over his
companions, and such was their confidence in his skill and cunning,
that not above a dozen of all those aboard hung back from the
undertaking, but nearly every man desired to be taken.

Of these volunteers Captain Morgan chose twenty--among others our
Master Harry--and having arranged with his lieutenant that if nothing
was heard from the expedition at the end of three days he should sail
for Jamaica to await news, he embarked upon that enterprise, which,
though never heretofore published, was perhaps the boldest and the
most desperate of all those that have since made his name so famous.
For what could be a more unparalleled undertaking than for a little
open boat, containing but twenty men, to enter the harbor of the third
strongest fortress of the Spanish mainland with the intention of
cutting out the Spanish vice admiral from the midst of a whole fleet
of powerfully armed vessels, and how many men in all the world do you
suppose would venture such a thing?

But there is this to be said of that great buccaneer: that if he
undertook enterprises so desperate as this, he yet laid his plans so
well that they never went altogether amiss. Moreover, the very
desperation of his successes was of such a nature that no man could
suspect that he would dare to undertake such things, and accordingly
his enemies were never prepared to guard against his attacks. Aye, had
he but worn the king's colors and served under the rules of honest
war, he might have become as great and as renowned as Admiral Blake
himself.

But all that is neither here nor there; what I have to tell you now is
that Captain Morgan in this open boat with his twenty mates reached
the Cape of Salmedina toward the fall of day. Arriving within view of
the harbor they discovered the plate fleet at anchor, with two
men-of-war and an armed galley riding as a guard at the mouth of the
harbor, scarce half a league distant from the other ships. Having
spied the fleet in this posture, the pirates presently pulled down
their sails and rowed along the coast, feigning to be a Spanish vessel
from Nombre de Dios. So hugging the shore, they came boldly within the
harbor, upon the opposite side of which you might see the fortress a
considerable distance away.

Being now come so near to the consummation of their adventure, Captain
Morgan required every man to make an oath to stand by him to the last,
whereunto our hero swore as heartily as any man aboard, although his
heart, I must needs confess, was beating at a great rate at the
approach of what was to happen. Having thus received the oaths of all
his followers, Captain Morgan commanded the surgeon of the expedition
that, when the order was given, he, the medico, was to bore six holes
in the boat, so that, it sinking under them, they might all be
compelled to push forward, with no chance of retreat. And such was the
ascendancy of this man over his followers, and such was their awe of
him, that not one of them uttered even so much as a murmur, though
what he had commanded the surgeon to do pledged them either to victory
or to death, with no chance to choose between. Nor did the surgeon
question the orders he had received, much less did he dream of
disobeying them.

By now it had fallen pretty dusk, whereupon, spying two fishermen in a
canoe at a little distance, Captain Morgan demanded of them in Spanish
which vessel of those at anchor in the harbor was the vice admiral,
for that he had dispatches for the captain thereof. Whereupon the
fishermen, suspecting nothing, pointed to them a galleon of great size
riding at anchor not half a league distant.

[Illustration]

Toward this vessel accordingly the pirates directed their course, and
when they had come pretty nigh, Captain Morgan called upon the surgeon
that now it was time for him to perform the duty that had been laid
upon him. Whereupon the other did as he was ordered, and that so
thoroughly that the water presently came gushing into the boat in
great streams, whereat all hands pulled for the galleon as though
every next moment was to be their last.

And what do you suppose were our hero's emotions at this time? Like
all in the boat, his awe of Captain Morgan was so great that I do
believe he would rather have gone to the bottom than have questioned
his command, even when it was to scuttle the boat. Nevertheless, when
he felt the cold water gushing about his feet (for he had taken off
his shoes and stockings) he became possessed with such a fear of being
drowned that even the Spanish galleon had no terrors for him if he
could only feel the solid planks thereof beneath his feet.

Indeed, all the crew appeared to be possessed of a like dismay, for
they pulled at the oars with such an incredible force that they were
under the quarter of the galleon before the boat was half filled with
water.

Here, as they approached, it then being pretty dark and the moon not
yet having risen, the watch upon the deck hailed them, whereupon
Captain Morgan called out in Spanish that he was Capt. Alvarez
Mendazo, and that he brought dispatches for the vice admiral.

But at that moment, the boat being now so full of water as to be
logged, it suddenly tilted upon one side as though to sink beneath
them, whereupon all hands, without further orders, went scrambling up
the side, as nimble as so many monkeys, each armed with a pistol in
one hand and a cutlass in the other, and so were upon deck before the
watch could collect his wits to utter any outcry or to give any other
alarm than to cry out, "Jesu bless us! who are these?" at which words
somebody knocked him down with the butt of a pistol, though who it was
our hero could not tell in the darkness and the hurry.

Before any of those upon deck could recover from their alarm or those
from below come up upon deck, a part of the pirates, under the
carpenter and the surgeon, had run to the gun room and had taken
possession of the arms, while Captain Morgan, with Master Harry and a
Portuguese called Murillo Braziliano, had flown with the speed of the
wind into the great cabin.

Here they found the captain of the vice admiral playing at cards with
the Sieur Simon and a friend, Madam Simon and her daughter being
present.

Captain Morgan instantly set his pistol at the breast of the Spanish
captain, swearing with a most horrible fierce countenance that if he
spake a word or made any outcry he was a dead man. As for our hero,
having now got his hand into the game, he performed the same service
for the Spaniard's friend, declaring he would shoot him dead if he
opened his lips or lifted so much as a single finger.

All this while the ladies, not comprehending what had occurred, had
sat as mute as stones; but now having so far recovered themselves as
to find a voice, the younger of the two fell to screaming, at which
the Sieur Simon called out to her to be still, for these were friends
who had come to help them, and not enemies who had come to harm them.

All this, you are to understand, occupied only a little while, for in
less than a minute three or four of the pirates had come into the
cabin, who, together with the Portuguese, proceeded at once to bind
the two Spaniards hand and foot, and to gag them. This being done to
our buccaneer's satisfaction, and the Spanish captain being stretched
out in the corner of the cabin, he instantly cleared his countenance
of its terrors, and bursting forth into a great loud laugh, clapped
his hand to the Sieur Simon's, which he wrung with the best will in
the world. Having done this, and being in a fine humor after this his
first success, he turned to the two ladies. "And this, ladies," said
he, taking our hero by the hand and presenting him, "is a young
gentleman who has embarked with me to learn the trade of piracy. I
recommend him to your politeness."

Think what a confusion this threw our Master Harry into, to be sure,
who at his best was never easy in the company of strange ladies! You
may suppose what must have been his emotions to find himself thus
introduced to the attention of Madam Simon and her daughter, being at
the time in his bare feet, clad only in his shirt and breeches, and
with no hat upon his head, a pistol in one hand and a cutlass in the
other. However, he was not left for long to his embarrassments, for
almost immediately after he had thus far relaxed, Captain Morgan fell
of a sudden serious again, and bidding the Sieur Simon to get his
ladies away into some place of safety, for the most hazardous part of
this adventure was yet to occur, he quitted the cabin with Master
Harry and the other pirates (for you may call him a pirate now) at his
heels.

Having come upon deck, our hero beheld that a part of the Spanish crew
were huddled forward in a flock like so many sheep (the others being
crowded below with the hatches fastened upon them), and such was the
terror of the pirates, and so dreadful the name of Henry Morgan, that
not one of those poor wretches dared to lift up his voice to give any
alarm, nor even to attempt an escape by jumping overboard.

At Captain Morgan's orders, these men, together with certain of his
own company, ran nimbly aloft and began setting the sails, which, the
night now having fallen pretty thick, was not for a good while
observed by any of the vessels riding at anchor about them.

Indeed, the pirates might have made good their escape, with at most
only a shot or two from the men-of-war, had it not then been about the
full of the moon, which, having arisen, presently discovered to those
of the fleet that lay closest about them what was being done aboard
the vice admiral.

At this one of the vessels hailed them, and then after a while, having
no reply, hailed them again. Even then the Spaniards might not
immediately have suspected anything was amiss but only that the vice
admiral for some reason best known to himself was shifting his
anchorage, had not one of the Spaniards aloft--but who it was Captain
Morgan was never able to discover--answered the hail by crying out
that the vice admiral had been seized by the pirates.

At this the alarm was instantly given and the mischief done, for
presently there was a tremendous bustle through that part of the fleet
lying nighest the vice admiral--a deal of shouting of orders, a
beating of drums, and the running hither and thither of the crews.

But by this time the sails of the vice admiral had filled with a
strong land breeze that was blowing up the harbor, whereupon the
carpenter, at Captain Morgan's orders, having cut away both anchors,
the galleon presently bore away up the harbor, gathering headway every
moment with the wind nearly dead astern. The nearest vessel was the
only one that for the moment was able to offer any hindrance. This
ship, having by this time cleared away one of its guns, was able to
fire a parting shot against the vice-admiral, striking her somewhere
forward, as our hero could see by a great shower of splinters that
flew up in the moonlight.

At the sound of the shot all the vessels of the flota not yet
disturbed by the alarm were aroused at once, so that the pirates had
the satisfaction of knowing that they would have to run the gantlet of
all the ships between them and the open sea before they could reckon
themselves escaped.

And, indeed, to our hero's mind it seemed that the battle which
followed must have been the most terrific cannonade that was ever
heard in the world. It was not so ill at first, for it was some while
before the Spaniards could get their guns clear for action, they being
not the least in the world prepared for such an occasion as this. But
by and by first one and then another ship opened fire upon the
galleon, until it seemed to our hero that all the thunders of heaven
let loose upon them could not have created a more prodigious uproar,
and that it was not possible that they could any of them escape
destruction.

By now the moon had risen full and round, so that the clouds of smoke
that rose in the air appeared as white as snow. The air seemed full of
the hiss and screaming of shot, each one of which, when it struck the
galleon, was magnified by our hero's imagination into ten times its
magnitude from the crash which it delivered and from the cloud of
splinters it would cast up into the moonlight. At last he suddenly
beheld one poor man knocked sprawling across the deck, who, as he
raised his arm from behind the mast, disclosed that the hand was gone
from it, and that the shirt sleeve was red with blood in the
moonlight. At this sight all the strength fell away from poor Harry,
and he felt sure that a like fate or even a worse must be in store for
him.

But, after all, this was nothing to what it might have been in broad
daylight, for what with the darkness of night, and the little
preparation the Spaniards could make for such a business, and the
extreme haste with which they discharged their guns (many not
understanding what was the occasion of all this uproar), nearly all
the shot flew so wide of the mark that not above one in twenty struck
that at which it was aimed.

Meantime Captain Morgan, with the Sieur Simon, who had followed him
upon deck, stood just above where our hero lay behind the shelter of
the bulwark. The captain had lit a pipe of tobacco, and he stood now
in the bright moonlight close to the rail, with his hands behind him,
looking out ahead with the utmost coolness imaginable, and paying no
more attention to the din of battle than though it were twenty leagues
away. Now and then he would take his pipe from his lips to utter an
order to the man at the wheel. Excepting this he stood there hardly
moving at all, the wind blowing his long red hair over his shoulders.

[Illustration: BURNING THE SHIP]

Had it not been for the armed galley the pirates might have got the
galleon away with no great harm done in spite of all this
cannonading, for the man-of-war which rode at anchor nighest to them
at the mouth of the harbor was still so far away that they might have
passed it by hugging pretty close to the shore, and that without any
great harm being done to them in the darkness. But just at this
moment, when the open water lay in sight, came this galley pulling out
from behind the point of the shore in such a manner as either to head
our pirates off entirely or else to compel them to approach so near to
the man-of-war that that latter vessel could bring its guns to bear
with more effect.

This galley, I must tell you, was like others of its kind such as you
may find in these waters, the hull being long and cut low to the water
so as to allow the oars to dip freely. The bow was sharp and projected
far out ahead, mounting a swivel upon it, while at the stern a number
of galleries built one above another into a castle gave shelter to
several companies of musketeers as well as the officers commanding
them.

Our hero could behold the approach of this galley from above the
starboard bulwarks, and it appeared to him impossible for them to hope
to escape either it or the man-of-war. But still Captain Morgan
maintained the same composure that he had exhibited all the while,
only now and then delivering an order to the man at the wheel, who,
putting the helm over, threw the bows of the galleon around more to
the larboard, as though to escape the bow of the galley and get into
the open water beyond. This course brought the pirates ever closer and
closer to the man-of-war, which now began to add its thunder to the
din of the battle, and with so much more effect that at every
discharge you might hear the crashing and crackling of splintered
wood, and now and then the outcry or groaning of some man who was
hurt. Indeed, had it been daylight, they must at this juncture all
have perished, though, as was said, what with the night and the
confusion and the hurry, they escaped entire destruction, though more
by a miracle than through any policy upon their own part.

Meantime the galley, steering as though to come aboard of them, had
now come so near that it, too, presently began to open its musketry
fire upon them, so that the humming and rattling of bullets were
presently added to the din of cannonading.

In two minutes more it would have been aboard of them, when in a
moment Captain Morgan roared out of a sudden to the man at the helm to
put it hard a starboard. In response the man ran the wheel over with
the utmost quickness, and the galleon, obeying her helm very readily,
came around upon a course which, if continued, would certainly bring
them into collision with their enemy.

It is possible at first the Spaniards imagined the pirates intended to
escape past their stern, for they instantly began backing oars to keep
them from getting past, so that the water was all of a foam about
them; at the same time they did this they poured in such a fire of
musketry that it was a miracle that no more execution was accomplished
than happened.

As for our hero, methinks for the moment he forgot all about
everything else than as to whether or no his captain's maneuver would
succeed, for in the very first moment he divined, as by some instinct,
what Captain Morgan purposed doing.

At this moment, so particular in the execution of this nice design, a
bullet suddenly struck down the man at the wheel. Hearing the sharp
outcry, our Harry turned to see him fall forward, and then to his
hands and knees upon the deck, the blood running in a black pool
beneath him, while the wheel, escaping from his hands, spun over until
the spokes were all of a mist.

In a moment the ship would have fallen off before the wind had not our
hero, leaping to the wheel (even as Captain Morgan shouted an order
for some one to do so), seized the flying spokes, whirling them back
again, and so bringing the bow of the galleon up to its former course.

In the first moment of this effort he had reckoned of nothing but of
carrying out his captain's designs. He neither thought of cannon balls
nor of bullets. But now that his task was accomplished, he came
suddenly back to himself to find the galleries of the galley aflame
with musket shots, and to become aware with a most horrible sinking of
the spirits that all the shots therefrom were intended for him. He
cast his eyes about him with despair, but no one came to ease him of
his task, which, having undertaken, he had too much spirit to resign
from carrying through to the end, though he was well aware that the
very next instant might mean his sudden and violent death. His ears
hummed and rang, and his brain swam as light as a feather. I know not
whether he breathed, but he shut his eyes tight as though that might
save him from the bullets that were raining about him.

[Illustration]

At this moment the Spaniards must have discovered for the first time
the pirates' design, for of a sudden they ceased firing, and began to
shout out a multitude of orders, while the oars lashed the water all
about with a foam. But it was too late then for them to escape, for
within a couple of seconds the galleon struck her enemy a blow so
violent upon the larboard quarter as nearly to hurl our Harry upon the
deck, and then with a dreadful, horrible crackling of wood, commingled
with a yelling of men's voices, the galley was swung around upon her
side, and the galleon, sailing into the open sea, left nothing of her
immediate enemy but a sinking wreck, and the water dotted all over
with bobbing heads and waving hands in the moonlight.

And now, indeed, that all danger was past and gone, there were plenty
to come running to help our hero at the wheel. As for Captain Morgan,
having come down upon the main deck, he fetches the young helmsman a
clap upon the back. "Well, Master Harry," says he, "and did I not tell
you I would make a man of you?" Whereat our poor Harry fell
a-laughing, but with a sad catch in his voice, for his hands trembled
as with an ague, and were as cold as ice. As for his emotions, God
knows he was nearer crying than laughing, if Captain Morgan had but
known it.

Nevertheless, though undertaken under the spur of the moment, I
protest it was indeed a brave deed, and I cannot but wonder how many
young gentlemen of sixteen there are to-day who, upon a like occasion,
would act as well as our Harry.


V

The balance of our hero's adventures were of a lighter sort than those
already recounted, for the next morning the Spanish captain (a very
polite and well-bred gentleman) having fitted him out with a shift of
his own clothes, Master Harry was presented in a proper form to the
ladies. For Captain Morgan, if he had felt a liking for the young man
before, could not now show sufficient regard for him. He ate in the
great cabin and was petted by all. Madam Simon, who was a fat and
red-faced lady, was forever praising him, and the young miss, who was
extremely well-looking, was as continually making eyes at him.

She and Master Harry, I must tell you, would spend hours together, she
making pretense of teaching him French, although he was so possessed
with a passion of love that he was nigh suffocated with it. She, upon
her part, perceiving his emotions, responded with extreme good nature
and complacency, so that had our hero been older, and the voyage
proved longer, he might have become entirely enmeshed in the toils of
his fair siren. For all this while, you are to understand, the pirates
were making sail straight for Jamaica, which they reached upon the
third day in perfect safety.

In that time, however, the pirates had well-nigh gone crazy for joy;
for when they came to examine their purchase they discovered her cargo
to consist of plate to the prodigious sum of £130,000 in value. 'Twas
a wonder they did not all make themselves drunk for joy. No doubt they
would have done so had not Captain Morgan, knowing they were still in
the exact track of the Spanish fleets, threatened them that the first
man among them who touched a drop of rum without his permission he
would shoot him dead upon the deck. This threat had such effect that
they all remained entirely sober until they had reached Port Royal
Harbor, which they did about nine o'clock in the morning.

[Illustration]

And now it was that our hero's romance came all tumbling down about
his ears with a run. For they had hardly come to anchor in the harbor
when a boat came from a man-of-war, and who should come stepping
aboard but Lieutenant Grantley (a particular friend of our hero's
father) and his own eldest brother Thomas, who, putting on a very
stern face, informed Master Harry that he was a desperate and hardened
villain who was sure to end at the gallows, and that he was to go
immediately back to his home again. He told our embryo pirate that
his family had nigh gone distracted because of his wicked and
ungrateful conduct. Nor could our hero move him from his inflexible
purpose. "What," says our Harry, "and will you not then let me wait
until our prize is divided and I get my share?"

"Prize, indeed!" says his brother. "And do you then really think that
your father would consent to your having a share in this terrible
bloody and murthering business?"

And so, after a good deal of argument, our hero was constrained to go;
nor did he even have an opportunity to bid adieu to his inamorata. Nor
did he see her any more, except from a distance, she standing on the
poop deck as he was rowed away from her, her face all stained with
crying. For himself, he felt that there was no more joy in life;
nevertheless, standing up in the stern of the boat, he made shift,
though with an aching heart, to deliver her a fine bow with the hat he
had borrowed from the Spanish captain, before his brother bade him sit
down again.

And so to the ending of this story, with only this to relate, that our
Master Harry, so far from going to the gallows, became in good time a
respectable and wealthy sugar merchant with an English wife and a fine
family of children, whereunto, when the mood was upon him, he has
sometimes told these adventures (and sundry others not here
recounted), as I have told them unto you.

[Illustration]




Chapter IV

TOM CHIST AND THE TREASURE BOX

_An Old-time Story of the Days of Captain Kidd_


I

To tell about Tom Chist, and how he got his name, and how he came to
be living at the little settlement of Henlopen, just inside the mouth
of the Delaware Bay, the story must begin as far back as 1686, when a
great storm swept the Atlantic coast from end to end. During the
heaviest part of the hurricane a bark went ashore on the
Hen-and-Chicken Shoals, just below Cape Henlopen and at the mouth of
the Delaware Bay, and Tom Chist was the only soul of all those on
board the ill-fated vessel who escaped alive.

This story must first be told, because it was on account of the
strange and miraculous escape that happened to him at that time that
he gained the name that was given to him.

Even as late as that time of the American colonies, the little
scattered settlement at Henlopen, made up of English, with a few Dutch
and Swedish people, was still only a spot upon the face of the great
American wilderness that spread away, with swamp and forest, no man
knew how far to the westward. That wilderness was not only full of
wild beasts, but of Indian savages, who every fall would come in
wandering tribes to spend the winter along the shores of the
fresh-water lakes below Henlopen. There for four or five months they
would live upon fish and clams and wild ducks and geese, chipping
their arrowheads, and making their earthenware pots and pans under the
lee of the sand hills and pine woods below the Capes.

Sometimes on Sundays, when the Rev. Hillary Jones would be preaching
in the little log church back in the woods, these half-clad red
savages would come in from the cold, and sit squatting in the back
part of the church, listening stolidly to the words that had no
meaning for them.

But about the wreck of the bark in 1686. Such a wreck as that which
then went ashore on the Hen-and-Chicken Shoals was a godsend to the
poor and needy settlers in the wilderness where so few good things
ever came. For the vessel went to pieces during the night, and the
next morning the beach was strewn with wreckage--boxes and barrels,
chests and spars, timbers and planks, a plentiful and bountiful
harvest to be gathered up by the settlers as they chose, with no one
to forbid or prevent them.

The name of the bark, as found painted on some of the water barrels
and sea chests, was the _Bristol Merchant_, and she no doubt hailed
from England.

As was said, the only soul who escaped alive off the wreck was Tom
Chist.

A settler, a fisherman named Matt Abrahamson, and his daughter Molly,
found Tom. He was washed up on the beach among the wreckage, in a
great wooden box which had been securely tied around with a rope and
lashed between two spars--apparently for better protection in beating
through the surf. Matt Abrahamson thought he had found something of
more than usual value when he came upon this chest; but when he cut
the cords and broke open the box with his broadax, he could not have
been more astonished had he beheld a salamander instead of a baby of
nine or ten months old lying half smothered in the blankets that
covered the bottom of the chest.

Matt Abrahamson's daughter Molly had had a baby who had died a month
or so before. So when she saw the little one lying there in the bottom
of the chest, she cried out in a great loud voice that the Good Man
had sent her another baby in place of her own.

The rain was driving before the hurricane storm in dim, slanting
sheets, and so she wrapped up the baby in the man's coat she wore and
ran off home without waiting to gather up any more of the wreckage.

It was Parson Jones who gave the foundling his name. When the news
came to his ears of what Matt Abrahamson had found he went over to the
fisherman's cabin to see the child. He examined the clothes in which
the baby was dressed. They were of fine linen and handsomely stitched,
and the reverend gentleman opined that the foundling's parents must
have been of quality. A kerchief had been wrapped around the baby's
neck and under its arms and tied behind, and in the corner, marked
with very fine needlework, were the initials T. C.

"What d'ye call him, Molly?" said Parson Jones. He was standing, as he
spoke, with his back to the fire, warming his palms before the blaze.
The pocket of the greatcoat he wore bulged out with a big case bottle
of spirits which he had gathered up out of the wreck that afternoon.
"What d'ye call him, Molly?"

"I'll call him Tom, after my own baby."

"That goes very well with the initial on the kerchief," said Parson
Jones. "But what other name d'ye give him? Let it be something to go
with the C."

"I don't know," said Molly.

"Why not call him 'Chist,' since he was born in a chist out of the
sea? 'Tom Chist'--the name goes off like a flash in the pan." And so
"Tom Chist" he was called and "Tom Chist" he was christened.

So much for the beginning of the history of Tom Chist. The story of
Captain Kidd's treasure box does not begin until the late spring of
1699.

That was the year that the famous pirate captain, coming up from the
West Indies, sailed his sloop into the Delaware Bay, where he lay for
over a month waiting for news from his friends in New York.

For he had sent word to that town asking if the coast was clear for
him to return home with the rich prize he had brought from the Indian
seas and the coast of Africa, and meantime he lay there in the
Delaware Bay waiting for a reply. Before he left he turned the whole
of Tom Chist's life topsy-turvy with something that he brought ashore.

By that time Tom Chist had grown into a strong-limbed, thick-jointed
boy of fourteen or fifteen years of age. It was a miserable dog's life
he lived with old Matt Abrahamson, for the old fisherman was in his
cups more than half the time, and when he was so there was hardly a
day passed that he did not give Tom a curse or a buffet or, as like as
not, an actual beating. One would have thought that such treatment
would have broken the spirit of the poor little foundling, but it had
just the opposite effect upon Tom Chist, who was one of your stubborn,
sturdy, stiff-willed fellows who only grow harder and more tough the
more they are ill-treated. It had been a long time now since he had
made any outcry or complaint at the hard usage he suffered from old
Matt. At such times he would shut his teeth and bear whatever came to
him, until sometimes the half-drunken old man would be driven almost
mad by his stubborn silence. Maybe he would stop in the midst of the
beating he was administering, and, grinding his teeth, would cry out:
"Won't ye say naught? Won't ye say naught? Well, then, I'll see if I
can't make ye say naught." When things had reached such a pass as
this Molly would generally interfere to protect her foster son, and
then she and Tom would together fight the old man until they had
wrenched the stick or the strap out of his hand. Then old Matt would
chase them out of doors and around and around the house for maybe half
an hour, until his anger was cool, when he would go back again, and
for a time the storm would be over.

Besides his foster mother, Tom Chist had a very good friend in Parson
Jones, who used to come over every now and then to Abrahamson's hut
upon the chance of getting a half dozen fish for breakfast. He always
had a kind word or two for Tom, who during the winter evenings would
go over to the good man's house to learn his letters, and to read and
write and cipher a little, so that by now he was able to spell the
words out of the Bible and the almanac, and knew enough to change
tuppence into four ha'pennies.

This is the sort of boy Tom Chist was, and this is the sort of life he
led.

In the late spring or early summer of 1699 Captain Kidd's sloop sailed
into the mouth of the Delaware Bay and changed the whole fortune of
his life.

And this is how you come to the story of Captain Kidd's treasure box.


II

Old Matt Abrahamson kept the flat-bottomed boat in which he went
fishing some distance down the shore, and in the neighborhood of the
old wreck that had been sunk on the Shoals. This was the usual fishing
ground of the settlers, and here old Matt's boat generally lay drawn
up on the sand.

There had been a thunderstorm that afternoon, and Tom had gone down
the beach to bale out the boat in readiness for the morning's fishing.

It was full moonlight now, as he was returning, and the night sky was
full of floating clouds. Now and then there was a dull flash to the
westward, and once a muttering growl of thunder, promising another
storm to come.

All that day the pirate sloop had been lying just off the shore back
of the Capes, and now Tom Chist could see the sails glimmering
pallidly in the moonlight, spread for drying after the storm. He was
walking up the shore homeward when he became aware that at some
distance ahead of him there was a ship's boat drawn up on the little
narrow beach, and a group of men clustered about it. He hurried
forward with a good deal of curiosity to see who had landed, but it
was not until he had come close to them that he could distinguish who
and what they were. Then he knew that it must be a party who had come
off the pirate sloop. They had evidently just landed, and two men were
lifting out a chest from the boat. One of them was a negro, naked to
the waist, and the other was a white man in his shirt sleeves, wearing
petticoat breeches, a Monterey cap upon his head, a red bandanna
handkerchief around his neck, and gold earrings in his ears. He had a
long, plaited queue hanging down his back, and a great sheath knife
dangling from his side. Another man, evidently the captain of the
party, stood at a little distance as they lifted the chest out of the
boat. He had a cane in one hand and a lighted lantern in the other,
although the moon was shining as bright as day. He wore jack boots and
a handsome laced coat, and he had a long, drooping mustache that
curled down below his chin. He wore a fine, feathered hat, and his
long black hair hung down upon his shoulders.

All this Tom Chist could see in the moonlight that glinted and
twinkled upon the gilt buttons of his coat.

They were so busy lifting the chest from the boat that at first they
did not observe that Tom Chist had come up and was standing there. It
was the white man with the long, plaited queue and the gold earrings
that spoke to him. "Boy, what do you want here, boy?" he said, in a
rough, hoarse voice. "Where d'ye come from?" And then dropping his end
of the chest, and without giving Tom time to answer, he pointed off
down the beach, and said, "You'd better be going about your own
business, if you know what's good for you; and don't you come back, or
you'll find what you don't want waiting for you."

[Illustration: WHO SHALL BE CAPTAIN?]

Tom saw in a glance that the pirates were all looking at him, and
then, without saying a word, he turned and walked away. The man who
had spoken to him followed him threateningly for some little distance,
as though to see that he had gone away as he was bidden to do. But
presently he stopped, and Tom hurried on alone, until the boat and the
crew and all were dropped away behind and lost in the moonlight night.
Then he himself stopped also, turned, and looked back whence he had
come.

There had been something very strange in the appearance of the men he
had just seen, something very mysterious in their actions, and he
wondered what it all meant, and what they were going to do. He stood
for a little while thus looking and listening. He could see nothing,
and could hear only the sound of distant talking. What were they doing
on the lonely shore thus at night? Then, following a sudden impulse,
he turned and cut off across the sand hummocks, skirting around
inland, but keeping pretty close to the shore, his object being to spy
upon them, and to watch what they were about from the back of the low
sand hills that fronted the beach.

He had gone along some distance in his circuitous return when he
became aware of the sound of voices that seemed to be drawing closer
to him as he came toward the speakers. He stopped and stood listening,
and instantly, as he stopped, the voices stopped also. He crouched
there silently in the bright, glimmering moonlight, surrounded by the
silent stretches of sand, and the stillness seemed to press upon him
like a heavy hand. Then suddenly the sound of a man's voice began
again, and as Tom listened he could hear some one slowly counting.
"Ninety-one," the voice began, "ninety-two, ninety-three, ninety-four,
ninety-five, ninety-six, ninety-seven, ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one
hundred, one hundred and one"--the slow, monotonous count coming
nearer and nearer; "one hundred and two, one hundred and three, one
hundred and four," and so on in its monotonous reckoning.

Suddenly he saw three heads appear above the sand hill, so close to
him that he crouched down quickly with a keen thrill, close beside the
hummock near which he stood. His first fear was that they might have
seen him in the moonlight; but they had not, and his heart rose again
as the counting voice went steadily on. "One hundred and twenty," it
was saying--"and twenty-one, and twenty-two, and twenty-three, and
twenty-four," and then he who was counting came out from behind the
little sandy rise into the white and open level of shimmering
brightness.

It was the man with the cane whom Tom had seen some time before--the
captain of the party who had landed. He carried his cane under his arm
now, and was holding his lantern close to something that he held in
his hand, and upon which he looked narrowly as he walked with a slow
and measured tread in a perfectly straight line across the sand,
counting each step as he took it. "And twenty-five, and twenty-six,
and twenty-seven, and twenty-eight, and twenty-nine, and thirty."

[Illustration]

Behind him walked two other figures; one was the half-naked negro, the
other the man with the plaited queue and the earrings, whom Tom had
seen lifting the chest out of the boat. Now they were carrying the
heavy box between them, laboring through the sand with shuffling tread
as they bore it onward.

As he who was counting pronounced the word "thirty," the two men set
the chest down on the sand with a grunt, the white man panting and
blowing and wiping his sleeve across his forehead. And immediately he
who counted took out a slip of paper and marked something down upon
it. They stood there for a long time, during which Tom lay behind the
sand hummock watching them, and for a while the silence was
uninterrupted. In the perfect stillness Tom could hear the washing of
the little waves beating upon the distant beach, and once the far-away
sound of a laugh from one of those who stood by the ship's boat.

One, two, three minutes passed, and then the men picked up the chest
and started on again; and then again the other man began his counting.
"Thirty and one, and thirty and two, and thirty and three, and thirty
and four"--he walked straight across the level open, still looking
intently at that which he held in his hand--"and thirty and five, and
thirty and six, and thirty and seven," and so on, until the three
figures disappeared in the little hollow between the two sand hills on
the opposite side of the open, and still Tom could hear the sound of
the counting voice in the distance.

Just as they disappeared behind the hill there was a sudden faint
flash of light; and by and by, as Tom lay still listening to the
counting, he heard, after a long interval, a far-away muffled rumble
of distant thunder. He waited for a while, and then arose and stepped
to the top of the sand hummock behind which he had been lying. He
looked all about him, but there was no one else to be seen. Then he
stepped down from the hummock and followed in the direction which the
pirate captain and the two men carrying the chest had gone. He crept
along cautiously, stopping now and then to make sure that he still
heard the counting voice, and when it ceased he lay down upon the sand
and waited until it began again.

Presently, so following the pirates, he saw the three figures again in
the distance, and, skirting around back of a hill of sand covered with
coarse sedge grass, he came to where he overlooked a little open level
space gleaming white in the moonlight.

The three had been crossing the level of sand, and were now not more
than twenty-five paces from him. They had again set down the chest,
upon which the white man with the long queue and the gold earrings had
seated to rest himself, the negro standing close beside him. The moon
shone as bright as day and full upon his face. It was looking directly
at Tom Chist, every line as keen cut with white lights and black
shadows as though it had been carved in ivory and jet. He sat
perfectly motionless, and Tom drew back with a start, almost thinking
he had been discovered. He lay silent, his heart beating heavily in
his throat; but there was no alarm, and presently he heard the
counting begin again, and when he looked once more he saw they were
going away straight across the little open. A soft, sliding hillock of
sand lay directly in front of them. They did not turn aside, but went
straight over it, the leader helping himself up the sandy slope with
his cane, still counting and still keeping his eyes fixed upon that
which he held in his hand. Then they disappeared again behind the
white crest on the other side.

So Tom followed them cautiously until they had gone almost half a mile
inland. When next he saw them clearly it was from a little sandy rise
which looked down like the crest of a bowl upon the floor of sand
below. Upon this smooth, white floor the moon beat with almost
dazzling brightness.

The white man who had helped to carry the chest was now kneeling,
busied at some work, though what it was Tom at first could not see. He
was whittling the point of a stick into a long wooden peg, and when,
by and by, he had finished what he was about, he arose and stepped to
where he who seemed to be the captain had stuck his cane upright into
the ground as though to mark some particular spot. He drew the cane
out of the sand, thrusting the stick down in its stead. Then he drove
the long peg down with a wooden mallet which the negro handed to him.
The sharp rapping of the mallet upon the top of the peg sounded loud
in the perfect stillness, and Tom lay watching and wondering what
it all meant. The man, with quick-repeated blows, drove the peg
farther and farther down into the sand until it showed only two or
three inches above the surface. As he finished his work there was
another faint flash of light, and by and by another smothered rumble
of thunder, and Tom, as he looked out toward the westward, saw the
silver rim of the round and sharply outlined thundercloud rising
slowly up into the sky and pushing the other and broken drifting
clouds before it.

[Illustration: Kidd at Gardiner's Island

_Illustration from_
SEA ROBBERS OF NEW YORK

_by_ Thomas A. Janvier

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _November, 1894_]

The two white men were now stooping over the peg, the negro man
watching them. Then presently the man with the cane started straight
away from the peg, carrying the end of a measuring line with him, the
other end of which the man with the plaited queue held against the top
of the peg. When the pirate captain had reached the end of the
measuring line he marked a cross upon the sand, and then again they
measured out another stretch of space.

So they measured a distance five times over, and then, from where Tom
lay, he could see the man with the queue drive another peg just at the
foot of a sloping rise of sand that swept up beyond into a tall white
dune marked sharp and clear against the night sky behind. As soon as
the man with the plaited queue had driven the second peg into the
ground they began measuring again, and so, still measuring,
disappeared in another direction which took them in behind the sand
dune where Tom no longer could see what they were doing.

The negro still sat by the chest where the two had left him, and so
bright was the moonlight that from where he lay Tom could see the
glint of it twinkling in the whites of his eyeballs.

Presently from behind the hill there came, for the third time, the
sharp rapping sound of the mallet driving still another peg, and then
after a while the two pirates emerged from behind the sloping
whiteness into the space of moonlight again.

They came direct to where the chest lay, and the white man and the
black man lifting it once more, they walked away across the level of
open sand, and so on behind the edge of the hill and out of Tom's
sight.


III

Tom Chist could no longer see what the pirates were doing, neither did
he dare to cross over the open space of sand that now lay between them
and him. He lay there speculating as to what they were about, and
meantime the storm cloud was rising higher and higher above the
horizon, with louder and louder mutterings of thunder following each
dull flash from out the cloudy, cavernous depths. In the silence he
could hear an occasional click as of some iron implement, and he
opined that the pirates were burying the chest, though just where they
were at work he could neither see nor tell.

Still he lay there watching and listening, and by and by a puff of
warm air blew across the sand, and a thumping tumble of louder thunder
leaped from out the belly of the storm cloud, which every minute was
coming nearer and nearer. Still Tom Chist lay watching.

Suddenly, almost unexpectedly, the three figures reappeared from
behind the sand hill, the pirate captain leading the way, and the
negro and white man following close behind him. They had gone about
halfway across the white, sandy level between the hill and the hummock
behind which Tom Chist lay, when the white man stopped and bent over
as though to tie his shoe.

This brought the negro a few steps in front of his companion.

That which then followed happened so suddenly, so unexpectedly, so
swiftly, that Tom Chist had hardly time to realize what it all meant
before it was over. As the negro passed him the white man arose
suddenly and silently erect, and Tom Chist saw the white moonlight
glint upon the blade of a great dirk knife which he now held in his
hand. He took one, two silent, catlike steps behind the unsuspecting
negro. Then there was a sweeping flash of the blade in the pallid
light, and a blow, the thump of which Tom could distinctly hear even
from where he lay stretched out upon the sand. There was an instant
echoing yell from the black man, who ran stumbling forward, who
stopped, who regained his footing, and then stood for an instant as
though rooted to the spot.

Tom had distinctly seen the knife enter his back, and even thought
that he had seen the glint of the point as it came out from the
breast.

Meantime the pirate captain had stopped, and now stood with his hand
resting upon his cane looking impassively on.

Then the black man started to run. The white man stood for a while
glaring after him; then he, too, started after his victim upon the
run. The black man was not very far from Tom when he staggered and
fell. He tried to rise, then fell forward again, and lay at length. At
that instant the first edge of the cloud cut across the moon, and
there was a sudden darkness; but in the silence Tom heard the sound of
another blow and a groan, and then presently a voice calling to the
pirate captain that it was all over.

He saw the dim form of the captain crossing the level sand, and then,
as the moon sailed out from behind the cloud, he saw the white man
standing over a black figure that lay motionless upon the sand.

[Illustration]

Then Tom Chist scrambled up and ran away, plunging down into the
hollow of sand that lay in the shadows below. Over the next rise he
ran, and down again into the next black hollow, and so on over the
sliding, shifting ground, panting and gasping. It seemed to him that
he could hear footsteps following, and in the terror that possessed
him he almost expected every instant to feel the cold knife blade
slide between his own ribs in such a thrust from behind as he had seen
given to the poor black man.

[Illustration]

So he ran on like one in a nightmare. His feet grew heavy like lead,
he panted and gasped, his breath came hot and dry in his throat. But
still he ran and ran until at last he found himself in front of old
Matt Abrahamson's cabin, gasping, panting, and sobbing for breath, his
knees relaxed and his thighs trembling with weakness.

As he opened the door and dashed into the darkened cabin (for both
Matt and Molly were long ago asleep in bed) there was a flash of
light, and even as he slammed to the door behind him there was an
instant peal of thunder, heavy as though a great weight had been
dropped upon the roof of the sky, so that the doors and windows of the
cabin rattled.


IV

Then Tom Chist crept to bed, trembling, shuddering, bathed in sweat,
his heart beating like a trip hammer, and his brain dizzy from that
long, terror-inspired race through the soft sand in which he had
striven to outstrip he knew not what pursuing horror.

For a long, long time he lay awake, trembling and chattering with
nervous chills, and when he did fall asleep it was only to drop into
monstrous dreams in which he once again saw ever enacted, with various
grotesque variations, the tragic drama which his waking eyes had
beheld the night before.

Then came the dawning of the broad, wet daylight, and before the
rising of the sun Tom was up and out of doors to find the young day
dripping with the rain of overnight.

His first act was to climb the nearest sand hill and to gaze out
toward the offing where the pirate ship had been the day before.

It was no longer there.

Soon afterward Matt Abrahamson came out of the cabin and he called to
Tom to go get a bite to eat, for it was time for them to be away
fishing.

All that morning the recollection of the night before hung over Tom
Chist like a great cloud of boding trouble. It filled the confined
area of the little boat and spread over the entire wide spaces of sky
and sea that surrounded them. Not for a moment was it lifted. Even
when he was hauling in his wet and dripping line with a struggling
fish at the end of it a recurrent memory of what he had seen would
suddenly come upon him, and he would groan in spirit at the
recollection. He looked at Matt Abrahamson's leathery face, at his
lantern jaws cavernously and stolidly chewing at a tobacco leaf, and
it seemed monstrous to him that the old man should be so unconscious
of the black cloud that wrapped them all about.

When the boat reached the shore again he leaped scrambling to the
beach, and as soon as his dinner was eaten he hurried away to find the
Dominie Jones.

He ran all the way from Abrahamson's hut to the parson's house, hardly
stopping once, and when he knocked at the door he was panting and
sobbing for breath.

The good man was sitting on the back-kitchen doorstep smoking his long
pipe of tobacco out into the sunlight, while his wife within was
rattling about among the pans and dishes in preparation of their
supper, of which a strong, porky smell already filled the air.

Then Tom Chist told his story, panting, hurrying, tumbling one word
over another in his haste, and Parson Jones listened, breaking every
now and then into an ejaculation of wonder. The light in his pipe went
out and the bowl turned cold.

"And I don't see why they should have killed the poor black man," said
Tom, as he finished his narrative.

"Why, that is very easy enough to understand," said the good reverend
man. "'Twas a treasure box they buried!"

In his agitation Mr. Jones had risen from his seat and was now
stumping up and down, puffing at his empty tobacco pipe as though it
were still alight.

"A treasure box!" cried out Tom.

"Aye, a treasure box! And that was why they killed the poor black man.
He was the only one, d'ye see, besides they two who knew the place
where 'twas hid, and now that they've killed him out of the way,
there's nobody but themselves knows. The villains--Tut, tut, look at
that now!" In his excitement the dominie had snapped the stem of his
tobacco pipe in two.

"Why, then," said Tom, "if that is so, 'tis indeed a wicked, bloody
treasure, and fit to bring a curse upon anybody who finds it!"

"'Tis more like to bring a curse upon the soul who buried it," said
Parson Jones, "and it may be a blessing to him who finds it. But tell
me, Tom, do you think you could find the place again where 'twas hid?"

"I can't tell that," said Tom, "'twas all in among the sand humps,
d'ye see, and it was at night into the bargain. Maybe we could find
the marks of their feet in the sand," he added.

"'Tis not likely," said the reverend gentleman, "for the storm last
night would have washed all that away."

"I could find the place," said Tom, "where the boat was drawn up on
the beach."

"Why, then, that's something to start from, Tom," said his friend. "If
we can find that, then maybe we can find whither they went from
there."

"If I was certain it was a treasure box," cried out Tom Chist, "I
would rake over every foot of sand betwixt here and Henlopen to find
it."

"'Twould be like hunting for a pin in a haystack," said the Rev.
Hilary Jones.

As Tom walked away home, it seemed as though a ton's weight of gloom
had been rolled away from his soul. The next day he and Parson Jones
were to go treasure-hunting together; it seemed to Tom as though he
could hardly wait for the time to come.


V

The next afternoon Parson Jones and Tom Chist started off together
upon the expedition that made Tom's fortune forever. Tom carried a
spade over his shoulder and the reverend gentleman walked along beside
him with his cane.

As they jogged along up the beach they talked together about the only
thing they could talk about--the treasure box. "And how big did you
say 'twas?" quoth the good gentleman.

"About so long," said Tom Chist, measuring off upon the spade, "and
about so wide, and this deep."

"And what if it should be full of money, Tom?" said the reverend
gentleman, swinging his cane around and around in wide circles in the
excitement of the thought, as he strode along briskly. "Suppose it
should be full of money, what then?"

"By Moses!" said Tom Chist, hurrying to keep up with his friend, "I'd
buy a ship for myself, I would, and I'd trade to Injy and to Chiny to
my own boot, I would. Suppose the chist was all full of money, sir,
and suppose we should find it; would there be enough in it, d'ye
suppose, to buy a ship?"

"To be sure there would be enough, Tom; enough and to spare, and a
good big lump over."

"And if I find it 'tis mine to keep, is it, and no mistake?"

"Why, to be sure it would be yours!" cried out the parson, in a loud
voice. "To be sure it would be yours!" He knew nothing of the law, but
the doubt of the question began at once to ferment in his brain, and
he strode along in silence for a while. "Whose else would it be but
yours if you find it?" he burst out. "Can you tell me that?"

"If ever I have a ship of my own," said Tom Chist, "and if ever I sail
to Injy in her, I'll fetch ye back the best chist of tea, sir, that
ever was fetched from Cochin Chiny."

Parson Jones burst out laughing. "Thankee, Tom," he said; "and I'll
thankee again when I get my chist of tea. But tell me, Tom, didst thou
ever hear of the farmer girl who counted her chickens before they were
hatched?"

It was thus they talked as they hurried along up the beach together,
and so came to a place at last where Tom stopped short and stood
looking about him. "'Twas just here," he said, "I saw the boat last
night. I know 'twas here, for I mind me of that bit of wreck yonder,
and that there was a tall stake drove in the sand just where yon stake
stands."

Parson Jones put on his spectacles and went over to the stake toward
which Tom pointed. As soon as he had looked at it carefully he called
out: "Why, Tom, this hath been just drove down into the sand. 'Tis a
brand-new stake of wood, and the pirates must have set it here
themselves as a mark, just as they drove the pegs you spoke about down
into the sand."

Tom came over and looked at the stake. It was a stout piece of oak
nearly two inches thick; it had been shaped with some care, and the
top of it had been painted red. He shook the stake and tried to move
it, but it had been driven or planted so deeply into the sand that he
could not stir it. "Aye, sir," he said, "it must have been set here
for a mark, for I'm sure 'twas not here yesterday or the day before."
He stood looking about him to see if there were other signs of the
pirates' presence. At some little distance there was the corner of
something white sticking up out of the sand. He could see that it was
a scrap of paper, and he pointed to it, calling out: "Yonder is a
piece of paper, sir. I wonder if they left that behind them?"

[Illustration: EXTORTING TRIBUTE FROM THE CITIZENS]

It was a miraculous chance that placed that paper there. There was
only an inch of it showing, and if it had not been for Tom's sharp
eyes, it would certainly have been overlooked and passed by. The next
windstorm would have covered it up, and all that afterward happened
never would have occurred. "Look, sir," he said, as he struck the sand
from it, "it hath writing on it."

"Let me see it," said Parson Jones. He adjusted the spectacles a
little more firmly astride of his nose as he took the paper in his
hand and began conning it. "What's all this?" he said; "a whole lot of
figures and nothing else." And then he read aloud, "'Mark--S. S. W. S.
by S.' What d'ye suppose that means, Tom?"

"I don't know, sir," said Tom. "But maybe we can understand it better
if you read on."

"'Tis all a great lot of figures," said Parson Jones, "without a grain
of meaning in them so far as I can see, unless they be sailing
directions." And then he began reading again: "'Mark--S. S. W. by S.
40, 72, 91, 130, 151, 177, 202, 232, 256, 271'--d'ye see, it must be
sailing directions--'299, 335, 362, 386, 415, 446, 469, 491, 522, 544,
571, 598'--what a lot of them there be--'626, 652, 676, 695, 724, 851,
876, 905, 940, 967. Peg. S. E. by E. 269 foot. Peg. S. S. W. by S. 427
foot. Peg. Dig to the west of this six foot.'"

"What's that about a peg?" exclaimed Tom. "What's that about a peg?
And then there's something about digging, too!" It was as though a
sudden light began shining into his brain. He felt himself growing
quickly very excited. "Read that over again, sir," he cried. "Why,
sir, you remember I told you they drove a peg into the sand. And don't
they say to dig close to it? Read it over again, sir--read it over
again!"

"Peg?" said the good gentleman. "To be sure it was about a peg. Let's
look again. Yes, here it is. 'Peg S. E. by E. 269 foot.'"

"Aye!" cried out Tom Chist again, in great excitement. "Don't you
remember what I told you, sir, 269 foot? Sure that must be what I saw
'em measuring with the line."

Parson Jones had now caught the flame of excitement that was blazing
up so strongly in Tom's breast. He felt as though some wonderful thing
was about to happen to them. "To be sure, to be sure!" he called out,
in a great big voice. "And then they measured out 427 foot
south-southwest by south, and they then drove another peg, and then
they buried the box six foot to the west of it. Why, Tom--why, Tom
Chist! if we've read this aright, thy fortune is made."

Tom Chist stood staring straight at the old gentleman's excited face,
and seeing nothing but it in all the bright infinity of sunshine. Were
they, indeed, about to find the treasure chest? He felt the sun very
hot upon his shoulders, and he heard the harsh, insistent jarring of a
tern that hovered and circled with forked tail and sharp white wings
in the sunlight just above their heads; but all the time he stood
staring into the good old gentleman's face.

It was Parson Jones who first spoke. "But what do all these figures
mean?" And Tom observed how the paper shook and rustled in the tremor
of excitement that shook his hand. He raised the paper to the focus of
his spectacles and began to read again. "'Mark 40, 72, 91--'"

"Mark?" cried out Tom, almost screaming. "Why, that must mean the
stake yonder; that must be the mark." And he pointed to the oaken
stick with its red tip blazing against the white shimmer of sand
behind it.

"And the 40 and 72 and 91," cried the old gentleman, in a voice
equally shrill--"why, that must mean the number of steps the pirate
was counting when you heard him."

"To be sure that's what they mean!" cried Tom Chist. "That is it, and
it can be nothing else. Oh, come, sir--come, sir; let us make haste
and find it!"

"Stay! stay!" said the good gentleman, holding up his hand; and again
Tom Chist noticed how it trembled and shook. His voice was steady
enough, though very hoarse, but his hand shook and trembled as though
with a palsy. "Stay! stay! First of all, we must follow these
measurements. And 'tis a marvelous thing," he croaked, after a little
pause, "how this paper ever came to be here."

"Maybe it was blown here by the storm," suggested Tom Chist.

"Like enough; like enough," said Parson Jones. "Like enough, after the
wretches had buried the chest and killed the poor black man, they were
so buffeted and bowsed about by the storm that it was shook out of the
man's pocket, and thus blew away from him without his knowing aught of
it."

"But let us find the box!" cried out Tom Chist, flaming with his
excitement.

"Aye, aye," said the good man; "only stay a little, my boy, until we
make sure what we're about. I've got my pocket compass here, but we
must have something to measure off the feet when we have found the
peg. You run across to Tom Brooke's house and fetch that measuring rod
he used to lay out his new byre. While you're gone I'll pace off the
distance marked on the paper with my pocket compass here."


VI

Tom Chist was gone for almost an hour, though he ran nearly all the
way and back, upborne as on the wings of the wind. When he returned,
panting, Parson Jones was nowhere to be seen, but Tom saw his
footsteps leading away inland, and he followed the scuffling marks in
the smooth surface across the sand humps and down into the hollows,
and by and by found the good gentleman in a spot he at once knew as
soon as he laid his eyes upon it.

It was the open space where the pirates had driven their first peg,
and where Tom Chist had afterward seen them kill the poor black man.
Tom Chist gazed around as though expecting to see some sign of the
tragedy, but the space was as smooth and as undisturbed as a floor,
excepting where, midway across it, Parson Jones, who was now stooping
over something on the ground, had trampled it all around about.

When Tom Chist saw him he was still bending over, scraping away from
something he had found.

It was the first peg!

Inside of half an hour they had found the second and third pegs, and
Tom Chist stripped off his coat, and began digging like mad down into
the sand, Parson Jones standing over him watching him. The sun was
sloping well toward the west when the blade of Tom Chist's spade
struck upon something hard.

If it had been his own heart that he had hit in the sand his breast
could hardly have thrilled more sharply.

It was the treasure box!

[Illustration]

Parson Jones himself leaped down into the hole, and began scraping
away the sand with his hands as though he had gone crazy. At last,
with some difficulty, they tugged and hauled the chest up out of the
sand to the surface, where it lay covered all over with the grit that
clung to it.

It was securely locked and fastened with a padlock, and it took a good
many blows with the blade of the spade to burst the bolt. Parson Jones
himself lifted the lid.

Tom Chist leaned forward and gazed down into the open box. He would
not have been surprised to have seen it filled full of yellow gold and
bright jewels. It was filled half full of books and papers, and half
full of canvas bags tied safely and securely around and around with
cords of string.

Parson Jones lifted out one of the bags, and it jingled as he did so.
It was full of money.

He cut the string, and with trembling, shaking hands handed the bag to
Tom, who, in an ecstasy of wonder and dizzy with delight, poured out
with swimming sight upon the coat spread on the ground a cataract of
shining silver money that rang and twinkled and jingled as it fell in
a shining heap upon the coarse cloth.

Parson Jones held up both hands into the air, and Tom stared at what
he saw, wondering whether it was all so, and whether he was really
awake. It seemed to him as though he was in a dream.

There were two-and-twenty bags in all in the chest: ten of them full
of silver money, eight of them full of gold money, three of them full
of gold dust, and one small bag with jewels wrapped up in wad cotton
and paper.

"'Tis enough," cried out Parson Jones, "to make us both rich men as
long as we live."

The burning summer sun, though sloping in the sky, beat down upon them
as hot as fire; but neither of them noticed it. Neither did they
notice hunger nor thirst nor fatigue, but sat there as though in a
trance, with the bags of money scattered on the sand around them, a
great pile of money heaped upon the coat, and the open chest beside
them. It was an hour of sundown before Parson Jones had begun fairly
to examine the books and papers in the chest.

Of the three books, two were evidently log books of the pirates who
had been lying off the mouth of the Delaware Bay all this time. The
other book was written in Spanish, and was evidently the log book of
some captured prize.

It was then, sitting there upon the sand, the good old gentleman
reading in his high, cracking voice, that they first learned from the
bloody records in those two books who it was who had been lying inside
the Cape all this time, and that it was the famous Captain Kidd. Every
now and then the reverend gentleman would stop to exclaim, "Oh, the
bloody wretch!" or, "Oh, the desperate, cruel villains!" and then
would go on reading again a scrap here and a scrap there.

And all the while Tom Chist sat and listened, every now and then
reaching out furtively and touching the heap of money still lying upon
the coat.

One might be inclined to wonder why Captain Kidd had kept those bloody
records. He had probably laid them away because they so incriminated
many of the great people of the colony of New York that, with the
books in evidence, it would have been impossible to bring the pirate
to justice without dragging a dozen or more fine gentlemen into the
dock along with him. If he could have kept them in his own possession
they would doubtless have been a great weapon of defense to protect
him from the gallows. Indeed, when Captain Kidd was finally brought to
conviction and hung, he was not accused of his piracies, but of
striking a mutinous seaman upon the head with a bucket and
accidentally killing him. The authorities did not dare try him for
piracy. He was really hung because he was a pirate, and we know that
it was the log books that Tom Chist brought to New York that did the
business for him; he was accused and convicted of manslaughter for
killing of his own ship carpenter with a bucket.

So Parson Jones, sitting there in the slanting light, read through
these terrible records of piracy, and Tom, with the pile of gold and
silver money beside him, sat and listened to him.

What a spectacle, if anyone had come upon them! But they were alone,
with the vast arch of sky empty above them and the wide white stretch
of sand a desert around them. The sun sank lower and lower, until
there was only time to glance through the other papers in the chest.

They were nearly all goldsmiths' bills of exchange drawn in favor of
certain of the most prominent merchants of New York. Parson Jones, as
he read over the names, knew of nearly all the gentlemen by hearsay.
Aye, here was this gentleman; he thought that name would be among 'em.
What? Here is Mr. So-and-so. Well, if all they say is true, the
villain has robbed one of his own best friends. "I wonder," he said,
"why the wretch should have hidden these papers so carefully away with
the other treasures, for they could do him no good?" Then, answering
his own question: "Like enough because these will give him a hold over
the gentlemen to whom they are drawn so that he can make a good
bargain for his own neck before he gives the bills back to their
owners. I tell you what it is, Tom," he continued, "it is you yourself
shall go to New York and bargain for the return of these papers.
'Twill be as good as another fortune to you."

The majority of the bills were drawn in favor of one Richard
Chillingsworth, Esquire. "And he is," said Parson Jones, "one of the
richest men in the province of New York. You shall go to him with the
news of what we have found."

"When shall I go?" said Tom Chist.

"You shall go upon the very first boat we can catch," said the parson.
He had turned, still holding the bills in his hand, and was now
fingering over the pile of money that yet lay tumbled out upon the
coat. "I wonder, Tom," said he, "if you could spare me a score or so
of these doubloons?"

"You shall have fifty score, if you choose," said Tom, bursting with
gratitude and with generosity in his newly found treasure.

"You are as fine a lad as ever I saw, Tom," said the parson, "and I'll
thank you to the last day of my life."

Tom scooped up a double handful of silver money. "Take it, sir," he
said, "and you may have as much more as you want of it."

He poured it into the dish that the good man made of his hands, and
the parson made a motion as though to empty it into his pocket. Then
he stopped, as though a sudden doubt had occurred to him. "I don't
know that 'tis fit for me to take this pirate money, after all," he
said.

"But you are welcome to it," said Tom.

Still the parson hesitated. "Nay," he burst out, "I'll not take it;
'tis blood money." And as he spoke he chucked the whole double handful
into the now empty chest, then arose and dusted the sand from his
breeches. Then, with a great deal of bustling energy, he helped to tie
the bags again and put them all back into the chest.

They reburied the chest in the place whence they had taken it, and
then the parson folded the precious paper of directions, placed it
carefully in his wallet, and his wallet in his pocket. "Tom," he said,
for the twentieth time, "your fortune has been made this day."

And Tom Chist, as he rattled in his breeches pocket the half dozen
doubloons he had kept out of his treasure, felt that what his friend
had said was true.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the two went back homeward across the level space of sand Tom Chist
suddenly stopped stock-still and stood looking about him. "'Twas just
here," he said, digging his heel down into the sand, "that they killed
the poor black man."

[Illustration: "Pirates Used to Do That to Their Captains Now and
Then"

_Illustration from_
SEA ROBBERS OF NEW YORK

_by_ Thomas A. Janvier

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _November, 1894_]

"And here he lies buried for all time," said Parson Jones; and as he
spoke he dug his cane down into the sand. Tom Chist shuddered. He
would not have been surprised if the ferrule of the cane had struck
something soft beneath that level surface. But it did not, nor was any
sign of that tragedy ever seen again. For, whether the pirates had
carried away what they had done and buried it elsewhere, or whether
the storm in blowing the sand had completely leveled off and hidden
all sign of that tragedy where it was enacted, certain it is that
it never came to sight again--at least so far as Tom Chist and the
Rev. Hilary Jones ever knew.


VII

This is the story of the treasure box. All that remains now is to
conclude the story of Tom Chist, and to tell of what came of him in
the end.

He did not go back again to live with old Matt Abrahamson. Parson
Jones had now taken charge of him and his fortunes, and Tom did not
have to go back to the fisherman's hut.

Old Abrahamson talked a great deal about it, and would come in his
cups and harangue good Parson Jones, making a vast protestation of
what he would do to Tom--if he ever caught him--for running away. But
Tom on all these occasions kept carefully out of his way, and nothing
came of the old man's threatenings.

Tom used to go over to see his foster mother now and then, but always
when the old man was from home. And Molly Abrahamson used to warn him
to keep out of her father's way. "He's in as vile a humor as ever I
see, Tom," she said; "he sits sulking all day long, and 'tis my belief
he'd kill ye if he caught ye."

Of course Tom said nothing, even to her, about the treasure, and he
and the reverend gentleman kept the knowledge thereof to themselves.
About three weeks later Parson Jones managed to get him shipped aboard
of a vessel bound for New York town, and a few days later Tom Chist
landed at that place. He had never been in such a town before, and he
could not sufficiently wonder and marvel at the number of brick
houses, at the multitude of people coming and going along the fine,
hard, earthen sidewalk, at the shops and the stores where goods hung
in the windows, and, most of all, the fortifications and the battery
at the point, at the rows of threatening cannon, and at the
scarlet-coated sentries pacing up and down the ramparts. All this was
very wonderful, and so were the clustered boats riding at anchor in
the harbor. It was like a new world, so different was it from the
sand hills and the sedgy levels of Henlopen.

Tom Chist took up his lodgings at a coffee house near to the town
hall, and thence he sent by the postboy a letter written by Parson
Jones to Master Chillingsworth. In a little while the boy returned
with a message, asking Tom to come up to Mr. Chillingsworth's house
that afternoon at two o'clock.

Tom went thither with a great deal of trepidation, and his heart fell
away altogether when he found it a fine, grand brick house, three
stories high, and with wrought-iron letters across the front.

The counting house was in the same building; but Tom, because of Mr.
Jones's letter, was conducted directly into the parlor, where the
great rich man was awaiting his coming. He was sitting in a
leather-covered armchair, smoking a pipe of tobacco, and with a bottle
of fine old Madeira close to his elbow.

Tom had not had a chance to buy a new suit of clothes yet, and so he
cut no very fine figure in the rough dress he had brought with him
from Henlopen. Nor did Mr. Chillingsworth seem to think very highly of
his appearance, for he sat looking sideways at Tom as he smoked.

"Well, my lad," he said, "and what is this great thing you have to
tell me that is so mightily wonderful? I got what's-his-name--Mr.
Jones's--letter, and now I am ready to hear what you have to say."

But if he thought but little of his visitor's appearance at first, he
soon changed his sentiments toward him, for Tom had not spoken twenty
words when Mr. Chillingsworth's whole aspect changed. He straightened
himself up in his seat, laid aside his pipe, pushed away his glass of
Madeira, and bade Tom take a chair.

He listened without a word as Tom Chist told of the buried treasure,
of how he had seen the poor negro murdered, and of how he and Parson
Jones had recovered the chest again. Only once did Mr. Chillingsworth
interrupt the narrative. "And to think," he cried, "that the villain
this very day walks about New York town as though he were an honest
man, ruffling it with the best of us! But if we can only get hold of
these log books you speak of. Go on; tell me more of this."

When Tom Chist's narrative was ended, Mr. Chillingsworth's bearing was
as different as daylight is from dark. He asked a thousand questions,
all in the most polite and gracious tone imaginable, and not only
urged a glass of his fine old Madeira upon Tom, but asked him to stay
to supper. There was nobody to be there, he said, but his wife and
daughter.

Tom, all in a panic at the very thought of the two ladies, sturdily
refused to stay even for the dish of tea Mr. Chillingsworth offered
him.

He did not know that he was destined to stay there as long as he
should live.

"And now," said Mr. Chillingsworth, "tell me about yourself."

"I have nothing to tell, Your Honor," said Tom, "except that I was
washed up out of the sea."

"Washed up out of the sea!" exclaimed Mr. Chillingsworth. "Why, how
was that? Come, begin at the beginning, and tell me all."

Thereupon Tom Chist did as he was bidden, beginning at the very
beginning and telling everything just as Molly Abrahamson had often
told it to him. As he continued, Mr. Chillingsworth's interest changed
into an appearance of stronger and stronger excitement. Suddenly he
jumped up out of his chair and began to walk up and down the room.

[Illustration]

"Stop! stop!" he cried out at last, in the midst of something Tom was
saying. "Stop! stop! Tell me; do you know the name of the vessel that
was wrecked, and from which you were washed ashore?"

"I've heard it said," said Tom Chist, "'twas the _Bristol Merchant_."

"I knew it! I knew it!" exclaimed the great man, in a loud voice,
flinging his hands up into the air. "I felt it was so the moment you
began the story. But tell me this, was there nothing found with you
with a mark or a name upon it?"

"There was a kerchief," said Tom, "marked with a T and a C."

"Theodosia Chillingsworth!" cried out the merchant. "I knew it! I knew
it! Heavens! to think of anything so wonderful happening as this! Boy!
boy! dost thou know who thou art? Thou art my own brother's son. His
name was Oliver Chillingsworth, and he was my partner in business, and
thou art his son." Then he ran out into the entryway, shouting and
calling for his wife and daughter to come.

       *       *       *       *       *

So Tom Chist--or Thomas Chillingsworth, as he now was to be
called--did stay to supper, after all.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the story, and I hope you may like it. For Tom Chist became
rich and great, as was to be supposed, and he married his pretty
cousin Theodosia (who had been named for his own mother, drowned in
the _Bristol Merchant_).

He did not forget his friends, but had Parson Jones brought to New
York to live.

As to Molly and Matt Abrahamson, they both enjoyed a pension of ten
pounds a year for as long as they lived; for now that all was well
with him, Tom bore no grudge against the old fisherman for all the
drubbings he had suffered.

The treasure box was brought on to New York, and if Tom Chist did not
get all the money there was in it (as Parson Jones had opined he
would) he got at least a good big lump of it.

And it is my belief that those log books did more to get Captain Kidd
arrested in Boston town and hanged in London than anything else that
was brought up against him.

[Illustration]




Chapter V

JACK BALLISTER'S FORTUNES


I

We, of these times, protected as we are by the laws and by the number
of people about us, can hardly comprehend such a life as that of the
American colonies in the early part of the eighteenth century, when it
was possible for a pirate like Capt. Teach, known as Blackbeard, to
exist, and for the governor and the secretary of the province in which
he lived perhaps to share his plunder, and to shelter and to protect
him against the law.

At that time the American colonists were in general a rough, rugged
people, knowing nothing of the finer things of life. They lived mostly
in little settlements, separated by long distances from one another,
so that they could neither make nor enforce laws to protect
themselves. Each man or little group of men had to depend upon his or
their own strength to keep what belonged to them, and to prevent
fierce men or groups of men from seizing what did not belong to them.

It is the natural disposition of everyone to get all that he can.
Little children, for instance, always try to take away from others
that which they want, and to keep it for their own. It is only by
constant teaching that they learn that they must not do so; that they
must not take by force what does not belong to them. So it is only by
teaching and training that people learn to be honest and not to take
what is not theirs. When this teaching is not sufficient to make a man
learn to be honest, or when there is something in the man's nature
that makes him not able to learn, then he only lacks the opportunity
to seize upon the things he wants, just as he would do if he were a
little child.

In the colonies at that time, as was just said, men were too few and
scattered to protect themselves against those who had made up their
minds to take by force that which they wanted, and so it was that men
lived an unrestrained and lawless life, such as we of these times of
better government can hardly comprehend.

The usual means of commerce between province and province was by water
in coasting vessels. These coasting vessels were so defenseless, and
the different colonial governments were so ill able to protect them,
that those who chose to rob them could do it almost without danger to
themselves.

So it was that all the western world was, in those days, infested with
armed bands of cruising freebooters or pirates, who used to stop
merchant vessels and take from them what they chose.

Each province in those days was ruled over by a royal governor
appointed by the king. Each governor, at one time, was free to do
almost as he pleased in his own province. He was accountable only to
the king and his government, and England was so distant that he was
really responsible almost to nobody but himself.

The governors were naturally just as desirous to get rich quickly,
just as desirous of getting all that they could for themselves, as was
anybody else--only they had been taught and had been able to learn
that it was not right to be an actual pirate or robber. They wanted to
be rich easily and quickly, but the desire was not strong enough to
lead them to dishonor themselves in their own opinion and in the
opinion of others by gratifying their selfishness. They would even
have stopped the pirates from doing what they did if they could, but
their provincial governments were too weak to prevent the freebooters
from robbing merchant vessels, or to punish them when they came
ashore. The provinces had no navies, and they really had no armies;
neither were there enough people living within the community to
enforce the laws against those stronger and fiercer men who were not
honest.

After the things the pirates seized from merchant vessels were once
stolen they were altogether lost. Almost never did any owner apply for
them, for it would be useless to do so. The stolen goods and
merchandise lay in the storehouses of the pirates, seemingly without
any owner excepting the pirates themselves.

The governors and the secretaries of the colonies would not dishonor
themselves by pirating upon merchant vessels, but it did not seem so
wicked after the goods were stolen--and so altogether lost--to take a
part of that which seemed to have no owner.

A child is taught that it is a very wicked thing to take, for
instance, by force, a lump of sugar from another child; but when a
wicked child has seized the sugar from another and taken it around the
corner, and that other child from whom he has seized it has gone home
crying, it does not seem so wicked for the third child to take a bite
of the sugar when it is offered to him, even if he thinks it has been
taken from some one else.

It was just so, no doubt, that it did not seem so wicked to Governor
Eden and Secretary Knight of North Carolina, or to Governor Fletcher
of New York, or to other colonial governors, to take a part of the
booty that the pirates, such as Blackbeard, had stolen. It did not
even seem very wicked to compel such pirates to give up a part of what
was not theirs, and which seemed to have no owner.

In Governor Eden's time, however, the colonies had begun to be more
thickly peopled, and the laws had gradually become stronger and
stronger to protect men in the possession of what was theirs. Governor
Eden was the last of the colonial governors who had dealings with the
pirates, and Blackbeard was almost the last of the pirates who, with
his banded men, was savage and powerful enough to come and go as he
chose among the people whom he plundered.

Virginia, at that time, was the greatest and the richest of all the
American colonies, and upon the farther side of North Carolina was the
province of South Carolina, also strong and rich. It was these two
colonies that suffered the most from Blackbeard, and it began to be
that the honest men that lived in them could endure no longer to be
plundered.

The merchants and traders and others who suffered cried out loudly for
protection, so loudly that the governors of these provinces could not
help hearing them.

Governor Eden was petitioned to act against the pirates, but he would
do nothing, for he felt very friendly toward Blackbeard--just as a
child who has had a taste of the stolen sugar feels friendly toward
the child who gives it to him.

At last, when Blackbeard sailed up into the very heart of Virginia,
and seized upon and carried away the daughter of that colony's
foremost people, the governor of Virginia, finding that the governor
of North Carolina would do nothing to punish the outrage, took the
matter into his own hands and issued a proclamation offering a reward
of one hundred pounds for Blackbeard, alive or dead, and different
sums for the other pirates who were his followers.

Governor Spottiswood had the right to issue the proclamation, but he
had no right to commission Lieutenant Maynard, as he did, to take down
an armed force into the neighboring province and to attack the pirates
in the waters of the North Carolina sounds. It was all a part of the
rude and lawless condition of the colonies at the time that such a
thing could have been done.

[Illustration: "Jack Followed the Captain and the Young Lady up the
Crooked Path to the House"

_Illustration from_
JACK BALLISTER'S FORTUNES

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published by_
The Century Company, 1894]

The governor's proclamation against the pirates was issued upon the
eleventh day of November. It was read in the churches the Sunday
following and was posted upon the doors of all the government custom
offices in lower Virginia. Lieutenant Maynard, in the boats that
Colonel Parker had already fitted out to go against the pirates, set
sail upon the seventeenth of the month for Ocracoke. Five days later
the battle was fought.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blackbeard's sloop was lying inside of Ocracoke Inlet among the shoals
and sand bars when he first heard of Governor Spottiswood's
proclamation.

There had been a storm, and a good many vessels had run into the inlet
for shelter. Blackbeard knew nearly all of the captains of these
vessels, and it was from them that he first heard of the proclamation.

He had gone aboard one of the vessels--a coaster from Boston. The wind
was still blowing pretty hard from the southeast. There were maybe a
dozen vessels lying within the inlet at that time, and the captain of
one of them was paying the Boston skipper a visit when Blackbeard came
aboard. The two captains had been talking together. They instantly
ceased when the pirate came down into the cabin, but he had heard
enough of their conversation to catch its drift. "Why d'ye stop?" he
said. "I heard what you said. Well, what then? D'ye think I mind it at
all? Spottiswood is going to send his bullies down here after me.
That's what you were saying. Well, what then? You don't think I'm
afraid of his bullies, do you?"

"Why, no, Captain, I didn't say you was afraid," said the visiting
captain.

"And what right has he got to send down here against me in North
Carolina, I should like to ask you?"

"He's got none at all," said the Boston captain, soothingly. "Won't
you take a taste of Hollands, Captain?"

"He's no more right to come blustering down here into Governor Eden's
province than I have to come aboard of your schooner here, Tom Burley,
and to carry off two or three kegs of this prime Hollands for my own
drinking."

Captain Burley--the Boston man--laughed a loud, forced laugh. "Why,
Captain," he said, "as for two or three kegs of Hollands, you won't
find that aboard. But if you'd like to have a keg of it for your own
drinking, I'll send it to you and be glad enough to do so for old
acquaintance' sake."

"But I tell you what 'tis, Captain," said the visiting skipper to
Blackbeard, "they're determined and set against you this time. I tell
you, Captain, Governor Spottiswood hath issued a hot proclamation
against you, and 't hath been read out in all the churches. I myself
saw it posted in Yorktown upon the customhouse door and read it there
myself. The governor offers one hundred pounds for you, and fifty
pounds for your officers, and twenty pounds each for your men."

"Well, then," said Blackbeard, holding up his glass, "here, I wish 'em
good luck, and when they get their hundred pounds for me they'll be in
a poor way to spend it. As for the Hollands," said he, turning to
Captain Burley, "I know what you've got aboard here and what you
haven't. D'ye suppose ye can blind me? Very well, you send over two
kegs, and I'll let you go without search." The two captains were very
silent. "As for that Lieutenant Maynard you're all talking about,"
said Blackbeard, "why, I know him very well. He was the one who was so
busy with the pirates down Madagascar way. I believe you'd all like to
see him blow me out of the water, but he can't do it. There's nobody
in His Majesty's service I'd rather meet than Lieutenant Maynard. I'd
teach him pretty briskly that North Carolina isn't Madagascar."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the evening of the twenty-second the two vessels under command of
Lieutenant Maynard came into the mouth of Ocracoke Inlet and there
dropped anchor. Meantime the weather had cleared, and all the vessels
but one had gone from the inlet. The one vessel that remained was a
New Yorker. It had been there over a night and a day, and the captain
and Blackbeard had become very good friends.

The same night that Maynard came into the inlet a wedding was held on
the shore. A number of men and women came up the beach in oxcarts and
sledges; others had come in boats from more distant points and across
the water.

The captain of the New Yorker and Blackbeard went ashore together a
little after dark. The New Yorker had been aboard of the pirate's
sloop for all the latter part of the afternoon, and he and Blackbeard
had been drinking together in the cabin. The New York man was now a
little tipsy, and he laughed and talked foolishly as he and Blackbeard
were rowed ashore. The pirate sat grim and silent.

It was nearly dark when they stepped ashore on the beach. The New York
captain stumbled and fell headlong, rolling over and over, and the
crew of the boat burst out laughing.

The people had already begun to dance in an open shed fronting upon
the shore. There were fires of pine knots in front of the building,
lighting up the interior with a red glare. A negro was playing a
fiddle somewhere inside, and the shed was filled with a crowd of
grotesque dancing figures--men and women. Now and then they called
with loud voices as they danced, and the squeaking of the fiddle
sounded incessantly through the noise of outcries and the stamp and
shuffling of feet.

Captain Teach and the New York captain stood looking on. The New York
man had tilted himself against a post and stood there holding one arm
around it, supporting himself. He waved the other hand foolishly in
time to the music, now and then snapping his thumb and finger.

The young woman who had just been married approached the two. She had
been dancing, and she was warm and red, her hair blowzed about her
head. "Hi, Captain, won't you dance with me?" she said to Blackbeard.

Blackbeard stared at her. "Who be you?" he said.

She burst out laughing. "You look as if you'd eat a body," she cried.

Blackbeard's face gradually relaxed. "Why, to be sure, you're a brazen
one, for all the world," he said. "Well, I'll dance with you, that I
will. I'll dance the heart out of you."

He pushed forward, thrusting aside with his elbow the newly made
husband. The man, who saw that Blackbeard had been drinking, burst out
laughing, and the other men and women who had been standing around
drew away, so that in a little while the floor was pretty well
cleared. One could see the negro now; he sat on a barrel at the end of
the room. He grinned with his white teeth and, without stopping in his
fiddling, scraped his bow harshly across the strings, and then
instantly changed the tune to a lively jig. Blackbeard jumped up into
the air and clapped his heels together, giving, as he did so, a sharp,
short yell. Then he began instantly dancing grotesquely and violently.
The woman danced opposite to him, this way and that, with her knuckles
on her hips. Everybody burst out laughing at Blackbeard's grotesque
antics. They laughed again and again, clapping their hands, and the
negro scraped away on his fiddle like fury. The woman's hair came
tumbling down her back. She tucked it back, laughing and panting, and
the sweat ran down her face. She danced and danced. At last she burst
out laughing and stopped, panting. Blackbeard again jumped up in the
air and clapped his heels. Again he yelled, and as he did so, he
struck his heels upon the floor and spun around. Once more everybody
burst out laughing, clapping their hands, and the negro stopped
fiddling.

[Illustration: "He Led Jack up to a Man Who Sat upon a Barrel"

_Illustration from_
JACK BALLISTER'S FORTUNES

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published by_
The Century Company. 1894]

Near by was a shanty or cabin where they were selling spirits, and by
and by Blackbeard went there with the New York captain, and presently
they began drinking again. "Hi, Captain!" called one of the men,
"Maynard's out yonder in the inlet. Jack Bishop's just come across
from t'other side. He says Mr. Maynard hailed him and asked for a
pilot to fetch him in."

"Well, here's luck to him, and he can't come in quick enough for me!"
cried out Blackbeard in his hoarse, husky voice.

"Well, Captain," called a voice, "will ye fight him to-morrow?"

"Aye," shouted the pirate, "if he can get in to me, I'll try to give
'em what they seek, and all they want of it into the bargain. As for a
pilot, I tell ye what 'tis--if any man hereabouts goes out there to
pilot that villain in 'twill be the worst day's work he ever did in
all of his life. 'Twon't be fit for him to live in these parts of
America if I am living here at the same time." There was a burst of
laughter.

"Give us a toast, Captain! Give us something to drink to! Aye,
Captain, a toast! A toast!" a half dozen voices were calling out at
the same time.

"Well," cried out the pirate captain, "here's to a good, hot fight
to-morrow, and the best dog on top! 'Twill be, Bang! bang!--this way!"

He began pulling a pistol out of his pocket, but it stuck in the
lining, and he struggled and tugged at it. The men ducked and
scrambled away from before him, and then the next moment he had the
pistol out of his pocket. He swung it around and around. There was
perfect silence. Suddenly there was a flash and a stunning report, and
instantly a crash and tinkle of broken glass. One of the men cried
out, and began picking and jerking at the back of his neck. "He's
broken that bottle all down my neck," he called out.

"That's the way 'twill be," said Blackbeard.

"Lookee," said the owner of the place, "I won't serve out another drop
if 'tis going to be like that. If there's any more trouble I'll blow
out the lantern."

The sound of the squeaking and scraping of the fiddle and the shouts
and the scuffling feet still came from the shed where the dancing was
going on.

"Suppose you get your dose to-morrow, Captain," some one called out,
"what then?"

"Why, if I do," said Blackbeard, "I get it, and that's all there is of
it."

"Your wife 'll be a rich widdy then, won't she?" cried one of the men;
and there was a burst of laughter.

"Why," said the New York captain,--"why, has a--a bloody p-pirate like
you a wife then--a--like any honest man?"

"She'll be no richer than she is now," said Blackbeard.

"She knows where you've hid your money, anyways. Don't she, Captain?"
called out a voice.

"The divil knows where I've hid my money," said Blackbeard, "and I
know where I've hid it; and the longest liver of the twain will git it
all. And that's all there is of it."

The gray of early day was beginning to show in the east when
Blackbeard and the New York captain came down to the landing together.
The New York captain swayed and toppled this way and that as he
walked, now falling against Blackbeard, and now staggering away from
him.


II

Early in the morning--perhaps eight o'clock--Lieutenant Maynard sent a
boat from the schooner over to the settlement, which lay some four or
five miles distant. A number of men stood lounging on the landing,
watching the approach of the boat. The men rowed close up to the
wharf, and there lay upon their oars, while the boatswain of the
schooner, who was in command of the boat, stood up and asked if there
was any man there who could pilot them over the shoals.

Nobody answered, but all stared stupidly at him. After a while one of
the men at last took his pipe out of his mouth. "There ben't any pilot
here, master," said he; "we ben't pilots."

"Why, what a story you do tell!" roared the boatswain. "D'ye suppose
I've never been down here before, not to know that every man about
here knows the passes of the shoals?"

The fellow still held his pipe in his hand. He looked at another one
of the men. "Do you know the passes in over the shoals, Jem?" said he.

The man to whom he spoke was a young fellow with long, shaggy,
sunburnt hair hanging over his eyes in an unkempt mass. He shook his
head, grunting, "Na--I don't know naught about t' shoals."

"'Tis Lieutenant Maynard of His Majesty's navy in command of them
vessels out there," said the boatswain. "He'll give any man five pound
to pilot him in." The men on the wharf looked at one another, but
still no one spoke, and the boatswain stood looking at them. He saw
that they did not choose to answer him. "Why," he said, "I believe
you've not got right wits--that's what I believe is the matter with
you. Pull me up to the landing, men, and I'll go ashore and see if I
can find anybody that's willing to make five pound for such a little
bit of piloting as that."

After the boatswain had gone ashore the loungers still stood on the
wharf, looking down into the boat, and began talking to one another
for the men below to hear them. "They're coming in," said one, "to
blow poor Blackbeard out of the water." "Aye," said another, "he's so
peaceable, too, he is; he'll just lay still and let 'em blow and blow,
he will." "There's a young fellow there," said another of the men; "he
don't look fit to die yet, he don't. Why, I wouldn't be in his place
for a thousand pound." "I do suppose Blackbeard's so afraid he don't
know how to see," said the first speaker.

At last one of the men in the boat spoke up. "Maybe he don't know how
to see," said he, "but maybe we'll blow some daylight into him afore
we get through with him."

Some more of the settlers had come out from the shore to the end of
the wharf, and there was now quite a crowd gathering there, all
looking at the men in the boat. "What do them Virginny 'baccy-eaters
do down here in Caroliny, anyway?" said one of the newcomers. "They've
got no call to be down here in North Caroliny waters."

"Maybe you can keep us away from coming, and maybe you can't," said a
voice from the boat.

"Why," answered the man on the wharf, "we could keep you away easy
enough, but you ben't worth the trouble, and that's the truth."

There was a heavy iron bolt lying near the edge of the landing. One of
the men upon the wharf slyly thrust it out with the end of his foot.
It hung for a moment and then fell into the boat below with a crash.
"What d'ye mean by that?" roared the man in charge of the boat. "What
d'ye mean, ye villains? D'ye mean to stave a hole in us?"

"Why," said the man who had pushed it, "you saw 'twasn't done a
purpose, didn't you?"

"Well, you try it again, and somebody 'll get hurt," said the man in
the boat, showing the butt end of his pistol.

The men on the wharf began laughing. Just then the boatswain came down
from the settlement again, and out along the landing. The threatened
turbulence quieted as he approached, and the crowd moved sullenly
aside to let him pass. He did not bring any pilot with him, and he
jumped down into the stern of the boat, saying, briefly, "Push off."
The crowd of loungers stood looking after them as they rowed away, and
when the boat was some distance from the landing they burst out into a
volley of derisive yells. "The villains!" said the boatswain, "they
are all in league together. They wouldn't even let me go up into the
settlement to look for a pilot."

       *       *       *       *       *

The lieutenant and his sailing master stood watching the boat as it
approached. "Couldn't you, then, get a pilot, Baldwin?" said Mr.
Maynard, as the boatswain scrambled aboard.

"No, I couldn't, sir," said the man. "Either they're all banded
together, or else they're all afraid of the villains. They wouldn't
even let me go up into the settlement to find one."

"Well, then," said Mr. Maynard, "we'll make shift to work in as best
we may by ourselves. 'Twill be high tide against one o'clock. We'll
run in then with sail as far as we can, and then we'll send you ahead
with the boat to sound for a pass, and we'll follow with the sweeps.
You know the waters pretty well, you say."

"They were saying ashore that the villain hath forty men aboard," said
the boatswain.[2]

[Footnote 2: The pirate captain had really only twenty-five men aboard
of his sloop at the time of the battle.]

Lieutenant Maynard's force consisted of thirty-five men in the
schooner and twenty-five men in the sloop. He carried neither cannons
nor carronades, and neither of his vessels was very well fitted for
the purpose for which they were designed. The schooner, which he
himself commanded, offered almost no protection to the crew. The rail
was not more than a foot high in the waist, and the men on the deck
were almost entirely exposed. The rail of the sloop was perhaps a
little higher, but it, too, was hardly better adapted for fighting.
Indeed, the lieutenant depended more upon the moral force of official
authority to overawe the pirates than upon any real force of arms or
men. He never believed, until the very last moment, that the pirates
would show any real fight. It is very possible that they might not
have done so had they not thought that the lieutenant had actually no
legal right supporting him in his attack upon them in North Carolina
waters.

It was about noon when anchor was hoisted, and, with the schooner
leading, both vessels ran slowly in before a light wind that had begun
to blow toward midday. In each vessel a man stood in the bows,
sounding continually with lead and line. As they slowly opened up the
harbor within the inlet, they could see the pirate sloop lying about
three miles away. There was a boat just putting off from it to the
shore.

The lieutenant and his sailing master stood together on the roof of
the cabin deckhouse. The sailing master held a glass to his eye. "She
carries a long gun, sir," he said, "and four carronades. She'll be
hard to beat, sir, I do suppose, armed as we are with only light arms
for close fighting."

The lieutenant laughed. "Why, Brookes," he said, "you seem to think
forever of these men showing fight. You don't know them as I know
them. They have a deal of bluster and make a deal of noise, but when
you seize them and hold them with a strong hand, there's naught of
fight left in them. 'Tis like enough there 'll not be so much as a
musket fired to-day. I've had to do with 'em often enough before to
know my gentlemen well by this time." Nor, as was said, was it until
the very last that the lieutenant could be brought to believe that the
pirates had any stomach for a fight.

The two vessels had reached perhaps within a mile of the pirate sloop
before they found the water too shallow to venture any farther with
the sail. It was then that the boat was lowered as the lieutenant had
planned, and the boatswain went ahead to sound, the two vessels, with
their sails still hoisted but empty of wind, pulling in after with
sweeps.

The pirate had also hoisted sail, but lay as though waiting for the
approach of the schooner and the sloop.

[Illustration: "The Bullets Were Humming and Singing, Clipping Along
the Top of the Water"

_Illustration from_
JACK BALLISTER'S FORTUNES

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published by_
The Century Company, 1894]

The boat in which the boatswain was sounding had run in a considerable
distance ahead of the two vessels, which were gradually creeping up
with the sweeps until they had reached to within less than half a
mile of the pirates--the boat with the boatswain maybe a quarter of a
mile closer. Suddenly there was a puff of smoke from the pirate sloop,
and then another and another, and the next moment there came the three
reports of muskets up the wind.

"By zounds!" said the lieutenant. "I do believe they're firing on the
boat!" And then he saw the boat turn and begin pulling toward them.

The boat with the boatswain aboard came rowing rapidly. Again there
were three or four puffs of smoke and three or four subsequent reports
from the distant vessel. Then, in a little while, the boat was
alongside, and the boatswain came scrambling aboard. "Never mind
hoisting the boat," said the lieutenant; "we'll just take her in tow.
Come aboard as quick as you can." Then, turning to the sailing master,
"Well, Brookes, you'll have to do the best you can to get in over the
shoals under half sail."

"But, sir," said the master, "we'll be sure to run aground."

"Very well, sir," said the lieutenant, "you heard my orders. If we run
aground we run aground, and that's all there is of it."

"I sounded as far as maybe a little over a fathom," said the mate,
"but the villains would let me go no nearer. I think I was in the
channel, though. 'Tis more open inside, as I mind me of it. There's a
kind of a hole there, and if we get in over the shoals just beyond
where I was we'll be all right."

"Very well, then, you take the wheel, Baldwin," said the lieutenant,
"and do the best you can for us."

Lieutenant Maynard stood looking out forward at the pirate vessel,
which they were now steadily nearing under half sail. He could see
that there were signs of bustle aboard and of men running around upon
the deck. Then he walked aft and around the cabin. The sloop was some
distance astern. It appeared to have run aground, and they were trying
to push it off with the sweeps. The lieutenant looked down into the
water over the stern, and saw that the schooner was already raising
the mud in her wake. Then he went forward along the deck. His men
were crouching down along by the low rail, and there was a tense
quietness of expectation about them. The lieutenant looked them over
as he passed them. "Johnson," he said, "do you take the lead and line
and go forward and sound a bit." Then to the others: "Now, my men, the
moment we run her aboard, you get aboard of her as quick as you can,
do you understand? Don't wait for the sloop or think about her, but
just see that the grappling irons are fast, and then get aboard. If
any man offers to resist you, shoot him down. Are you ready, Mr.
Cringle?"

"Aye, aye, sir," said the gunner.

"Very well, then, be ready, men; we'll be aboard 'em in a minute or
two."

"There's less than a fathom of water here, sir," sang out Johnson from
the bows. As he spoke there was a sudden soft jar and jerk, then the
schooner was still. They were aground. "Push her off to the lee there!
Let go your sheets!" roared the boatswain from the wheel. "Push her
off to the lee." He spun the wheel around as he spoke. A half a dozen
men sprang up, seized the sweeps, and plunged them into the water.
Others ran to help them, but the sweeps only sank into the mud without
moving the schooner. The sails had fallen off and they were flapping
and thumping and clapping in the wind. Others of the crew had
scrambled to their feet and ran to help those at the sweeps. The
lieutenant had walked quickly aft again. They were very close now to
the pirate sloop, and suddenly some one hailed him from aboard of her.
When he turned he saw that there was a man standing up on the rail of
the pirate sloop, holding by the back stays. "Who are you?" he called,
from the distance, "and whence come you? What do you seek here? What
d'ye mean, coming down on us this way?"

The lieutenant heard somebody say, "That's Blackbeard his-self." And
he looked with great interest at the distant figure.

The pirate stood out boldly against the cloudy sky. Somebody seemed to
speak to him from behind. He turned his head and then he turned round
again. "We're only peaceful merchantmen!" he called out. "What
authority have you got to come down upon us this way? If you'll come
aboard I'll show you my papers and that we're only peaceful
merchantmen."

"The villains!" said the lieutenant to the master, who stood beside
him. "They're peaceful merchantmen, are they! They look like peaceful
merchantmen, with four carronades and a long gun aboard!" Then he
called out across the water, "I'll come aboard with my schooner as
soon as I can push her off here."

"If you undertake to come aboard of me," called the pirate, "I'll
shoot into you. You've got no authority to board me, and I won't have
you do it. If you undertake it 'twill be at your own risk, for I'll
neither ask quarter of you nor give none."

"Very well," said the lieutenant, "if you choose to try that, you may
do as you please; for I'm coming aboard of you as sure as heaven."

"Push off the bow there!" called the boatswain at the wheel. "Look
alive! Why don't you push off the bow?"

"She's hard aground!" answered the gunner. "We can't budge her an
inch."

"If they was to fire into us now," said the sailing master, "they'd
smash us to pieces."

"They won't fire into us," said the lieutenant. "They won't dare to."
He jumped down from the cabin deckhouse as he spoke, and went forward
to urge the men in pushing off the boat. It was already beginning to
move.

At that moment the sailing master suddenly called out, "Mr. Maynard!
Mr. Maynard! they're going to give us a broadside!"

Almost before the words were out of his mouth, before Lieutenant
Maynard could turn, there came a loud and deafening crash, and then
instantly another, and a third, and almost as instantly a crackling
and rending of broken wood. There were clean yellow splinters flying
everywhere. A man fell violently against the lieutenant, nearly
overturning him, but he caught at the stays and so saved himself. For
one tense moment he stood holding his breath. Then all about him arose
a sudden outcry of groans and shouts and oaths. The man who had fallen
against him was lying face down upon the deck. His thighs were
quivering, and a pool of blood was spreading and running out from
under him. There were other men down, all about the deck. Some were
rising; some were trying to rise; some only moved.

There was a distant sound of yelling and cheering and shouting. It was
from the pirate sloop. The pirates were rushing about upon her decks.
They had pulled the cannon back, and, through the grunting sound of
the groans about him, the lieutenant could distinctly hear the thud
and punch of the rammers, and he knew they were going to shoot again.

The low rail afforded almost no shelter against such a broadside, and
there was nothing for it but to order all hands below for the time
being.

"Get below!" roared out the lieutenant. "All hands get below and lie
snug for further orders!" In obedience the men ran scrambling below
into the hold, and in a little while the decks were nearly clear
except for the three dead men and some three or four wounded. The
boatswain, crouching down close to the wheel, and the lieutenant
himself were the only others upon deck. Everywhere there were smears
and sprinkles of blood. "Where's Brookes?" the lieutenant called out.

"He's hurt in the arm, sir, and he's gone below," said the boatswain.

Thereupon the lieutenant himself walked over to the forecastle hatch,
and, hailing the gunner, ordered him to get up another ladder, so that
the men could be run up on deck if the pirates should undertake to
come aboard. At that moment the boatswain at the wheel called out
that the villains were going to shoot again, and the lieutenant,
turning, saw the gunner aboard of the pirate sloop in the act of
touching the iron to the touchhole. He stooped down. There was another
loud and deafening crash of cannon, one, two, three--four--the last
two almost together--and almost instantly the boatswain called out,
"'Tis the sloop, sir! look at the sloop!"

[Illustration: "The Combatants Cut and Slashed with Savage Fury"

_Illustration from_
JACK BALLISTER'S FORTUNES

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published by_
The Century Company, 1894]

The sloop had got afloat again, and had been coming up to the aid of
the schooner, when the pirates fired their second broadside now at
her. When the lieutenant looked at her she was quivering with the
impact of the shot, and the next moment she began falling off to the
wind, and he could see the wounded men rising and falling and
struggling upon her decks.

At the same moment the boatswain called out that the enemy was coming
aboard, and even as he spoke the pirate sloop came drifting out from
the cloud of smoke that enveloped her, looming up larger and larger as
she came down upon them. The lieutenant still crouched down under the
rail, looking out at them. Suddenly, a little distance away, she came
about, broadside on, and then drifted. She was close aboard now.
Something came flying through the air--another and another. They were
bottles. One of them broke with a crash upon the deck. The others
rolled over to the farther rail. In each of them a quick-match was
smoking. Almost instantly there was a flash and a terrific report, and
the air was full of the whiz and singing of broken particles of glass
and iron. There was another report, and then the whole air seemed full
of gunpowder smoke. "They're aboard of us!" shouted the boatswain, and
even as he spoke the lieutenant roared out, "All hands to repel
boarders!" A second later there came the heavy, thumping bump of the
vessels coming together.

Lieutenant Maynard, as he called out the order, ran forward through
the smoke, snatching one of his pistols out of his pocket and the
cutlass out of its sheath as he did so. Behind him the men were
coming, swarming up from below. There was a sudden stunning report of
a pistol, and then another and another, almost together. There was a
groan and the fall of a heavy body, and then a figure came jumping
over the rail, with two or three more directly following. The
lieutenant was in the midst of the gunpowder smoke, when suddenly
Blackbeard was before him. The pirate captain had stripped himself
naked to the waist. His shaggy black hair was falling over his eyes,
and he looked like a demon fresh from the pit, with his frantic face.
Almost with the blindness of instinct the lieutenant thrust out his
pistol, firing it as he did so. The pirate staggered back: he was
down--no; he was up again. He had a pistol in each hand; but there was
a stream of blood running down his naked ribs. Suddenly, the mouth of
a pistol was pointing straight at the lieutenant's head. He ducked
instinctively, striking upward with his cutlass as he did so. There
was a stunning, deafening report almost in his ear. He struck again
blindly with his cutlass. He saw the flash of a sword and flung up his
guard almost instinctively, meeting the crash of the descending blade.
Somebody shot from behind him, and at the same moment he saw some one
else strike the pirate. Blackbeard staggered again, and this time
there was a great gash upon his neck. Then one of Maynard's own men
tumbled headlong upon him. He fell with the man, but almost instantly
he had scrambled to his feet again, and as he did so he saw that the
pirate sloop had drifted a little away from them, and that their
grappling irons had evidently parted. His hand was smarting as though
struck with the lash of a whip. He looked around him; the pirate
captain was nowhere to be seen--yes, there he was, lying by the rail.
He raised himself upon his elbow, and the lieutenant saw that he was
trying to point a pistol at him, with an arm that wavered and swayed
blindly, the pistol nearly falling from his fingers. Suddenly his
other elbow gave way and he fell down upon his face. He tried to raise
himself--he fell down again. There was a report and a cloud of smoke,
and when it cleared away Blackbeard had staggered up again. He was a
terrible figure--his head nodding down upon his breast. Somebody shot
again, and then the swaying figure toppled and fell. It lay still for
a moment--then rolled over--then lay still again.

There was a loud splash of men jumping overboard, and then, almost
instantly, the cry of "Quarter! quarter!" The lieutenant ran to the
edge of the vessel. It was as he had thought: the grappling irons of
the pirate sloop had parted, and it had drifted away. The few pirates
who had been left aboard of the schooner had jumped overboard and were
now holding up their hands. "Quarter!" they cried. "Don't
shoot!--quarter!" And the fight was over.

The lieutenant looked down at his hand, and then he saw, for the first
time, that there was a great cutlass gash across the back of it, and
that his arm and shirt sleeve were wet with blood. He went aft,
holding the wrist of his wounded hand. The boatswain was still at the
wheel. "By zounds!" said the lieutenant, with a nervous, quavering
laugh, "I didn't know there was such fight in the villains."

His wounded and shattered sloop was again coming up toward him under
sail, but the pirates had surrendered, and the fight was over.




Chapter VI

BLUESKIN, THE PIRATE


I

Cape May and Cape Henlopen form, as it were, the upper and lower jaws
of a gigantic mouth, which disgorges from its monstrous gullet the
cloudy waters of the Delaware Bay into the heaving, sparkling
blue-green of the Atlantic Ocean. From Cape Henlopen as the lower jaw
there juts out a long, curving fang of high, smooth-rolling sand
dunes, cutting sharp and clean against the still, blue sky
above--silent, naked, utterly deserted, excepting for the squat,
white-walled lighthouse standing upon the crest of the highest hill.
Within this curving, sheltering hook of sand hills lie the smooth
waters of Lewes Harbor, and, set a little back from the shore, the
quaint old town, with its dingy wooden houses of clapboard and
shingle, looks sleepily out through the masts of the shipping lying at
anchor in the harbor, to the purple, clean-cut, level thread of the
ocean horizon beyond.

Lewes is a queer, odd, old-fashioned little town, smelling fragrant of
salt marsh and sea breeze. It is rarely visited by strangers. The
people who live there are the progeny of people who have lived there
for many generations, and it is the very place to nurse, and preserve,
and care for old legends and traditions of bygone times, until they
grow from bits of gossip and news into local history of considerable
size. As in the busier world men talk of last year's elections, here
these old bits, and scraps, and odds and ends of history are retailed
to the listener who cares to listen--traditions of the War of 1812,
when Beresford's fleet lay off the harbor threatening to bombard the
town; tales of the Revolution and of Earl Howe's warships, tarrying
for a while in the quiet harbor before they sailed up the river to
shake old Philadelphia town with the thunders of their guns at Red
Bank and Fort Mifflin.

With these substantial and sober threads of real history, other and
more lurid colors are interwoven into the web of local lore--legends
of the dark doings of famous pirates, of their mysterious, sinister
comings and goings, of treasures buried in the sand dunes and pine
barrens back of the cape and along the Atlantic beach to the
southward.

Of such is the story of Blueskin, the pirate.


II

It was in the fall and the early winter of the year 1750, and again in
the summer of the year following, that the famous pirate, Blueskin,
became especially identified with Lewes as a part of its traditional
history.

For some time--for three or four years--rumors and reports of
Blueskin's doings in the West Indies and off the Carolinas had been
brought in now and then by sea captains. There was no more cruel,
bloody, desperate, devilish pirate than he in all those
pirate-infested waters. All kinds of wild and bloody stories were
current concerning him, but it never occurred to the good folk of
Lewes that such stories were some time to be a part of their own
history.

But one day a schooner came drifting into Lewes harbor--shattered,
wounded, her forecastle splintered, her foremast shot half away, and
three great tattered holes in her mainsail. The mate with one of the
crew came ashore in the boat for help and a doctor. He reported that
the captain and the cook were dead and there were three wounded men
aboard. The story he told to the gathering crowd brought a very
peculiar thrill to those who heard it. They had fallen in with
Blueskin, he said, off Fenwick's Island (some twenty or thirty miles
below the capes), and the pirates had come aboard of them; but,
finding that the cargo of the schooner consisted only of cypress
shingles and lumber, had soon quitted their prize. Perhaps Blueskin
was disappointed at not finding a more valuable capture; perhaps the
spirit of deviltry was hotter in him that morning than usual; anyhow,
as the pirate craft bore away she fired three broadsides at short
range into the helpless coaster. The captain had been killed at the
first fire, the cook had died on the way up, three of the crew were
wounded, and the vessel was leaking fast, betwixt wind and water.

Such was the mate's story. It spread like wildfire, and in half an
hour all the town was in a ferment. Fenwick's Island was very near
home; Blueskin might come sailing into the harbor at any minute and
then--! In an hour Sheriff Jones had called together most of the
able-bodied men of the town, muskets and rifles were taken down from
the chimney places, and every preparation was made to defend the place
against the pirates, should they come into the harbor and attempt to
land.

But Blueskin did not come that day, nor did he come the next or the
next. But on the afternoon of the third the news went suddenly flying
over the town that the pirates were inside the capes. As the report
spread the people came running--men, women, and children--to the green
before the tavern, where a little knot of old seamen were gathered
together, looking fixedly out toward the offing, talking in low
voices. Two vessels, one bark-rigged, the other and smaller a sloop,
were slowly creeping up the bay, a couple of miles or so away and just
inside the cape. There appeared nothing remarkable about the two
crafts, but the little crowd that continued gathering upon the green
stood looking out across the bay at them none the less anxiously for
that. They were sailing close-hauled to the wind, the sloop following
in the wake of her consort as the pilot fish follows in the wake of
the shark.

But the course they held did not lie toward the harbor, but rather
bore away toward the Jersey shore, and by and by it began to be
apparent that Blueskin did not intend visiting the town. Nevertheless,
those who stood looking did not draw a free breath until, after
watching the two pirates for more than an hour and a half, they saw
them--then about six miles away--suddenly put about and sail with a
free wind out to sea again.

"The bloody villains have gone!" said old Captain Wolfe, shutting his
telescope with a click.

But Lewes was not yet quit of Blueskin. Two days later a half-breed
from Indian River bay came up, bringing the news that the pirates had
sailed into the inlet--some fifteen miles below Lewes--and had
careened the bark to clean her.

Perhaps Blueskin did not care to stir up the country people against
him, for the half-breed reported that the pirates were doing no harm,
and that what they took from the farmers of Indian River and Rehoboth
they paid for with good hard money.

It was while the excitement over the pirates was at its highest fever
heat that Levi West came home again.


III

Even in the middle of the last century the grist mill, a couple of
miles from Lewes, although it was at most but fifty or sixty years
old, had all a look of weather-beaten age, for the cypress shingles,
of which it was built, ripen in a few years of wind and weather to a
silvery, hoary gray, and the white powdering of flour lent it a look
as though the dust of ages had settled upon it, making the shadows
within dim, soft, mysterious. A dozen willow trees shaded with
dappling, shivering ripples of shadow the road before the mill door,
and the mill itself, and the long, narrow, shingle-built, one-storied,
hip-roofed dwelling house. At the time of the story the mill had
descended in a direct line of succession to Hiram White, the grandson
of old Ephraim White, who had built it, it was said, in 1701.

Hiram White was only twenty-seven years old, but he was already in
local repute as a "character." As a boy he was thought to be
half-witted or "natural," and, as is the case with such unfortunates
in small country towns where everybody knows everybody, he was made a
common sport and jest for the keener, crueler wits of the
neighborhood. Now that he was grown to the ripeness of manhood he was
still looked upon as being--to use a quaint expression--"slack," or
"not jest right." He was heavy, awkward, ungainly and loose-jointed,
and enormously, prodigiously strong. He had a lumpish, thick-featured
face, with lips heavy and loosely hanging, that gave him an air of
stupidity, half droll, half pathetic. His little eyes were set far
apart and flat with his face, his eyebrows were nearly white and his
hair was of a sandy, colorless kind. He was singularly taciturn,
lisping thickly when he did talk, and stuttering and hesitating in his
speech, as though his words moved faster than his mind could follow.
It was the custom for local wags to urge, or badger, or tempt him to
talk, for the sake of the ready laugh that always followed the few
thick, stammering words and the stupid drooping of the jaw at the end
of each short speech. Perhaps Squire Hall was the only one in Lewes
Hundred who mis-doubted that Hiram was half-witted. He had had
dealings with him and was wont to say that whoever bought Hiram White
for a fool made a fool's bargain. Certainly, whether he had common
wits or no, Hiram had managed his mill to pretty good purpose and was
fairly well off in the world as prosperity went in southern Delaware
and in those days. No doubt, had it come to the pinch, he might have
bought some of his tormentors out three times over.

Hiram White had suffered quite a financial loss some six months
before, through that very Blueskin who was now lurking in Indian River
inlet. He had entered into a "venture" with Josiah Shippin, a
Philadelphia merchant, to the tune of seven hundred pounds sterling.
The money had been invested in a cargo of flour and corn meal which
had been shipped to Jamaica by the bark _Nancy Lee_. The _Nancy
Lee_ had been captured by the pirates off Currituck Sound, the crew
set adrift in the longboat, and the bark herself and all her cargo
burned to the water's edge.

[Illustration: SO THE TREASURE WAS DIVIDED]

Five hundred of the seven hundred pounds invested in the unfortunate
"venture" was money bequeathed by Hiram's father, seven years before,
to Levi West.

Eleazer White had been twice married, the second time to the widow
West. She had brought with her to her new home a good-looking,
long-legged, black-eyed, black-haired ne'er-do-well of a son, a year
or so younger than Hiram. He was a shrewd, quick-witted lad, idle,
shiftless, willful, ill-trained perhaps, but as bright and keen as a
pin. He was the very opposite to poor, dull Hiram. Eleazer White had
never loved his son; he was ashamed of the poor, slack-witted oaf.
Upon the other hand, he was very fond of Levi West, whom he always
called "our Levi," and whom he treated in every way as though he were
his own son. He tried to train the lad to work in the mill, and was
patient beyond what the patience of most fathers would have been with
his stepson's idleness and shiftlessness. "Never mind," he was used to
say. "Levi 'll come all right. Levi's as bright as a button."

It was one of the greatest blows of the old miller's life when Levi
ran away to sea. In his last sickness the old man's mind constantly
turned to his lost stepson. "Mebby he'll come back again," said he,
"and if he does I want you to be good to him, Hiram. I've done my duty
by you and have left you the house and mill, but I want you to promise
that if Levi comes back again you'll give him a home and a shelter
under this roof if he wants one." And Hiram had promised to do as his
father asked.

After Eleazer died it was found that he had bequeathed five hundred
pounds to his "beloved stepson, Levi West," and had left Squire Hall
as trustee.

Levi West had been gone nearly nine years and not a word had been
heard from him; there could be little or no doubt that he was dead.

One day Hiram came into Squire Hall's office with a letter in his
hand. It was the time of the old French war, and flour and corn meal
were fetching fabulous prices in the British West Indies. The letter
Hiram brought with him was from a Philadelphia merchant, Josiah
Shippin, with whom he had had some dealings. Mr. Shippin proposed that
Hiram should join him in sending a "venture" of flour and corn meal to
Kingston, Jamaica. Hiram had slept upon the letter overnight and now
he brought it to the old Squire. Squire Hall read the letter, shaking
his head the while. "Too much risk, Hiram!" said he. "Mr Shippin
wouldn't have asked you to go into this venture if he could have got
anybody else to do so. My advice is that you let it alone. I reckon
you've come to me for advice?" Hiram shook his head. "Ye haven't? What
have ye come for, then?"

"Seven hundred pounds," said Hiram.

"Seven hundred pounds!" said Squire Hall. "I haven't got seven hundred
pounds to lend you, Hiram."

"Five hundred been left to Levi--I got hundred--raise hundred more on
mortgage," said Hiram.

"Tut, tut, Hiram," said Squire Hall, "that'll never do in the world.
Suppose Levi West should come back again, what then? I'm responsible
for that money. If you wanted to borrow it now for any reasonable
venture, you should have it and welcome, but for such a wildcat
scheme--"

"Levi never come back," said Hiram--"nine years gone--Levi's dead."

"Mebby he is," said Squire Hall, "but we don't know that."

"I'll give bond for security," said Hiram.

Squire Hall thought for a while in silence. "Very well, Hiram," said
he by and by, "if you'll do that. Your father left the money, and I
don't see that it's right for me to stay his son from using it. But
if it is lost, Hiram, and if Levi should come back, it will go well to
ruin ye."

So Hiram White invested seven hundred pounds in the Jamaica venture
and every farthing of it was burned by Blueskin, off Currituck Sound.


IV

Sally Martin was said to be the prettiest girl in Lewes Hundred, and
when the rumor began to leak out that Hiram White was courting her the
whole community took it as a monstrous joke. It was the common thing
to greet Hiram himself with, "Hey, Hiram; how's Sally?" Hiram never
made answer to such salutation, but went his way as heavily, as
impassively, as dully as ever.

The joke was true. Twice a week, rain or shine, Hiram White never
failed to scrape his feet upon Billy Martin's doorstep. Twice a week,
on Sundays and Thursdays, he never failed to take his customary seat
by the kitchen fire. He rarely said anything by way of talk; he nodded
to the farmer, to his wife, to Sally and, when he chanced to be at
home, to her brother, but he ventured nothing further. There he would
sit from half past seven until nine o'clock, stolid, heavy, impassive,
his dull eyes following now one of the family and now another, but
always coming back again to Sally. It sometimes happened that she had
other company--some of the young men of the neighborhood. The presence
of such seemed to make no difference to Hiram; he bore whatever broad
jokes might be cracked upon him, whatever grins, whatever giggling
might follow those jokes, with the same patient impassiveness. There
he would sit, silent, unresponsive; then, at the first stroke of nine
o'clock, he would rise, shoulder his ungainly person into his
overcoat, twist his head into his three-cornered hat, and with a "Good
night, Sally, I be going now," would take his departure, shutting the
door carefully to behind him.

Never, perhaps, was there a girl in the world had such a lover and
such a courtship as Sally Martin.


V

It was one Thursday evening in the latter part of November, about a
week after Blueskin's appearance off the capes, and while the one
subject of talk was of the pirates being in Indian River inlet. The
air was still and wintry; a sudden cold snap had set in and skins of
ice had formed over puddles in the road; the smoke from the chimneys
rose straight in the quiet air and voices sounded loud, as they do in
frosty weather.

Hiram White sat by the dim light of a tallow dip, poring laboriously
over some account books. It was not quite seven o'clock, and he never
started for Billy Martin's before that hour. As he ran his finger
slowly and hesitatingly down the column of figures, he heard the
kitchen door beyond open and shut, the noise of footsteps crossing the
floor and the scraping of a chair dragged forward to the hearth. Then
came the sound of a basket of corncobs being emptied on the smoldering
blaze and then the snapping and crackling of the reanimated fire.
Hiram thought nothing of all this, excepting, in a dim sort of way,
that it was Bob, the negro mill hand, or old black Dinah, the
housekeeper, and so went on with his calculations.

At last he closed the books with a snap and, smoothing down his hair,
arose, took up the candle, and passed out of the room into the kitchen
beyond.

A man was sitting in front of the corncob fire that flamed and blazed
in the great, gaping, sooty fireplace. A rough overcoat was flung over
the chair behind him and his hands were spread out to the roaring
warmth. At the sound of the lifted latch and of Hiram's entrance he
turned his head, and when Hiram saw his face he stood suddenly still
as though turned to stone. The face, marvelously altered and changed
as it was, was the face of his stepbrother, Levi West. He was not
dead; he had come home again. For a time not a sound broke the dead,
unbroken silence excepting the crackling of the blaze in the fireplace
and the sharp ticking of the tall clock in the corner. The one face,
dull and stolid, with the light of the candle shining upward over its
lumpy features, looked fixedly, immovably, stonily at the other,
sharp, shrewd, cunning--the red wavering light of the blaze shining
upon the high cheek bones, cutting sharp on the nose and twinkling in
the glassy turn of the black, ratlike eyes. Then suddenly that face
cracked, broadened, spread to a grin. "I have come back again, Hi,"
said Levi, and at the sound of the words the speechless spell was
broken.

Hiram answered never a word, but he walked to the fireplace, set the
candle down upon the dusty mantelshelf among the boxes and bottles,
and, drawing forward a chair upon the other side of the hearth, sat
down.

His dull little eyes never moved from his stepbrother's face. There
was no curiosity in his expression, no surprise, no wonder. The heavy
under lip dropped a little farther open and there was more than usual
of dull, expressionless stupidity upon the lumpish face; but that was
all.

As was said, the face upon which he looked was strangely, marvelously
changed from what it had been when he had last seen it nine years
before, and, though it was still the face of Levi West, it was a very
different Levi West than the shiftless ne'er-do-well who had run away
to sea in the Brazilian brig that long time ago. That Levi West had
been a rough, careless, happy-go-lucky fellow; thoughtless and
selfish, but with nothing essentially evil or sinister in his nature.
The Levi West that now sat in a rush-bottom chair at the other side of
the fireplace had that stamped upon his front that might be both evil
and sinister. His swart complexion was tanned to an Indian copper. On
one side of his face was a curious discoloration in the skin and a
long, crooked, cruel scar that ran diagonally across forehead and
temple and cheek in a white, jagged seam. This discoloration was of a
livid blue, about the tint of a tattoo mark. It made a patch the size
of a man's hand, lying across the cheek and the side of the neck.
Hiram could not keep his eyes from this mark and the white scar
cutting across it.

There was an odd sort of incongruity in Levi's dress; a pair of heavy
gold earrings and a dirty red handkerchief knotted loosely around his
neck, beneath an open collar, displaying to its full length the lean,
sinewy throat with its bony "Adam's apple," gave to his costume
somewhat the smack of a sailor. He wore a coat that had once been of
fine plum color--now stained and faded--too small for his lean length,
and furbished with tarnished lace. Dirty cambric cuffs hung at his
wrists and on his fingers were half a dozen and more rings, set with
stones that shone, and glistened, and twinkled in the light of the
fire. The hair at either temple was twisted into a Spanish curl,
plastered flat to the cheek, and a plaited queue hung halfway down his
back.

Hiram, speaking never a word, sat motionless, his dull little eyes
traveling slowly up and down and around and around his stepbrother's
person.

Levi did not seem to notice his scrutiny, leaning forward, now with
his palms spread out to the grateful warmth, now rubbing them slowly
together. But at last he suddenly whirled his chair around, rasping on
the floor, and faced his stepbrother. He thrust his hand into his
capacious coat pocket and brought out a pipe which he proceeded to
fill from a skin of tobacco. "Well, Hi," said he, "d'ye see I've come
back home again?"

"Thought you was dead," said Hiram, dully.

Levi laughed, then he drew a red-hot coal out of the fire, put it upon
the bowl of the pipe and began puffing out clouds of pungent smoke.
"Nay, nay," said he; "not dead--not dead by odds. But [puff] by the
Eternal Holy, Hi, I played many a close game [puff] with old Davy
Jones, for all that."

Hiram's look turned inquiringly toward the jagged scar and Levi caught
the slow glance. "You're lookin' at this," said he, running his finger
down the crooked seam. "That looks bad, but it wasn't so close as
this"--laying his hand for a moment upon the livid stain. "A cooly
devil off Singapore gave me that cut when we fell foul of an opium
junk in the China Sea four years ago last September. This," touching
the disfiguring blue patch again, "was a closer miss, Hi. A Spanish
captain fired a pistol at me down off Santa Catharina. He was so nigh
that the powder went under the skin and it'll never come out again.
---- his eyes--he had better have fired the pistol into his own head
that morning. But never mind that. I reckon I'm changed, ain't I, Hi?"

He took his pipe out of his mouth and looked inquiringly at Hiram, who
nodded.

Levi laughed. "Devil doubt it," said he, "but whether I'm changed or
no, I'll take my affidavy that you are the same old half-witted Hi
that you used to be. I remember dad used to say that you hadn't no
more than enough wits to keep you out of the rain. And, talking of
dad, Hi, I hearn tell he's been dead now these nine years gone. D'ye
know what I've come home for?"

Hiram shook his head.

"I've come for that five hundred pounds that dad left me when he died,
for I hearn tell of that, too."

Hiram sat quite still for a second or two and then he said, "I put
that money out to venture and lost it all."

Levi's face fell and he took his pipe out of his mouth, regarding
Hiram sharply and keenly. "What d'ye mean?" said he presently.

"I thought you was dead--and I put--seven hundred pounds--into _Nancy
Lee_--and Blueskin burned her--off Currituck."

"Burned her off Currituck!" repeated Levi. Then suddenly a light
seemed to break upon his comprehension. "Burned by Blueskin!" he
repeated, and thereupon flung himself back in his chair and burst into
a short, boisterous fit of laughter. "Well, by the Holy Eternal, Hi,
if that isn't a piece of your tarnal luck. Burned by Blueskin, was
it?" He paused for a moment, as though turning it over in his mind.
Then he laughed again. "All the same," said he presently, "d'ye see, I
can't suffer for Blueskin's doings. The money was willed to me, fair
and true, and you have got to pay it, Hiram White, burn or sink,
Blueskin or no Blueskin." Again he puffed for a moment or two in
reflective silence. "All the same, Hi," said he, once more resuming
the thread of talk, "I don't reckon to be too hard on you. You be only
half-witted, anyway, and I sha'n't be too hard on you. I give you a
month to raise that money, and while you're doing it I'll jest hang
around here. I've been in trouble, Hi, d'ye see. I'm under a cloud and
so I want to keep here, as quiet as may be. I'll tell ye how it came
about: I had a set-to with a land pirate in Philadelphia, and somebody
got hurt. That's the reason I'm here now, and don't you say anything
about it. Do you understand?"

Hiram opened his lips as though it was his intent to answer, then
seemed to think better of it and contented himself by nodding his
head.

That Thursday night was the first for a six-month that Hiram White did
not scrape his feet clean at Billy Martin's doorstep.


VI

Within a week Levi West had pretty well established himself among his
old friends and acquaintances, though upon a different footing from
that of nine years before, for this was a very different Levi from
that other. Nevertheless, he was none the less popular in the barroom
of the tavern and at the country store, where he was always the center
of a group of loungers. His nine years seemed to have been crowded
full of the wildest of wild adventures and happenings, as well by land
as by sea, and, given an appreciative audience, he would reel off his
yarns by the hour, in a reckless, devil-may-care fashion that set
agape even old sea dogs who had sailed the western ocean since
boyhood. Then he seemed always to have plenty of money, and he loved
to spend it at the tavern taproom, with a lavishness that was at once
the wonder and admiration of gossips.

[Illustration: Colonel Rhett and the Pirate

_Illustration from_
COLONIES AND NATION

_by_ Woodrow Wilson

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _May_, 1901]

At that time, as was said, Blueskin was the one engrossing topic of
talk, and it added not a little to Levi's prestige when it was found
that he had actually often seen that bloody, devilish pirate with his
own eyes. A great, heavy, burly fellow, Levi said he was, with a beard
as black as a hat--a devil with his sword and pistol afloat, but not
so black as he was painted when ashore. He told of many adventures in
which Blueskin figured and was then always listened to with more than
usual gaping interest.

As for Blueskin, the quiet way in which the pirates conducted
themselves at Indian River almost made the Lewes folk forget what he
could do when the occasion called. They almost ceased to remember that
poor shattered schooner that had crawled with its ghastly dead and
groaning wounded into the harbor a couple of weeks since. But if for a
while they forgot who or what Blueskin was, it was not for long.

One day a bark from Bristol, bound for Cuba and laden with a valuable
cargo of cloth stuffs and silks, put into Lewes harbor to take in
water. The captain himself came ashore and was at the tavern for two
or three hours. It happened that Levi was there and that the talk was
of Blueskin. The English captain, a grizzled old sea dog, listened to
Levi's yarns with not a little contempt. He had, he said, sailed in
the China Sea and the Indian Ocean too long to be afraid of any
hog-eating Yankee pirate such as this Blueskin. A junk full of coolies
armed with stink-pots was something to speak of, but who ever heard of
the likes of Blueskin falling afoul of anything more than a Spanish
canoe or a Yankee coaster?

Levi grinned. "All the same, my hearty," said he, "if I was you I'd
give Blueskin a wide berth. I hear that he's cleaned the vessel that
was careened awhile ago, and mebby he'll give you a little trouble if
you come too nigh him."

To this the Englishman only answered that Blueskin might be----, and
that the next afternoon, wind and weather permitting, he intended to
heave anchor and run out to sea.

Levi laughed again. "I wish I might be here to see what'll happen,"
said he, "but I'm going up the river to-night to see a gal and mebby
won't be back again for three or four days."

The next afternoon the English bark set sail as the captain promised,
and that night Lewes town was awake until almost morning, gazing at a
broad red glare that lighted up the sky away toward the southeast. Two
days afterward a negro oysterman came up from Indian River with news
that the pirates were lying off the inlet, bringing ashore bales of
goods from their larger vessel and piling the same upon the beach
under tarpaulins. He said that it was known down at Indian River that
Blueskin had fallen afoul of an English bark, had burned her and had
murdered the captain and all but three of the crew, who had joined
with the pirates.

The excitement over this terrible happening had only begun to subside
when another occurred to cap it. One afternoon a ship's boat, in which
were five men and two women, came rowing into Lewes harbor. It was the
longboat of the Charleston packet, bound for New York, and was
commanded by the first mate. The packet had been attacked and captured
by the pirates about ten leagues south by east of Cape Henlopen. The
pirates had come aboard of them at night and no resistance had been
offered. Perhaps it was that circumstance that saved the lives of all,
for no murder or violence had been done. Nevertheless, officers,
passengers and crew had been stripped of everything of value and set
adrift in the boats and the ship herself had been burned. The longboat
had become separated from the others during the night and had sighted
Henlopen a little after sunrise.

It may be here said that Squire Hall made out a report of these two
occurrences and sent it up to Philadelphia by the mate of the packet.
But for some reason it was nearly four weeks before a sloop of war was
sent around from New York. In the meanwhile, the pirates had disposed
of the booty stored under the tarpaulins on the beach at Indian River
inlet, shipping some of it away in two small sloops and sending the
rest by wagons somewhere up the country.


VII

Levi had told the English captain that he was going up-country to
visit one of his lady friends. He was gone nearly two weeks. Then once
more he appeared, as suddenly, as unexpectedly, as he had done when he
first returned to Lewes. Hiram was sitting at supper when the door
opened and Levi walked in, hanging up his hat behind the door as
unconcernedly as though he had only been gone an hour. He was in an
ugly, lowering humor and sat himself down at the table without
uttering a word, resting his chin upon his clenched fist and glowering
fixedly at the corn cake while Dinah fetched him a plate and knife and
fork.

His coming seemed to have taken away all of Hiram's appetite. He
pushed away his plate and sat staring at his stepbrother, who
presently fell to at the bacon and eggs like a famished wolf. Not a
word was said until Levi had ended his meal and filled his pipe.
"Look'ee, Hiram," said he, as he stooped over the fire and raked out a
hot coal. "Look'ee, Hiram! I've been to Philadelphia, d'ye see,
a-settlin' up that trouble I told you about when I first come home.
D'ye understand? D'ye remember? D'ye get it through your skull?" He
looked around over his shoulder, waiting as though for an answer. But
getting none, he continued: "I expect two gentlemen here from
Philadelphia to-night. They're friends of mine and are coming to talk
over the business and ye needn't stay at home, Hi. You can go out
somewhere, d'ye understand?" And then he added with a grin, "Ye can go
to see Sally."

Hiram pushed back his chair and arose. He leaned with his back against
the side of the fireplace. "I'll stay at home," said he presently.

"But I don't want you to stay at home, Hi," said Levi. "We'll have to
talk business and I want you to go!"

"I'll stay at home," said Hiram again.

Levi's brow grew as black as thunder. He ground his teeth together and
for a moment or two it seemed as though an explosion was coming. But
he swallowed his passion with a gulp. "You're a----pig-headed,
half-witted fool," said he. Hiram never so much as moved his eyes. "As
for you," said Levi, whirling round upon Dinah, who was clearing the
table, and glowering balefully upon the old negress, "you put them
things down and git out of here. Don't you come nigh this kitchen
again till I tell ye to. If I catch you pryin' around may I be ----,
eyes and liver, if I don't cut your heart out."

       *       *       *       *       *

In about half an hour Levi's friends came; the first a little, thin,
wizened man with a very foreign look. He was dressed in a rusty black
suit and wore gray yarn stockings and shoes with brass buckles. The
other was also plainly a foreigner. He was dressed in sailor fashion,
with petticoat breeches of duck, a heavy pea-jacket, and thick boots,
reaching to the knees. He wore a red sash tied around his waist, and
once, as he pushed back his coat, Hiram saw the glitter of a pistol
butt. He was a powerful, thickset man, low-browed and bull-necked, his
cheek, and chin, and throat closely covered with a stubble of
blue-black beard. He wore a red kerchief tied around his head and over
it a cocked hat, edged with tarnished gilt braid.

Levi himself opened the door to them. He exchanged a few words outside
with his visitors, in a foreign language of which Hiram understood
nothing. Neither of the two strangers spoke a word to Hiram: the
little man shot him a sharp look out of the corners of his eyes and
the burly ruffian scowled blackly at him, but beyond that neither
vouchsafed him any regard.

Levi drew to the shutters, shot the bolt in the outer door, and tilted
a chair against the latch of the one that led from the kitchen into
the adjoining room. Then the three worthies seated themselves at the
table which Dinah had half cleared of the supper china, and were
presently deeply engrossed over a packet of papers which the big,
burly man had brought with him in the pocket of his pea-jacket. The
confabulation was conducted throughout in the same foreign language
which Levi had used when first speaking to them--a language quite
unintelligible to Hiram's ears. Now and then the murmur of talk would
rise loud and harsh over some disputed point; now and then it would
sink away to whispers.

Twice the tall clock in the corner whirred and sharply struck the
hour, but throughout the whole long consultation Hiram stood silent,
motionless as a stock, his eyes fixed almost unwinkingly upon the
three heads grouped close together around the dim, flickering light of
the candle and the papers scattered upon the table.

Suddenly the talk came to an end, the three heads separated and the
three chairs were pushed back, grating harshly. Levi rose, went to the
closet and brought thence a bottle of Hiram's apple brandy, as coolly
as though it belonged to himself. He set three tumblers and a crock of
water upon the table and each helped himself liberally.

As the two visitors departed down the road, Levi stood for a while at
the open door, looking after the dusky figures until they were
swallowed in the darkness. Then he turned, came in, shut the door,
shuddered, took a final dose of the apple brandy and went to bed,
without, since his first suppressed explosion, having said a single
word to Hiram.

Hiram, left alone, stood for a while, silent, motionless as ever, then
he looked slowly about him, gave a shake of the shoulders as though to
arouse himself, and taking the candle, left the room, shutting the
door noiselessly behind him.


VIII

This time of Levi West's unwelcome visitation was indeed a time of
bitter trouble and tribulation to poor Hiram White. Money was of very
different value in those days than it is now, and five hundred pounds
was in its way a good round lump--in Sussex County it was almost a
fortune. It was a desperate struggle for Hiram to raise the amount of
his father's bequest to his stepbrother. Squire Hall, as may have been
gathered, had a very warm and friendly feeling for Hiram, believing in
him when all others disbelieved; nevertheless, in the matter of money
the old man was as hard and as cold as adamant. He would, he said, do
all he could to help Hiram, but that five hundred pounds must and
should be raised--Hiram must release his security bond. He would loan
him, he said, three hundred pounds, taking a mortgage upon the mill.
He would have lent him four hundred but that there was already a first
mortgage of one hundred pounds upon it, and he would not dare to put
more than three hundred more atop of that.

Hiram had a considerable quantity of wheat which he had bought upon
speculation and which was then lying idle in a Philadelphia
storehouse. This he had sold at public sale and at a very great
sacrifice; he realized barely one hundred pounds upon it. The
financial horizon looked very black to him; nevertheless, Levi's five
hundred pounds was raised, and paid into Squire Hall's hands, and
Squire Hall released Hiram's bond.

The business was finally closed on one cold, gray afternoon in the
early part of December. As Hiram tore his bond across and then tore it
across again and again, Squire Hall pushed back the papers upon his
desk and cocked his feet upon its slanting top. "Hiram," said he,
abruptly, "Hiram, do you know that Levi West is forever hanging around
Billy Martin's house, after that pretty daughter of his?"

So long a space of silence followed the speech that the Squire began
to think that Hiram might not have heard him. But Hiram had heard.
"No," said he, "I didn't know it."

"Well, he is," said Squire Hall. "It's the talk of the whole
neighborhood. The talk's pretty bad, too. D'ye know that they say that
she was away from home three days last week, nobody knew where? The
fellow's turned her head with his sailor's yarns and his traveler's
lies."

Hiram said not a word, but he sat looking at the other in stolid
silence. "That stepbrother of yours," continued the old Squire
presently, "is a rascal--he is a rascal, Hiram, and I mis-doubt he's
something worse. I hear he's been seen in some queer places and with
queer company of late."

He stopped again, and still Hiram said nothing. "And look'ee, Hiram,"
the old man resumed, suddenly, "I do hear that you be courtin' the
girl, too; is that so?"

"Yes," said Hiram, "I'm courtin' her, too."

"Tut! tut!" said the Squire, "that's a pity, Hiram. I'm afraid your
cakes are dough."

After he had left the Squire's office, Hiram stood for a while in the
street, bareheaded, his hat in his hand, staring unwinkingly down at
the ground at his feet, with stupidly drooping lips and lackluster
eyes. Presently he raised his hand and began slowly smoothing down the
sandy shock of hair upon his forehead. At last he aroused himself with
a shake, looked dully up and down the street, and then, putting on his
hat, turned and walked slowly and heavily away.

The early dusk of the cloudy winter evening was settling fast, for the
sky was leaden and threatening. At the outskirts of the town Hiram
stopped again and again stood for a while in brooding thought. Then,
finally, he turned slowly, not the way that led homeward, but taking
the road that led between the bare and withered fields and crooked
fences toward Billy Martin's.

It would be hard to say just what it was that led Hiram to seek Billy
Martin's house at that time of day--whether it was fate or ill
fortune. He could not have chosen a more opportune time to confirm his
own undoing. What he saw was the very worst that his heart feared.

Along the road, at a little distance from the house, was a mock-orange
hedge, now bare, naked, leafless. As Hiram drew near he heard
footsteps approaching and low voices. He drew back into the fence
corner and there stood, half sheltered by the stark network of twigs.
Two figures passed slowly along the gray of the roadway in the
gloaming. One was his stepbrother, the other was Sally Martin. Levi's
arm was around her, he was whispering into her ear, and her head
rested upon his shoulder.

Hiram stood as still, as breathless, as cold as ice. They stopped upon
the side of the road just beyond where he stood. Hiram's eyes never
left them. There for some time they talked together in low voices,
their words now and then reaching the ears of that silent, breathless
listener.

Suddenly there came the clattering of an opening door, and then Betty
Martin's voice broke the silence, harshly, shrilly: "Sal!--Sal!--Sally
Martin! You, Sally Martin! Come in yere. Where be ye?"

The girl flung her arms around Levi's neck and their lips met in one
quick kiss. The next moment she was gone, flying swiftly, silently,
down the road past where Hiram stood, stooping as she ran. Levi stood
looking after her until she was gone; then he turned and walked away
whistling.

His whistling died shrilly into silence in the wintry distance, and
then at last Hiram came stumbling out from the hedge. His face had
never looked before as it looked then.


IX

Hiram was standing in front of the fire with his hands clasped behind
his back. He had not touched the supper on the table. Levi was eating
with an appetite. Suddenly he looked over his plate at his
stepbrother.

"How about that five hundred pounds, Hiram?" said he. "I gave ye a
month to raise it and the month ain't quite up yet, but I'm goin' to
leave this here place day after to-morrow--by next day at the
furd'st--and I want the money that's mine."

"I paid it to Squire Hall to-day and he has it fer ye," said Hiram,
dully.

Levi laid down his knife and fork with a clatter. "Squire Hall!" said
he, "what's Squire Hall got to do with it? Squire Hall didn't have the
use of that money. It was you had it and you have got to pay it back
to me, and if you don't do it, by G----, I'll have the law on you,
sure as you're born."

"Squire Hall's trustee--I ain't your trustee," said Hiram, in the same
dull voice.

"I don't know nothing about trustees," said Levi, "or anything about
lawyer business, either. What I want to know is, are you going to pay
me my money or no?"

"No," said Hiram, "I ain't--Squire Hall 'll pay ye; you go to him."

Levi West's face grew purple red. He pushed back, his chair grating
harshly. "You--bloody land pirate!" he said, grinding his teeth
together. "I see through your tricks. You're up to cheating me out of
my money. You know very well that Squire Hall is down on me, hard and
bitter--writin' his ---- reports to Philadelphia and doing all he can
to stir up everybody agin me and to bring the bluejackets down on me.
I see through your tricks as clear as glass, but ye sha'n't trick me.
I'll have my money if there's law in the land--ye bloody, unnatural
thief ye, who'd go agin your dead father's will!"

Then--if the roof had fallen in upon him, Levi West could not have
been more amazed--Hiram suddenly strode forward, and, leaning half
across the table with his fists clenched, fairly glared into Levi's
eyes. His face, dull, stupid, wooden, was now fairly convulsed with
passion. The great veins stood out upon his temples like knotted
whipcords, and when he spoke his voice was more a breathless snarl
than the voice of a Christian man.

"Ye'll have the law, will ye?" said he. "Ye'll--have the law, will ye?
You're afeared to go to law--Levi West--you try th' law--and see how
ye like it. Who 're you to call me thief--ye bloody, murderin' villain
ye! You're the thief--Levi West--you come here and stole my daddy from
me--ye did. You make me ruin--myself to pay what oughter to been
mine--then--ye--ye steal the gal I was courtin', to boot." He stopped
and his lips writhed for words to say. "I know ye," said he, grinding
his teeth. "I know ye! And only for what my daddy made me promise I'd
a-had you up to the magistrate's before this."

Then, pointing with quivering finger: "There's the door--you see it!
Go out that there door and don't never come into it again--if ye
do--or if ye ever come where I can lay eyes on ye again--by th' Holy
Holy I'll hale ye up to the Squire's office and tell all I know and
all I've seen. Oh, I'll give ye your belly-fill of law if--ye want th'
law! Git out of the house, I say!"

As Hiram spoke Levi seemed to shrink together. His face changed from
its copper color to a dull, waxy yellow. When the other ended he
answered never a word. But he pushed back his chair, rose, put on his
hat and, with a furtive, sidelong look, left the house, without
stopping to finish the supper which he had begun. He never entered
Hiram White's door again.


X

Hiram had driven out the evil spirit from his home, but the mischief
that it had brewed was done and could not be undone. The next day it
was known that Sally Martin had run away from home, and that she had
run away with Levi West. Old Billy Martin had been in town in the
morning with his rifle, hunting for Levi and threatening if he caught
him to have his life for leading his daughter astray.

And, as the evil spirit had left Hiram's house, so had another and a
greater evil spirit quitted its harborage. It was heard from Indian
River in a few days more that Blueskin had quitted the inlet and had
sailed away to the southeast; and it was reported, by those who seemed
to know, that he had finally quitted those parts.

It was well for himself that Blueskin left when he did, for not three
days after he sailed away the _Scorpion_ sloop-of-war dropped anchor
in Lewes harbor. The New York agent of the unfortunate packet and a
government commissioner had also come aboard the _Scorpion_.

Without loss of time, the officer in command instituted a keen and
searching examination that brought to light some singularly curious
facts. It was found that a very friendly understanding must have
existed for some time between the pirates and the people of Indian
River, for, in the houses throughout that section, many things--some
of considerable value--that had been taken by the pirates from the
packet, were discovered and seized by the commissioner. Valuables of a
suspicious nature had found their way even into the houses of Lewes
itself.

The whole neighborhood seemed to have become more or less tainted by
the presence of the pirates.

Even poor Hiram White did not escape the suspicions of having had
dealings with them. Of course the examiners were not slow in
discovering that Levi West had been deeply concerned with Blueskin's
doings.

Old Dinah and black Bob were examined, and not only did the story of
Levi's two visitors come to light, but also the fact that Hiram was
present and with them while they were in the house disposing of the
captured goods to their agent.

Of all that he had endured, nothing seemed to cut poor Hiram so deeply
and keenly as these unjust suspicions. They seemed to bring the last
bitter pang, hardest of all to bear.

Levi had taken from him his father's love; he had driven him, if not
to ruin, at least perilously close to it. He had run away with the
girl he loved, and now, through him, even Hiram's good name was gone.

Neither did the suspicions against him remain passive; they became
active.

Goldsmiths' bills, to the amount of several thousand pounds, had been
taken in the packet and Hiram was examined with an almost
inquisitorial closeness and strictness as to whether he had or had not
knowledge of their whereabouts.

Under his accumulated misfortunes, he grew not only more dull, more
taciturn, than ever, but gloomy, moody, brooding as well. For hours he
would sit staring straight before him into the fire, without moving so
much as a hair.

One night--it was a bitterly cold night in February, with three inches
of dry and gritty snow upon the ground--while Hiram sat thus brooding,
there came, of a sudden, a soft tap upon the door.

Low and hesitating as it was, Hiram started violently at the sound. He
sat for a while, looking from right to left. Then suddenly pushing
back his chair, he arose, strode to the door, and flung it wide open.

It was Sally Martin.

[Illustration: The Pirate's Christmas

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S WEEKLY, _Christmas, 1893_]

Hiram stood for a while staring blankly at her. It was she who first
spoke. "Won't you let me come in, Hi?" said she. "I'm nigh starved
with the cold and I'm fit to die, I'm so hungry. For God's sake, let
me come in."

"Yes," said Hiram, "I'll let you come in, but why don't you go home?"

The poor girl was shivering and chattering with the cold; now she
began crying, wiping her eyes with the corner of a blanket in which
her head and shoulders were wrapped. "I have been home, Hiram," she
said, "but dad, he shut the door in my face. He cursed me just awful,
Hi--I wish I was dead!"

"You better come in," said Hiram. "It's no good standing out there in
the cold." He stood aside and the girl entered, swiftly, gratefully.

At Hiram's bidding black Dinah presently set some food before Sally
and she fell to eating ravenously, almost ferociously. Meantime, while
she ate, Hiram stood with his back to the fire, looking at her
face--that face once so round and rosy, now thin, pinched, haggard.

"Are you sick, Sally?" said he presently.

"No," said she, "but I've had pretty hard times since I left home,
Hi." The tears sprang to her eyes at the recollection of her troubles,
but she only wiped them hastily away with the back of her hand,
without stopping in her eating.

A long pause of dead silence followed. Dinah sat crouched together on
a cricket at the other side of the hearth, listening with interest.
Hiram did not seem to see her. "Did you go off with Levi?" said he at
last, speaking abruptly. The girl looked up furtively under her brows.
"You needn't be afeared to tell," he added.

"Yes," said she at last, "I did go off with him, Hi."

"Where've you been?"

At the question, she suddenly laid down her knife and fork. "Don't
you ask me that, Hi," said she, agitatedly, "I can't tell you that.
You don't know Levi, Hiram; I darsn't tell you anything he don't want
me to. If I told you where I been he'd hunt me out, no matter where I
was, and kill me. If you only knew what I know about him, Hiram, you
wouldn't ask anything about him."

Hiram stood looking broodingly at her for a long time; then at last he
again spoke. "I thought a sight of you onc't, Sally," said he.

Sally did not answer immediately, but, after a while, she suddenly
looked up. "Hiram," said she, "if I tell ye something will you promise
on your oath not to breathe a word to any living soul?" Hiram nodded.
"Then I'll tell you, but if Levi finds I've told he'll murder me as
sure as you're standin' there. Come nigher--I've got to whisper it."
He leaned forward close to her where she sat. She looked swiftly from
right to left; then raising her lips she breathed into his ear: "I'm
an honest woman, Hi. I was married to Levi West before I run away."


XI

The winter had passed, spring had passed, and summer had come.
Whatever Hiram had felt, he had made no sign of suffering.
Nevertheless, his lumpy face had begun to look flabby, his cheeks
hollow, and his loose-jointed body shrunk more awkwardly together into
its clothes. He was often awake at night, sometimes walking up and
down his room until far into the small hours.

It was through such a wakeful spell as this that he entered into the
greatest, the most terrible, happening of his life.

It was a sulphurously hot night in July. The air was like the breath
of a furnace, and it was a hard matter to sleep with even the easiest
mind and under the most favorable circumstances. The full moon shone
in through the open window, laying a white square of light upon the
floor, and Hiram, as he paced up and down, up and down, walked
directly through it, his gaunt figure starting out at every turn into
sudden brightness as he entered the straight line of misty light.

The clock in the kitchen whirred and rang out the hour of twelve, and
Hiram stopped in his walk to count the strokes.

The last vibration died away into silence, and still he stood
motionless, now listening with a new and sudden intentness, for, even
as the clock rang the last stroke, he heard soft, heavy footsteps,
moving slowly and cautiously along the pathway before the house and
directly below the open window. A few seconds more and he heard the
creaking of rusty hinges. The mysterious visitor had entered the mill.
Hiram crept softly to the window and looked out. The moon shone full
on the dusty, shingled face of the old mill, not thirty steps away,
and he saw that the door was standing wide open. A second or two of
stillness followed, and then, as he still stood looking intently, he
saw the figure of a man suddenly appear, sharp and vivid, from the
gaping blackness of the open doorway. Hiram could see his face as
clear as day. It was Levi West, and he carried an empty meal bag over
his arm.

Levi West stood looking from right to left for a second or two, and
then he took off his hat and wiped his brow with the back of his hand.
Then he softly closed the door behind him and left the mill as he had
come, and with the same cautious step. Hiram looked down upon him as
he passed close to the house and almost directly beneath. He could
have touched him with his hand.

Fifty or sixty yards from the house Levi stopped and a second figure
arose from the black shadow in the angle of the worm fence and joined
him. They stood for a while talking together, Levi pointing now and
then toward the mill. Then the two turned, and, climbing over the
fence, cut across an open field and through the tall, shaggy grass
toward the southeast.

Hiram straightened himself and drew a deep breath, and the moon,
shining full upon his face, showed it twisted, convulsed, as it had
been when he had fronted his stepbrother seven months before in the
kitchen. Great beads of sweat stood on his brow and he wiped them away
with his sleeve. Then, coatless, hatless as he was, he swung himself
out of the window, dropped upon the grass, and, without an instant of
hesitation, strode off down the road in the direction that Levi West
had taken.

As he climbed the fence where the two men had climbed it he could see
them in the pallid light, far away across the level, scrubby meadow
land, walking toward a narrow strip of pine woods.

A little later they entered the sharp-cut shadows beneath the trees
and were swallowed in the darkness.

With fixed eyes and close-shut lips, as doggedly, as inexorably as
though he were a Nemesis hunting his enemy down, Hiram followed their
footsteps across the stretch of moonlit open. Then, by and by, he also
was in the shadow of the pines. Here, not a sound broke the midnight
hush. His feet made no noise upon the resinous softness of the ground
below. In that dead, pulseless silence he could distinctly hear the
distant voices of Levi and his companion, sounding loud and resonant
in the hollow of the woods. Beyond the woods was a cornfield, and
presently he heard the rattling of the harsh leaves as the two plunged
into the tasseled jungle. Here, as in the woods, he followed them,
step by step, guided by the noise of their progress through the canes.

Beyond the cornfield ran a road that, skirting to the south of Lewes,
led across a wooden bridge to the wide salt marshes that stretched
between the town and the distant sand hills. Coming out upon this road
Hiram found that he had gained upon those he followed, and that they
now were not fifty paces away, and he could see that Levi's companion
carried over his shoulder what looked like a bundle of tools.

He waited for a little while to let them gain their distance and for
the second time wiped his forehead with his shirt sleeve; then,
without ever once letting his eyes leave them, he climbed the fence to
the roadway.

For a couple of miles or more he followed the two along the white,
level highway, past silent, sleeping houses, past barns, sheds, and
haystacks, looming big in the moonlight, past fields, and woods, and
clearings, past the dark and silent skirts of the town, and so, at
last, out upon the wide, misty salt marshes, which seemed to stretch
away interminably through the pallid light, yet were bounded in the
far distance by the long, white line of sand hills.

Across the level salt marshes he followed them, through the rank sedge
and past the glassy pools in which his own inverted image stalked
beneath as he stalked above; on and on, until at last they had reached
a belt of scrub pines, gnarled and gray, that fringed the foot of the
white sand hills.

Here Hiram kept within the black network of shadow. The two whom he
followed walked more in the open, with their shadows, as black as ink,
walking along in the sand beside them, and now, in the dead,
breathless stillness, might be heard, dull and heavy, the distant
thumping, pounding roar of the Atlantic surf, beating on the beach at
the other side of the sand hills, half a mile away.

At last the two rounded the southern end of the white bluff, and when
Hiram, following, rounded it also, they were no longer to be seen.

Before him the sand hill rose, smooth and steep, cutting in a sharp
ridge against the sky. Up this steep hill trailed the footsteps of
those he followed, disappearing over the crest. Beyond the ridge lay a
round, bowl-like hollow, perhaps fifty feet across and eighteen or
twenty feet deep, scooped out by the eddying of the winds into an
almost perfect circle. Hiram, slowly, cautiously, stealthily,
following their trailing line of footmarks, mounted to the top of the
hillock and peered down into the bowl beneath. The two men were
sitting upon the sand, not far from the tall, skeleton-like shaft of
a dead pine tree that rose, stark and gray, from the sand in which it
may once have been buried, centuries ago.


XII

Levi had taken off his coat and waistcoat and was fanning himself with
his hat. He was sitting upon the bag he had brought from the mill and
which he had spread out upon the sand. His companion sat facing him.
The moon shone full upon him and Hiram knew him instantly--he was the
same burly, foreign-looking ruffian who had come with the little man
to the mill that night to see Levi. He also had his hat off and was
wiping his forehead and face with a red handkerchief. Beside him lay
the bundle of tools he had brought--a couple of shovels, a piece of
rope, and a long, sharp iron rod.

The two men were talking together, but Hiram could not understand what
they said, for they spoke in the same foreign language that they had
before used. But he could see his stepbrother point with his finger,
now to the dead tree and now to the steep, white face of the opposite
side of the bowl-like hollow.

At last, having apparently rested themselves, the conference, if
conference it was, came to an end, and Levi led the way, the other
following, to the dead pine tree. Here he stopped and began searching,
as though for some mark; then, having found that which he looked for,
he drew a tapeline and a large brass pocket compass from his pocket.
He gave one end of the tape line to his companion, holding the other
with his thumb pressed upon a particular part of the tree. Taking his
bearings by the compass, he gave now and then some orders to the
other, who moved a little to the left or the right as he bade. At last
he gave a word of command, and, thereupon, his companion drew a wooden
peg from his pocket and thrust it into the sand. From this peg as a
base they again measured, taking bearings by the compass, and again
drove a peg. For a third time they repeated their measurements and
then, at last, seemed to have reached the point which they aimed for.

Here Levi marked a cross with his heel upon the sand.

His companion brought him the pointed iron rod which lay beside the
shovels, and then stood watching as Levi thrust it deep into the sand,
again and again, as though sounding for some object below. It was some
while before he found that for which he was seeking, but at last the
rod struck with a jar upon some hard object below. After making sure
of success by one or two additional taps with the rod, Levi left it
remaining where it stood, brushing the sand from his hands. "Now fetch
the shovels, Pedro," said he, speaking for the first time in English.

The two men were busy for a long while, shoveling away the sand. The
object for which they were seeking lay buried some six feet deep, and
the work was heavy and laborious, the shifting sand sliding back,
again and again, into the hole. But at last the blade of one of the
shovels struck upon some hard substance and Levi stooped and brushed
away the sand with the palm of his hand.

Levi's companion climbed out of the hole which they had dug and tossed
the rope which he had brought with the shovels down to the other. Levi
made it fast to some object below and then himself mounted to the
level of the sand above. Pulling together, the two drew up from the
hole a heavy iron-bound box, nearly three feet long and a foot wide
and deep.

Levi's companion stooped and began untying the rope which had been
lashed to a ring in the lid.

What next happened happened suddenly, swiftly, terribly. Levi drew
back a single step, and shot one quick, keen look to right and to
left. He passed his hand rapidly behind his back, and the next moment
Hiram saw the moonlight gleam upon the long, sharp, keen blade of a
knife. Levi raised his arm. Then, just as the other arose from bending
over the chest, he struck, and struck again, two swift, powerful
blows. Hiram saw the blade drive, clean and sharp, into the back, and
heard the hilt strike with a dull thud against the ribs--once, twice.
The burly, black-bearded wretch gave a shrill, terrible cry and fell
staggering back. Then, in an instant, with another cry, he was up and
clutched Levi with a clutch of despair by the throat and by the arm.
Then followed a struggle, short, terrible, silent. Not a sound was
heard but the deep, panting breath and the scuffling of feet in the
sand, upon which there now poured and dabbled a dark-purple stream.
But it was a one-sided struggle and lasted only for a second or two.
Levi wrenched his arm loose from the wounded man's grasp, tearing his
shirt sleeve from the wrist to the shoulder as he did so. Again and
again the cruel knife was lifted, and again and again it fell, now no
longer bright, but stained with red.

Then, suddenly, all was over. Levi's companion dropped to the sand
without a sound, like a bundle of rags. For a moment he lay limp and
inert; then one shuddering spasm passed over him and he lay silent and
still, with his face half buried in the sand.

Levi, with the knife still gripped tight in his hand, stood leaning
over his victim, looking down upon his body. His shirt and hand, and
even his naked arm, were stained and blotched with blood. The moon lit
up his face and it was the face of a devil from hell.

At last he gave himself a shake, stooped and wiped his knife and hand
and arm upon the loose petticoat breeches of the dead man. He thrust
his knife back into its sheath, drew a key from his pocket and
unlocked the chest. In the moonlight Hiram could see that it was
filled mostly with paper and leather bags, full, apparently of money.

All through this awful struggle and its awful ending Hiram lay, dumb
and motionless, upon the crest of the sand hill, looking with a horrid
fascination upon the death struggle in the pit below. Now Hiram arose.
The sand slid whispering down from the crest as he did so, but Levi
was too intent in turning over the contents of the chest to notice the
slight sound.

[Illustration: "He Lay Silent and Still, with His Face Half Buried in
the Sand"

_Illustration from_
BLUESKIN, THE PIRATE

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
THE NORTHWESTERN MILLER, _December, 1890_]

Hiram's face was ghastly pale and drawn. For one moment he opened his
lips as though to speak, but no word came. So, white, silent, he stood
for a few seconds, rather like a statue than a living man, then,
suddenly, his eyes fell upon the bag, which Levi had brought with him,
no doubt, to carry back the treasure for which he and his companion
were in search, and which still lay spread out on the sand where it
had been flung. Then, as though a thought had suddenly flashed upon
him, his whole expression changed, his lips closed tightly together as
though fearing an involuntary sound might escape, and the haggard look
dissolved from his face.

Cautiously, slowly, he stepped over the edge of the sand hill and down
the slanting face. His coming was as silent as death, for his feet
made no noise as he sank ankle-deep in the yielding surface. So,
stealthily, step by step, he descended, reached the bag, lifted it
silently. Levi, still bending over the chest and searching through the
papers within, was not four feet away. Hiram raised the bag in his
hands. He must have made some slight rustle as he did so, for suddenly
Levi half turned his head. But he was one instant too late. In a flash
the bag was over his head--shoulders--arms--body.

Then came another struggle, as fierce, as silent, as desperate as that
other--and as short. Wiry, tough, and strong as he was, with a lean,
sinewy, nervous vigor, fighting desperately for his life as he was,
Levi had no chance against the ponderous strength of his stepbrother.
In any case, the struggle could not have lasted long; as it was, Levi
stumbled backward over the body of his dead mate and fell, with Hiram
upon him. Maybe he was stunned by the fall; maybe he felt the
hopelessness of resistance, for he lay quite still while Hiram,
kneeling upon him, drew the rope from the ring of the chest and,
without uttering a word, bound it tightly around both the bag and the
captive within, knotting it again and again and drawing it tight. Only
once was a word spoken. "If you'll lemme go," said a muffled voice
from the bag, "I'll give you five thousand pounds--it's in that there
box." Hiram answered never a word, but continued knotting the rope and
drawing it tight.


XIII

The _Scorpion_ sloop-of-war lay in Lewes harbor all that winter and
spring, probably upon the slim chance of a return of the pirates. It
was about eight o'clock in the morning and Lieutenant Maynard was
sitting in Squire Hall's office, fanning himself with his hat and
talking in a desultory fashion. Suddenly the dim and distant noise of
a great crowd was heard from without, coming nearer and nearer. The
Squire and his visitor hurried to the door. The crowd was coming down
the street shouting, jostling, struggling, some on the footway, some
in the roadway. Heads were at the doors and windows, looking down upon
them. Nearer they came, and nearer; then at last they could see that
the press surrounded and accompanied one man. It was Hiram White,
hatless, coatless, the sweat running down his face in streams, but
stolid and silent as ever. Over his shoulder he carried a bag, tied
round and round with a rope. It was not until the crowd and the man it
surrounded had come quite near that the Squire and the lieutenant saw
that a pair of legs in gray-yarn stockings hung from the bag. It was a
man he was carrying.

Hiram had lugged his burden five miles that morning without help and
with scarcely a rest on the way.

He came directly toward the Squire's office and, still surrounded and
hustled by the crowd, up the steep steps to the office within. He
flung his burden heavily upon the floor without a word and wiped his
streaming forehead.

The Squire stood with his knuckles on his desk, staring first at Hiram
and then at the strange burden he had brought. A sudden hush fell
upon all, though the voices of those without sounded as loud and
turbulent as ever. "What is it, Hiram?" said Squire Hall at last.

Then for the first time Hiram spoke, panting thickly. "It's a bloody
murderer," said he, pointing a quivering finger at the motionless
figure.

"Here, some of you!" called out the Squire. "Come! Untie this man! Who
is he?" A dozen willing fingers quickly unknotted the rope and the bag
was slipped from the head and body.

Hair and face and eyebrows and clothes were powdered with meal, but,
in spite of all and through all the innocent whiteness, dark spots and
blotches and smears of blood showed upon head and arm and shirt. Levi
raised himself upon his elbow and looked scowlingly around at the
amazed, wonderstruck faces surrounding him.

"Why, it's Levi West!" croaked the Squire, at last finding his voice.

Then, suddenly, Lieutenant Maynard pushed forward, before the others
crowded around the figure on the floor, and, clutching Levi by the
hair, dragged his head backward so as to better see his face. "Levi
West!" said he in a loud voice. "Is this the Levi West you've been
telling me of? Look at that scar and the mark on his cheek! _This is
Blueskin himself._"


XIV

In the chest which Blueskin had dug up out of the sand were found not
only the goldsmiths' bills taken from the packet, but also many other
valuables belonging to the officers and the passengers of the
unfortunate ship.

The New York agents offered Hiram a handsome reward for his efforts in
recovering the lost bills, but Hiram declined it, positively and
finally. "All I want," said he, in his usual dull, stolid fashion, "is
to have folks know I'm honest." Nevertheless, though he did not
accept what the agents of the packet offered, fate took the matter
into its own hands and rewarded him not unsubstantially. Blueskin was
taken to England in the _Scorpion_. But he never came to trial. While
in Newgate he hanged himself to the cell window with his own
stockings. The news of his end was brought to Lewes in the early
autumn and Squire Hall took immediate measures to have the five
hundred pounds of his father's legacy duly transferred to Hiram.

In November Hiram married the pirate's widow.

[Illustration: "There Cap'n Goldsack goes, creeping, creeping,
creeping, Looking for his treasure down below!"

_Illustration from_
CAP'N GOLDSACK

_by_ William Sharp

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _July_, 1902]




Chapter VII

CAPTAIN SCARFIELD

PREFACE

[Illustration: CAPTAIN SCARFIELD]


_The author of this narrative cannot recall that, in any history of
the famous pirates, he has ever read a detailed and sufficient account
of the life and death of Capt. John Scarfield. Doubtless some data
concerning his death and the destruction of his schooner might be
gathered from the report of Lieutenant Mainwaring, now filed in the
archives of the Navy Department, but beyond such bald and bloodless
narrative the author knows of nothing, unless it be the little
chap-book history published by Isaiah Thomas in Newburyport about the
year 1821-22, entitled, "A True History of the Life and Death of
Captain Jack Scarfield." This lack of particularity in the history of
one so notable in his profession it is the design of the present
narrative in a measure to supply, and, if the author has seen fit to
cast it in the form of a fictional story, it is only that it may make
more easy reading for those who see fit to follow the tale from this
to its conclusion._


CAPTAIN SCARFIELD


I

Eleazer Cooper, or Captain Cooper, as was his better-known title in
Philadelphia, was a prominent member of the Society of Friends. He was
an overseer of the meeting and an occasional speaker upon particular
occasions. When at home from one of his many voyages he never failed
to occupy his seat in the meeting both on First Day and Fifth Day, and
he was regarded by his fellow townsmen as a model of business
integrity and of domestic responsibility.

More incidental to this history, however, it is to be narrated that
Captain Cooper was one of those trading skippers who carried their own
merchandise in their own vessels which they sailed themselves, and on
whose decks they did their own bartering. His vessel was a swift,
large schooner, the _Eliza Cooper_, _of Philadelphia_, named for his
wife. His cruising grounds were the West India Islands, and his
merchandise was flour and corn meal ground at the Brandywine Mills at
Wilmington, Delaware.

During the War of 1812 he had earned, as was very well known, an
extraordinary fortune in this trading; for flour and corn meal sold at
fabulous prices in the French, Spanish, Dutch, and Danish islands, cut
off, as they were, from the rest of the world by the British blockade.

The running of this blockade was one of the most hazardous maritime
ventures possible, but Captain Cooper had met with such unvaried
success, and had sold his merchandise at such incredible profit that,
at the end of the war, he found himself to have become one of the
wealthiest merchants of his native city.

It was known at one time that his balance in the Mechanics' Bank was
greater than that of any other individual depositor upon the books,
and it was told of him that he had once deposited in the bank a chest
of foreign silver coin, the exchanged value of which, when translated
into American currency, was upward of forty-two thousand dollars--a
prodigious sum of money in those days.

In person, Captain Cooper was tall and angular of frame. His face was
thin and severe, wearing continually an unsmiling, mask-like
expression of continent and unruffled sobriety. His manner was dry and
taciturn, and his conduct and life were measured to the most absolute
accord with the teachings of his religious belief.

He lived in an old-fashioned house on Front Street below Spruce--as
pleasant, cheerful a house as ever a trading captain could return to.
At the back of the house a lawn sloped steeply down toward the river.
To the south stood the wharf and storehouses; to the north an orchard
and kitchen garden bloomed with abundant verdure. Two large chestnut
trees sheltered the porch and the little space of lawn, and when you
sat under them in the shade you looked down the slope between two rows
of box bushes directly across the shining river to the Jersey shore.

At the time of our story--that is, about the year 1820--this property
had increased very greatly in value, but it was the old home of the
Coopers, as Eleazer Cooper was entirely rich enough to indulge his
fancy in such matters. Accordingly, as he chose to live in the same
house where his father and his grandfather had dwelt before him, he
peremptorily, if quietly, refused all offers looking toward the
purchase of the lot of ground--though it was now worth five or six
times its former value.

As was said, it was a cheerful, pleasant home, impressing you when you
entered it with the feeling of spotless and all-pervading
cleanliness--a cleanliness that greeted you in the shining brass
door-knocker; that entertained you in the sitting room with its
stiff, leather-covered furniture, the brass-headed tacks whereof
sparkled like so many stars--a cleanliness that bade you farewell in
the spotless stretch of sand-sprinkled hallway, the wooden floor of
which was worn into knobs around the nail heads by the countless
scourings and scrubbings to which it had been subjected and which left
behind them an all-pervading faint, fragrant odor of soap and warm
water.

Eleazer Cooper and his wife were childless, but one inmate made the
great, silent, shady house bright with life. Lucinda Fairbanks, a
niece of Captain Cooper's by his only sister, was a handsome,
sprightly girl of eighteen or twenty, and a great favorite in the
Quaker society of the city.

It remains only to introduce the final and, perhaps, the most
important actor of the narrative--Lieut. James Mainwaring. During the
past twelve months or so he had been a frequent visitor at the Cooper
house. At this time he was a broad-shouldered, red-cheeked, stalwart
fellow of twenty-six or twenty-eight. He was a great social favorite,
and possessed the added romantic interest of having been aboard the
_Constitution_ when she fought the _Guerriere_, and of having, with
his own hands, touched the match that fired the first gun of that
great battle.

Mainwaring's mother and Eliza Cooper had always been intimate friends,
and the coming and going of the young man during his leave of absence
were looked upon in the house as quite a matter of course. Half a
dozen times a week he would drop in to execute some little commission
for the ladies, or, if Captain Cooper was at home, to smoke a pipe of
tobacco with him, to sip a dram of his famous old Jamaica rum, or to
play a rubber of checkers of an evening. It is not likely that either
of the older people was the least aware of the real cause of his
visits; still less did they suspect that any passages of sentiment had
passed between the young people.

[Illustration: "He Had Found the Captain Agreeable and Companionable"

_Illustration from_
SEA ROBBERS OF NEW YORK

_by_ Thomas A. Janvier

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S MAGAZINE, _November_, 1894]

The truth was that Mainwaring and the young lady were very deeply in
love. It was a love that they were obliged to keep a profound secret,
for not only had Eleazer Cooper held the strictest sort of testimony
against the late war--a testimony so rigorous as to render it
altogether unlikely that one of so military a profession as Mainwaring
practiced could hope for his consent to a suit for marriage, but
Lucinda could not have married one not a member of the Society of
Friends without losing her own birthright membership therein. She
herself might not attach much weight to such a loss of membership in
the Society, but her fear of, and her respect for, her uncle led her
to walk very closely in her path of duty in this respect. Accordingly
she and Mainwaring met as they could--clandestinely--and the stolen
moments were very sweet. With equal secrecy Lucinda had, at the
request of her lover, sat for a miniature portrait to Mrs. Gregory,
which miniature, set in a gold medallion, Mainwaring, with a mild,
sentimental pleasure, wore hung around his neck and beneath his shirt
frill next his heart.

In the month of April of the year 1820 Mainwaring received orders to
report at Washington. During the preceding autumn the West India
pirates, and notably Capt. Jack Scarfield, had been more than usually
active, and the loss of the packet _Marblehead_ (which, sailing from
Charleston, South Carolina, was never heard of more) was attributed to
them. Two other coasting vessels off the coast of Georgia had been
looted and burned by Scarfield, and the government had at last aroused
itself to the necessity of active measures for repressing these pests
of the West India waters.

Mainwaring received orders to take command of the _Yankee_, a swift,
light-draught, heavily armed brig of war, and to cruise about the
Bahama Islands and to capture and destroy all the pirates' vessels he
could there discover.

On his way from Washington to New York, where the _Yankee_ was then
waiting orders, Mainwaring stopped in Philadelphia to bid good-by to
his many friends in that city. He called at the old Cooper house. It
was on a Sunday afternoon. The spring was early and the weather
extremely pleasant that day, being filled with a warmth almost as of
summer. The apple trees were already in full bloom and filled all the
air with their fragrance. Everywhere there seemed to be the pervading
hum of bees, and the drowsy, tepid sunshine was very delightful.

At that time Eleazer was just home from an unusually successful voyage
to Antigua. Mainwaring found the family sitting under one of the still
leafless chestnut trees, Captain Cooper smoking his long clay pipe and
lazily perusing a copy of the _National Gazette_. Eleazer listened
with a great deal of interest to what Mainwaring had to say of his
proposed cruise. He himself knew a great deal about the pirates, and,
singularly unbending from his normal, stiff taciturnity, he began
telling of what he knew, particularly of Captain Scarfield--in whom he
appeared to take an extraordinary interest.

Vastly to Mainwaring's surprise, the old Quaker assumed the position
of a defendant of the pirates, protesting that the wickedness of the
accused was enormously exaggerated. He declared that he knew some of
the freebooters very well and that at the most they were poor,
misdirected wretches who had, by easy gradation, slid into their
present evil ways, from having been tempted by the government
authorities to enter into privateering in the days of the late war. He
conceded that Captain Scarfield had done many cruel and wicked deeds,
but he averred that he had also performed many kind and benevolent
actions. The world made no note of these latter, but took care only to
condemn the evil that had been done. He acknowledged that it was true
that the pirate had allowed his crew to cast lots for the wife and the
daughter of the skipper of the _Northern Rose_, but there were none of
his accusers who told how, at the risk of his own life and the lives
of all his crew, he had given succor to the schooner _Halifax_, found
adrift with all hands down with yellow fever. There was no defender
of his actions to tell how he and his crew of pirates had sailed the
pest-stricken vessel almost into the rescuing waters of Kingston
harbor. Eleazer confessed that he could not deny that when Scarfield
had tied the skipper of the _Baltimore Belle_ naked to the foremast of
his own brig he had permitted his crew of cutthroats (who were drunk
at the time) to throw bottles at the helpless captive, who died that
night of the wounds he had received. For this he was doubtless very
justly condemned, but who was there to praise him when he had, at the
risk of his life and in the face of the authorities, carried a cargo
of provisions which he himself had purchased at Tampa Bay to the
Island of Bella Vista after the great hurricane of 1818? In this
notable adventure he had barely escaped, after a two days' chase, the
British frigate _Ceres_, whose captain, had a capture been effected,
would instantly have hung the unfortunate man to the yardarm in spite
of the beneficent mission he was in the act of conducting.

In all this Eleazer had the air of conducting the case for the
defendant. As he talked he became more and more animated and voluble.
The light went out in his tobacco pipe, and a hectic spot appeared in
either thin and sallow cheek. Mainwaring sat wondering to hear the
severely peaceful Quaker preacher defending so notoriously bloody and
cruel a cutthroat pirate as Capt. Jack Scarfield. The warm and
innocent surroundings, the old brick house looking down upon them, the
odor of apple blossoms and the hum of bees seemed to make it all the
more incongruous. And still the elderly Quaker skipper talked on and
on with hardly an interruption, till the warm sun slanted to the west
and the day began to decline.

That evening Mainwaring stayed to tea and when he parted from Lucinda
Fairbanks it was after nightfall, with a clear, round moon shining in
the milky sky and a radiance pallid and unreal enveloping the old
house, the blooming apple trees, the sloping lawn and the shining
river beyond. He implored his sweetheart to let him tell her uncle and
aunt of their acknowledged love and to ask the old man's consent to
it, but she would not permit him to do so. They were so happy as they
were. Who knew but what her uncle might forbid their fondness? Would
he not wait a little longer? Maybe it would all come right after a
while. She was so fond, so tender, so tearful at the nearness of their
parting that he had not the heart to insist. At the same time it was
with a feeling almost of despair that he realized that he must now be
gone--maybe for the space of two years--without in all that time
possessing the right to call her his before the world.

When he bade farewell to the older people it was with a choking
feeling of bitter disappointment. He yet felt the pressure of her
cheek against his shoulder, the touch of soft and velvet lips to his
own. But what were such clandestine endearments compared to what
might, perchance, be his--the right of calling her his own when he was
far away and upon the distant sea? And, besides, he felt like a coward
who had shirked his duty.

But he was very much in love. The next morning appeared in a drizzle
of rain that followed the beautiful warmth of the day before. He had
the coach all to himself, and in the damp and leathery solitude he
drew out the little oval picture from beneath his shirt frill and
looked long and fixedly with a fond and foolish joy at the innocent
face, the blue eyes, the red, smiling lips depicted upon the
satinlike, ivory surface.


II

For the better part of five months Mainwaring cruised about in the
waters surrounding the Bahama Islands. In that time he ran to earth
and dispersed a dozen nests of pirates. He destroyed no less than
fifteen piratical crafts of all sizes, from a large half-decked
whaleboat to a three-hundred-ton barkentine. The name of the _Yankee_
became a terror to every sea wolf in the western tropics, and the
waters of the Bahama Islands became swept almost clean of the bloody
wretches who had so lately infested it.

But the one freebooter of all others whom he sought--Capt. Jack
Scarfield--seemed to evade him like a shadow, to slip through his
fingers like magic. Twice he came almost within touch of the famous
marauder, both times in the ominous wrecks that the pirate captain had
left behind him. The first of these was the water-logged remains of a
burned and still smoking wreck that he found adrift in the great
Bahama channel. It was the _Water Witch_, of Salem, but he did not
learn her tragic story until, two weeks later, he discovered a part of
her crew at Port Maria, on the north coast of Jamaica. It was, indeed,
a dreadful story to which he listened. The castaways said that they of
all the vessel's crew had been spared so that they might tell the
commander of the _Yankee_, should they meet him, that he might keep
what he found, with Captain Scarfield's compliments, who served it up
to him hot cooked.

Three weeks later he rescued what remained of the crew of the
shattered, bloody hulk of the _Baltimore Belle_, eight of whose crew,
headed by the captain, had been tied hand and foot and heaved
overboard. Again, there was a message from Captain Scarfield to the
commander of the _Yankee_ that he might season what he found to suit
his own taste.

Mainwaring was of a sanguine disposition, with fiery temper. He swore,
with the utmost vehemence, that either he or John Scarfield would have
to leave the earth.

He had little suspicion of how soon was to befall the ominous
realization of his angry prophecy.

At that time one of the chief rendezvous of the pirates was the little
island of San José, one of the southernmost of the Bahama group. Here,
in the days before the coming of the _Yankee_, they were wont to put
in to careen and clean their vessels and to take in a fresh supply of
provisions, gunpowder, and rum, preparatory to renewing their attacks
upon the peaceful commerce circulating up and down outside the
islands, or through the wide stretches of the Bahama channel.

Mainwaring had made several descents upon this nest of freebooters. He
had already made two notable captures, and it was here he hoped
eventually to capture Captain Scarfield himself.

A brief description of this one-time notorious rendezvous of
freebooters might not be out of place. It consisted of a little
settlement of those wattled and mud-smeared houses such as you find
through the West Indies. There were only three houses of a more
pretentious sort, built of wood. One of these was a storehouse,
another was a rum shop, and a third a house in which dwelt a mulatto
woman, who was reputed to be a sort of left-handed wife of Captain
Scarfield's. The population was almost entirely black and brown. One
or two Jews and a half dozen Yankee traders, of hardly dubious
honesty, comprised the entire white population. The rest consisted of
a mongrel accumulation of negroes and mulattoes and half-caste
Spaniards, and of a multitude of black or yellow women and children.
The settlement stood in a bight of the beach forming a small harbor
and affording a fair anchorage for small vessels, excepting it were
against the beating of a southeasterly gale. The houses, or cabins,
were surrounded by clusters of coco palms and growths of bananas, and
a long curve of white beach, sheltered from the large Atlantic
breakers that burst and exploded upon an outer bar, was drawn like a
necklace around the semicircle of emerald-green water.

Such was the famous pirates' settlement of San José--a paradise of
nature and a hell of human depravity and wickedness--and it was to
this spot that Mainwaring paid another visit a few days after rescuing
the crew of the _Baltimore Belle_ from her shattered and sinking
wreck.

[Illustration: THE BUCCANEER WAS A PICTURESQUE FELLOW]

As the little bay with its fringe of palms and its cluster of wattle
huts opened up to view, Mainwaring discovered a vessel lying at anchor
in the little harbor. It was a large and well-rigged schooner of two
hundred and fifty or three hundred tons burden. As the _Yankee_
rounded to under the stern of the stranger and dropped anchor in such
a position as to bring her broadside battery to bear should the
occasion require, Mainwaring set his glass to his eye to read the name
he could distinguish beneath the overhang of her stern. It is
impossible to describe his infinite surprise when, the white lettering
starting out in the circle of the glass, he read, _The Eliza Cooper,
of Philadelphia_.

He could not believe the evidence of his senses. Certainly this sink
of iniquity was the last place in the world he would have expected to
have fallen in with Eleazer Cooper.

He ordered out the gig and had himself immediately rowed over to the
schooner. Whatever lingering doubts he might have entertained as to
the identity of the vessel were quickly dispelled when he beheld
Captain Cooper himself standing at the gangway to meet him. The
impassive face of the friend showed neither surprise nor confusion at
what must have been to him a most unexpected encounter.

But when he stepped upon the deck of the _Eliza Cooper_ and looked
about him, Mainwaring could hardly believe the evidence of his senses
at the transformation that he beheld. Upon the main deck were eight
twelve-pound carronade neatly covered with tarpaulin; in the bow a
Long Tom, also snugly stowed away and covered, directed a veiled and
muzzled snout out over the bowsprit.

It was entirely impossible for Mainwaring to conceal his astonishment
at so unexpected a sight, and whether or not his own thoughts lent
color to his imagination, it seemed to him that Eleazer Cooper
concealed under the immobility of his countenance no small degree of
confusion.

After Captain Cooper had led the way into the cabin and he and the
younger man were seated over a pipe of tobacco and the invariable
bottle of fine old Jamaica rum, Mainwaring made no attempt to refrain
from questioning him as to the reason for this singular and ominous
transformation.

"I am a man of peace, James Mainwaring," Eleazer replied, "but there
are men of blood in these waters, and an appearance of great strength
is of use to protect the innocent from the wicked. If I remained in
appearance the peaceful trader I really am, how long does thee suppose
I could remain unassailed in this place?"

It occurred to Mainwaring that the powerful armament he had beheld was
rather extreme to be used merely as a preventive. He smoked for a
while in silence and then he suddenly asked the other point-blank
whether, if it came to blows with such a one as Captain Scarfield,
would he make a fight of it?

The Quaker trading captain regarded him for a while in silence. His
look, it seemed to Mainwaring, appeared to be dubitative as to how far
he dared to be frank. "Friend James," he said at last, "I may as well
acknowledge that my officers and crew are somewhat worldly. Of a truth
they do not hold the same testimony as I. I am inclined to think that
if it came to the point of a broil with those men of iniquity, my
individual voice cast for peace would not be sufficient to keep my
crew from meeting violence with violence. As for myself, thee knows
who I am and what is my testimony in these matters."

Mainwaring made no comment as to the extremely questionable manner in
which the Quaker proposed to beat the devil about the stump. Presently
he asked his second question:

"And might I inquire," he said, "what you are doing here and why you
find it necessary to come at all into such a wicked, dangerous place
as this?"

"Indeed, I knew thee would ask that question of me," said the Friend,
"and I will be entirely frank with thee. These men of blood are, after
all, but human beings, and as human beings they need food. I have at
present upon this vessel upward of two hundred and fifty barrels of
flour which will bring a higher price here than anywhere else in the
West Indies. To be entirely frank with thee, I will tell thee that I
was engaged in making a bargain for the sale of the greater part of my
merchandise when the news of thy approach drove away my best
customer."

Mainwaring sat for a while in smoking silence. What the other had told
him explained many things he had not before understood. It explained
why Captain Cooper got almost as much for his flour and corn meal now
that peace had been declared as he had obtained when the war and the
blockade were in full swing. It explained why he had been so strong a
defender of Captain Scarfield and the pirates that afternoon in the
garden. Meantime, what was to be done? Eleazer confessed openly that
he dealt with the pirates. What now was his--Mainwaring's--duty in the
case? Was the cargo of the _Eliza Cooper_ contraband and subject to
confiscation? And then another question framed itself in his mind: Who
was this customer whom his approach had driven away?

As though he had formulated the inquiry into speech the other began
directly to speak of it. "I know," he said, "that in a moment thee
will ask me who was this customer of whom I have just now spoken. I
have no desire to conceal his name from thee. It was the man who is
known as Captain Jack or Captain John Scarfield."

Mainwaring fairly started from his seat. "The devil you say!" he
cried. "And how long has it been," he asked, "since he left you?"

The Quaker skipper carefully refilled his pipe, which he had by now
smoked out. "I would judge," he said, "that it is a matter of four or
five hours since news was brought overland by means of swift runners
of thy approach. Immediately the man of wickedness disappeared." Here
Eleazer set the bowl of his pipe to the candle flame and began puffing
out voluminous clouds of smoke. "I would have thee understand, James
Mainwaring," he resumed, "that I am no friend of this wicked and
sinful man. His safety is nothing to me. It is only a question of
buying upon his part and of selling upon mine. If it is any
satisfaction to thee I will heartily promise to bring thee news if I
hear anything of the man of Belial. I may furthermore say that I think
it is likely thee will have news more or less directly of him within
the space of a day. If this should happen, however, thee will have to
do thy own fighting without help from me, for I am no man of combat
nor of blood and will take no hand in it either way."

It struck Mainwaring that the words contained some meaning that did
not appear upon the surface. This significance struck him as so
ambiguous that when he went aboard the _Yankee_ he confided as much of
his suspicions as he saw fit to his second in command, Lieutenant
Underwood. As night descended he had a double watch set and had
everything prepared to repel any attack or surprise that might be
attempted.


III

Nighttime in the tropics descends with a surprising rapidity. At one
moment the earth is shining with the brightness of the twilight; the
next, as it were, all things are suddenly swallowed into a gulf of
darkness. The particular night of which this story treats was not
entirely clear; the time of year was about the approach of the rainy
season, and the tepid, tropical clouds added obscurity to the darkness
of the sky, so that the night fell with even more startling quickness
than usual. The blackness was very dense. Now and then a group of
drifting stars swam out of a rift in the vapors, but the night was
curiously silent and of a velvety darkness.

[Illustration: THEN THE REAL FIGHT BEGAN]

As the obscurity had deepened, Mainwaring had ordered lanthorns to
be lighted and slung to the shrouds and to the stays, and the faint
yellow of their illumination lighted the level white of the snug
little war vessel, gleaming here and there in a starlike spark upon
the brass trimmings and causing the rows of cannons to assume
curiously gigantic proportions.

For some reason Mainwaring was possessed by a strange, uneasy feeling.
He walked restlessly up and down the deck for a time, and then, still
full of anxieties for he knew not what, went into his cabin to finish
writing up his log for the day. He unstrapped his cutlass and laid it
upon the table, lighted his pipe at the lanthorn and was about
preparing to lay aside his coat when word was brought to him that the
captain of the trading schooner was come alongside and had some
private information to communicate to him.

Mainwaring surmised in an instant that the trader's visit related
somehow to news of Captain Scarfield, and as immediately, in the
relief of something positive to face, all of his feeling of
restlessness vanished like a shadow of mist. He gave orders that
Captain Cooper should be immediately shown into the cabin, and in a
few moments the tall, angular form of the Quaker skipper appeared in
the narrow, lanthorn-lighted space.

Mainwaring at once saw that his visitor was strangely agitated and
disturbed. He had taken off his hat, and shining beads of perspiration
had gathered and stood clustered upon his forehead. He did not reply
to Mainwaring's greeting; he did not, indeed, seem to hear it; but he
came directly forward to the table and stood leaning with one hand
upon the open log book in which the lieutenant had just been writing.
Mainwaring had reseated himself at the head of the table, and the tall
figure of the skipper stood looking down at him as from a considerable
height.

"James Mainwaring," he said, "I promised thee to report if I had news
of the pirate. Is thee ready now to hear my news?"

There was something so strange in his agitation that it began to
infect Mainwaring with a feeling somewhat akin to that which appeared
to disturb his visitor. "I know not what you mean, sir!" he cried, "by
asking if I care to hear your news. At this moment I would rather have
news of that scoundrel than to have anything I know of in the world."

"Thou would? Thou would?" cried the other, with mounting agitation.
"Is thee in such haste to meet him as all that? Very well; very well,
then. Suppose I could bring thee face to face with him--what then?
Hey? Hey? Face to face with him, James Mainwaring!"

The thought instantly flashed into Mainwaring's mind that the pirate
had returned to the island; that perhaps at that moment he was
somewhere near at hand.

"I do not understand you, sir," he cried. "Do you mean to tell me that
you know where the villain is? If so, lose no time in informing me,
for every instant of delay may mean his chance of again escaping."

"No danger of that!" the other declared, vehemently. "No danger of
that! I'll tell thee where he is and I'll bring thee to him quick
enough!" And as he spoke he thumped his fist against the open log
book. In the vehemence of his growing excitement his eyes appeared to
shine green in the lanthorn light, and the sweat that had stood in
beads upon his forehead was now running in streams down his face. One
drop hung like a jewel to the tip of his beaklike nose. He came a step
nearer to Mainwaring and bent forward toward him, and there was
something so strange and ominous in his bearing that the lieutenant
instinctively drew back a little where he sat.

"Captain Scarfield sent something to you," said Eleazer, almost in a
raucous voice, "something that you will be surprised to see." And the
lapse in his speech from the Quaker "thee" to the plural "you" struck
Mainwaring as singularly strange.

As he was speaking Eleazer was fumbling in a pocket of his
long-tailed drab coat, and presently he brought something forth that
gleamed in the lanthorn light.

The next moment Mainwaring saw leveled directly in his face the round
and hollow nozzle of a pistol.

There was an instant of dead silence and then, "I am the man you
seek!" said Eleazer Cooper, in a tense and breathless voice.

The whole thing had happened so instantaneously and unexpectedly that
for the moment Mainwaring sat like one petrified. Had a thunderbolt
fallen from the silent sky and burst at his feet he could not have
been more stunned. He was like one held in the meshes of a horrid
nightmare, and he gazed as through a mist of impossibility into the
lineaments of the well-known, sober face now transformed as from
within into the aspect of a devil. That face, now ashy white, was
distorted into a diabolical grin. The teeth glistened in the
lamplight. The brows, twisted into a tense and convulsed frown, were
drawn down into black shadows, through which the eyes burned a baleful
green like the eyes of a wild animal driven to bay. Again he spoke in
the same breathless voice. "I am John Scarfield! Look at me, then, if
you want to see a pirate!" Again there was a little time of silence,
through which Mainwaring heard his watch ticking loudly from where it
hung against the bulkhead. Then once more the other began speaking.
"You would chase me out of the West Indies, would you? G---- ---- you!
What are you come to now? You are caught in your own trap, and you'll
squeal loud enough before you get out of it. Speak a word or make a
movement and I'll blow your brains out against the partition behind
you! Listen to what I say or you are a dead man. Sing out an order
instantly for my mate and my bos'n to come here to the cabin, and be
quick about it, for my finger's on the trigger, and it's only a pull
to shut your mouth forever."

It was astonishing to Mainwaring, in afterward thinking about it all,
how quickly his mind began to recover its steadiness after that first
astonishing shock. Even as the other was speaking he discovered that
his brain was becoming clarified to a wonderful lucidity; his thoughts
were becoming rearranged, and with a marvelous activity and an
alertness he had never before experienced. He knew that if he moved to
escape or uttered any outcry he would be instantly a dead man, for the
circle of the pistol barrel was directed full against his forehead and
with the steadiness of a rock. If he could but for an instant divert
that fixed and deadly attention he might still have a chance for life.
With the thought an inspiration burst into his mind and he instantly
put it into execution; thought, inspiration, and action, as in a
flash, were one. He must make the other turn aside his deadly gaze,
and instantly he roared out in a voice that stunned his own ears:
"Strike, bos'n! Strike, quick!"

Taken by surprise, and thinking, doubtless, that another enemy stood
behind him, the pirate swung around like a flash with his pistol
leveled against the blank boarding. Equally upon the instant he saw
the trick that had been played upon him and in a second flash had
turned again. The turn and return had occupied but a moment of time,
but that moment, thanks to the readiness of his own invention, had
undoubtedly saved Mainwaring's life. As the other turned away his gaze
for that brief instant Mainwaring leaped forward and upon him. There
was a flashing flame of fire as the pistol was discharged and a
deafening detonation that seemed to split his brain. For a moment,
with reeling senses, he supposed himself to have been shot, the next
he knew he had escaped. With the energy of despair he swung his enemy
around and drove him with prodigious violence against the corner of
the table. The pirate emitted a grunting cry and then they fell
together, Mainwaring upon the top, and the pistol clattered with them
to the floor in their fall. Even as he fell, Mainwaring roared in a
voice of thunder, "All hands repel boarders!" And then again, "All
hands repel boarders!"

Whether hurt by the table edge or not, the fallen pirate struggled as
though possessed of forty devils, and in a moment or two Mainwaring
saw the shine of a long, keen knife that he had drawn from somewhere
about his person. The lieutenant caught him by the wrist, but the
other's muscles were as though made of steel. They both fought in
despairing silence, the one to carry out his frustrated purposes to
kill, the other to save his life. Again and again Mainwaring felt that
the knife had been thrust against him, piercing once his arm, once his
shoulder, and again his neck. He felt the warm blood streaming down
his arm and body and looked about him in despair. The pistol lay near
upon the deck of the cabin. Still holding the other by the wrist as he
could, Mainwaring snatched up the empty weapon and struck once and
again at the bald, narrow forehead beneath him. A third blow he
delivered with all the force he could command, and then with a violent
and convulsive throe the straining muscles beneath him relaxed and
grew limp and the fight was won.

Through all the struggle he had been aware of the shouts of voices, of
trampling of feet and discharge of firearms, and the thought came to
him, even through his own danger, that the _Yankee_ was being
assaulted by the pirates. As he felt the struggling form beneath him
loosen and dissolve into quietude, he leaped up, and snatching his
cutlass, which still lay upon the table, rushed out upon the deck,
leaving the stricken form lying twitching upon the floor behind him.

It was a fortunate thing that he had set double watches and prepared
himself for some attack from the pirates, otherwise the _Yankee_ would
certainly have been lost. As it was, the surprise was so overwhelming
that the pirates, who had been concealed in the large whaleboat that
had come alongside, were not only able to gain a foothold upon the
deck, but for a time it seemed as though they would drive the crew of
the brig below the hatches.

But as Mainwaring, streaming with blood, rushed out upon the deck, the
pirates became immediately aware that their own captain must have
been overpowered, and in an instant their desperate energy began to
evaporate. One or two jumped overboard; one, who seemed to be the
mate, fell dead from a pistol shot, and then, in the turn of a hand,
there was a rush of a retreat and a vision of leaping forms in the
dusky light of the lanthorns and a sound of splashing in the water
below.

The crew of the _Yankee_ continued firing at the phosphorescent wakes
of the swimming bodies, but whether with effect it was impossible at
the time to tell.


IV

The pirate captain did not die immediately. He lingered for three or
four days, now and then unconscious, now and then semi-conscious, but
always deliriously wandering. All the while he thus lay dying, the
mulatto woman, with whom he lived in this part of his extraordinary
dual existence, nursed and cared for him with such rude attentions as
the surroundings afforded. In the wanderings of his mind the same
duality of life followed him. Now and then he would appear the calm,
sober, self-contained, well-ordered member of a peaceful society that
his friends in his far-away home knew him to be; at other times the
nether part of his nature would leap up into life like a wild beast,
furious and gnashing. At the one time he talked evenly and clearly of
peaceful things; at the other time he blasphemed and hooted with fury.

Several times Mainwaring, though racked by his own wounds, sat beside
the dying man through the silent watches of the tropical nights.
Oftentimes upon these occasions as he looked at the thin, lean face
babbling and talking so aimlessly, he wondered what it all meant.
Could it have been madness--madness in which the separate entities of
good and bad each had, in its turn, a perfect and distinct existence?
He chose to think that this was the case. Who, within his inner
consciousness, does not feel that same ferine, savage man struggling
against the stern, adamantine bonds of morality and decorum? Were
those bonds burst asunder, as it was with this man, might not the wild
beast rush forth, as it had rushed forth in him, to rend and to tear?
Such were the questions that Mainwaring asked himself. And how had it
all come about? By what easy gradations had the respectable Quaker
skipper descended from the decorum of his home life, step by step,
into such a gulf of iniquity? Many such thoughts passed through
Mainwaring's mind, and he pondered them through the still reaches of
the tropical nights while he sat watching the pirate captain struggle
out of the world he had so long burdened. At last the poor wretch
died, and the earth was well quit of one of its torments.

[Illustration: "He Struck Once and Again at the Bald, Narrow Forehead
Beneath Him"

_Illustration from_
CAPTAIN SCARFIELD

_by_ Howard Pyle

_Originally published in_
THE NORTHWESTERN MILLER, _December_ 18, 1897]

A systematic search was made through the island for the scattered
crew, but none was captured. Either there were some secret hiding
places upon the island (which was not very likely) or else they had
escaped in boats hidden somewhere among the tropical foliage. At any
rate they were gone.

Nor, search as he would, could Mainwaring find a trace of any of the
pirate treasure. After the pirate's death and under close questioning,
the weeping mulatto woman so far broke down as to confess in broken
English that Captain Scarfield had taken a quantity of silver money
aboard his vessel, but either she was mistaken or else the pirates had
taken it thence again and had hidden it somewhere else.

Nor would the treasure ever have been found but for a most fortuitous
accident.

Mainwaring had given orders that the _Eliza Cooper_ was to be burned,
and a party was detailed to carry the order into execution. At this
the cook of the _Yankee_ came petitioning for some of the Wilmington
and Brandywine flour to make some plum duff upon the morrow, and
Mainwaring granted his request in so far that he ordered one of the
men to knock open one of the barrels of flour and to supply the cook's
demands.

The crew detailed to execute this modest order in connection with the
destruction of the pirate vessel had not been gone a quarter of an
hour when word came back that the hidden treasure had been found.

Mainwaring hurried aboard the _Eliza Cooper_, and there in the midst
of the open flour barrel he beheld a great quantity of silver coin
buried in and partly covered by the white meal. A systematic search
was now made. One by one the flour barrels were heaved up from below
and burst open on the deck and their contents searched, and if nothing
but the meal was found it was swept overboard. The breeze was whitened
with clouds of flour, and the white meal covered the surface of the
ocean for yards around.

In all, upward of one hundred and fifty thousand dollars was found
concealed beneath the innocent flour and meal. It was no wonder the
pirate captain was so successful, when he could upon an instant's
notice transform himself from a wolf of the ocean to a peaceful Quaker
trader selling flour to the hungry towns and settlements among the
scattered islands of the West Indies, and so carrying his bloody
treasure safely into his quiet Northern home.

In concluding this part of the narrative it may be added that a wide
strip of canvas painted black was discovered in the hold of the _Eliza
Cooper_. Upon it, in great white letters, was painted the name, "The
Bloodhound." Undoubtedly this was used upon occasions to cover the
real and peaceful title of the trading schooner, just as its captain
had, in reverse, covered his sanguine and cruel life by a thin sheet
of morality and respectability.

This is the true story of the death of Capt. Jack Scarfield.

The Newburyport chap-book, of which I have already spoken, speaks only
of how the pirate disguised himself upon the ocean as a Quaker trader.

Nor is it likely that anyone ever identified Eleazer Cooper with the
pirate, for only Mainwaring of all the crew of the _Yankee_ was
exactly aware of the true identity of Captain Scarfield. All that was
ever known to the world was that Eleazer Cooper had been killed in a
fight with the pirates.

In a little less than a year Mainwaring was married to Lucinda
Fairbanks. As to Eleazer Cooper's fortune, which eventually came into
the possession of Mainwaring through his wife, it was many times a
subject of speculation to the lieutenant how it had been earned. There
were times when he felt well assured that a part of it at least was
the fruit of piracy, but it was entirely impossible to guess how much
more was the result of legitimate trading.

For a little time it seemed to Mainwaring that he should give it all
up, but this was at once so impracticable and so quixotic that he
presently abandoned it, and in time his qualms and misdoubts faded
away and he settled himself down to enjoy that which had come to him
through his marriage.

In time the Mainwarings removed to New York, and ultimately the
fortune that the pirate Scarfield had left behind him was used in part
to found the great shipping house of Mainwaring & Bigot, whose famous
transatlantic packet ships were in their time the admiration of the
whole world.

[Illustration]




Chapter VIII

THE RUBY OF KISHMOOOR

_Prologue_


A very famous pirate of his day was Capt. Robertson Keitt.

Before embarking upon his later career of infamy, he was, in the
beginning, very well known as a reputable merchant in the island of
Jamaica. Thence entering, first of all, upon the business of the
African trade, he presently, by regular degrees, became a pirate, and
finally ended his career as one of the most renowned freebooters of
history.

The remarkable adventure through which he at once reached the pinnacle
of success, and became in his profession the most famous figure of his
day, was the capture of the Rajah of Kishmoor's great ship, _The Sun
of the East_. In this vessel was the Rajah's favorite Queen, who,
together with her attendants, was set upon a pilgrimage to Mecca. The
court of this great Oriental potentate was, as may be readily
supposed, fairly aglitter with gold and jewels, so that, what with
such personal adornments that the Queen and her attendants had fetched
with them, besides an ample treasury for the expenses of the
expedition, an incredible prize of gold and jewels rewarded the
freebooters for their successful adventure.

Among the precious stones taken in this great purchase was the
splendid ruby of Kishmoor. This, as may be known to the reader, was
one of the world's greatest gems, and was unique alike both for its
prodigious size and the splendor of its color. This precious jewel the
Rajah of Kishmoor had, upon a certain occasion, bestowed upon his
Queen, and at the time of her capture she wore it as the centerpiece
of a sort of coronet which encircled her forehead and brow.

The seizure by the pirate of so considerable a person as that of the
Queen of Kishmoor, and of the enormous treasure that he found aboard
her ship, would alone have been sufficient to have established his
fame. But the capture of so extraordinary a prize as that of the
ruby--which was, in itself, worth the value of an entire Oriental
kingdom--exalted him at once to the very highest pinnacle of renown.

Having achieved the capture of this incredible prize, our captain
scuttled the great ship and left her to sink with all on board. Three
Lascars of the crew alone escaped to bear the news of this tremendous
disaster to an astounded world.

As may readily be supposed, it was now no longer possible for Captain
Keitt to hope to live in such comparative obscurity as he had before
enjoyed. His was now too remarkable a figure in the eyes of the world.
Several expeditions from various parts were immediately fitted out
against him, and it presently became no longer compatible with his
safety to remain thus clearly outlined before the eyes of the world.
Accordingly, he immediately set about seeking such security as he
might now hope to find, which he did the more readily since he had
now, and at one cast, so entirely fulfilled his most sanguine
expectations of good fortune and of fame.

Thereafter, accordingly, the adventures of our captain became of a
more apocryphal sort. It was known that he reached the West Indies in
safety, for he was once seen at Port Royal and twice at Spanish Town,
in the island of Jamaica. Thereafter, however, he disappeared; nor was
it until several years later that the world heard anything concerning
him.

One day a certain Nicholas Duckworthy, who had once been gunner aboard
the pirate captain's own ship, _The Good Fortune_, was arrested in the
town of Bristol in the very act of attempting to sell to a merchant of
that place several valuable gems from a quantity which he carried with
him tied up in a red bandanna handkerchief.

In the confession of which Duckworthy afterward delivered himself he
declared that Captain Keitt, after his great adventure, having sailed
from Africa in safety, and so reached the shores of the New World, had
wrecked _The Good Fortune_ on a coral reef off the Windward Islands;
that he then immediately deserted the ship, and together with
Duckworthy himself, the sailing master (who was a Portuguese), the
captain of a brig, _The Bloody Hand_ (a consort of Keitt's), and a
villainous rascal named Hunt (who, occupying no precise position among
the pirates, was at once the instigator of and the partaker in the
greatest part of Captain Keitt's wickednesses), made his way to the
nearest port of safety. These five worthies at last fetched the island
of Jamaica, bringing with them all of the jewels and some of the gold
that had been captured from _The Sun of the East_.

But, upon coming to a division of their booty, it was presently
discovered that the Rajah's ruby had mysteriously disappeared from the
collection of jewels to be divided. The other pirates immediately
suspected their captain of having secretly purloined it, and, indeed,
so certain were they of his turpitude that they immediately set about
taking means to force a confession from him.

In this, however, they were so far unsuccessful that the captain,
refusing to yield to their importunities, had suffered himself to die
under their hands, and had so carried the secret of the hiding place
of the great ruby--if he possessed such a secret--along with him.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN KEITT]

Duckworthy concluded his confession by declaring that in his opinion
he himself, the Portuguese sailing master, the captain of _The Bloody
Hand_, and Hunt were the only ones of Captain Keitt's crew who were
now alive; for that _The Good Fortune_ must have broken up in a storm,
which immediately followed their desertion of her; in which event the
entire crew must inevitably have perished.

It may be added that Duckworthy himself was shortly hanged, so that,
if his surmise was true, there were now only three left alive of all
that wicked crew that had successfully carried to its completion the
greatest adventure which any pirate in the world had ever, perhaps,
embarked upon.


I

_Jonathan Rugg_

You may never know what romantic aspirations may lie hidden beneath
the most sedate and sober demeanor.

To have observed Jonathan Rugg, who was a tall, lean, loose-jointed
young Quaker of a somewhat forbidding aspect, with straight, dark hair
and a bony, overhanging forehead set into a frown, a pair of small,
deep-set eyes, and a square jaw, no one would for a moment have
suspected that he concealed beneath so serious an exterior any
appetite for romantic adventure.

Nevertheless, finding himself suddenly transported, as it were, from
the quiet of so sober a town as that of Philadelphia to the tropical
enchantment of Kingston, in the island of Jamaica, the night brilliant
with a full moon that swung in an opal sky, the warm and luminous
darkness replete with the mysteries of a tropical night, and burdened
with the odors of a land breeze, he suddenly discovered himself to be
overtaken with so vehement a desire for some unwonted excitement that,
had the opportunity presented itself, he felt himself ready to
embrace any adventure with the utmost eagerness, no matter whither it
would have conducted him.

At home (where he was a clerk in the countinghouse of a leading
merchant, by name Jeremiah Doolittle), should such idle fancies have
come to him, he would have looked upon himself as little better than a
fool, but now that he found himself for the first time in a foreign
country, surrounded by such strange and unusual sights and sounds, all
conducive to extravagant imaginations, the wish for some extraordinary
and altogether unusual experience took possession of him with a
singular vehemence to which he had heretofore been altogether a
stranger.

In the street where he stood, which was of a shining whiteness and
which reflected the effulgence of the moonlight with an incredible
distinction, he observed, stretching before him, long lines of white
garden walls, overtopped by a prodigious luxuriance of tropical
foliage.

In these gardens, and set close to the street, stood several
pretentious villas and mansions, the slatted blinds and curtains of
the windows of which were raised to admit of the freer entrance of the
cool and balmy air of the night. From within there issued forth bright
lights, together with the exhilarating sound of merry voices laughing
and talking, or perhaps a song accompanied by the tinkling music of a
spinet or of a guitar. An occasional group of figures, clad in light
and summerlike garments, and adorned with gay and startling colors,
passed him through the moonlight; so that what with the brightness and
warmth of the night, together with all these unusual sights and
sounds, it appeared to Jonathan Rugg that he was rather the inhabitant
of some extraordinary land of enchantment and unreality than a dweller
upon that sober and solid world in which he had heretofore passed his
entire existence.

Before continuing this narrative the reader may here be informed that
our hero had come into this enchanted world as the supercargo of the
ship _Susanna Hayes_, of Philadelphia; that he had for several years
proved himself so honest and industrious a servant to the merchant
house of the worthy Jeremiah Doolittle that that benevolent man had
given to his well-deserving clerk this opportunity at once of
gratifying an inclination for foreign travel and of filling a position
of trust that should redound to his individual profit. The _Susanna
Hayes_ had entered Kingston harbor that afternoon, and this was
Jonathan's first night spent in those tropical latitudes, whither his
fancy and his imagination had so often carried him while he stood over
the desk filing the accounts of invoices from foreign parts.

It might be finally added that, had he at all conceived how soon and
to what a degree his sudden inclination for adventure was to be
gratified, his romantic aspirations might have been somewhat dashed at
the prospect that lay before him.


II

_The Mysterious Lady with the Silver Veil_

At that moment our hero suddenly became conscious of the fact that a
small wicket in a wooden gate near which he stood had been opened, and
that the eyes of an otherwise concealed countenance were observing him
with the utmost closeness of scrutiny.

He had hardly time to become aware of this observation of his person
when the gate itself was opened, and there appeared before him, in the
moonlight, the bent and crooked figure of an aged negress. She was
clad in a calamanco raiment, and was further adorned with a variety of
gaudily colored trimmings, vastly suggestive of the tropical world of
which she was an inhabitant. Her woolly head was enveloped, after the
fashion of her people, in the folds of a gigantic and flaming red
turban constructed of an entire pocket handkerchief. Her face was
pock-pitted to an incredible degree, so that what with this deformity,
emphasized by the pouting of her prodigious and shapeless lips, and
the rolling of a pair of eyes as yellow as saffron, Jonathan Rugg
thought that he had never beheld a figure at once so extraordinary and
so repulsive.

It occurred to our hero that here, maybe, was to overtake him such an
adventure as that which he had just a moment before been desiring so
ardently. Nor was he mistaken; for the negress, first looking this way
and then that, with an extremely wary and cunning expression, and
apparently having satisfied herself that the street, for the moment,
was pretty empty of passers, beckoned to him to draw nearer. When he
had approached close enough to her she caught him by the sleeve, and,
instantly drawing him into the garden beyond, shut and bolted the gate
with a quickness and a silence suggestive of the most extravagant
secrecy.

At the same moment a huge negro suddenly appeared from the shadow of
the gatepost, and so placed himself between Jonathan and the gate that
any attempt to escape would inevitably have entailed a conflict, upon
our hero's part, with the sable and giant guardian.

Says the negress, looking very intently at our hero, "Be you afeared,
Buckra?"

"Why, no," quoth Jonathan; "for to tell thee the truth, friend, though
I am a man of peace, being of that religious order known as the
Society of Friends, I am not so weak in person nor so timid in
disposition as to warrant me in being afraid of anyone. Indeed, were I
of a mind to escape, I might, without boasting, declare my belief that
I should be able to push my way past even a better man than thy large
friend who stands so threateningly in front of yonder gate."

At these words the negress broke into so prodigious a grin that, in
the moonlight, it appeared as though the whole lower part of her face
had been transformed into shining teeth. "You be a brave Buckra," said
she, in her gibbering English. "You come wid Melina, and Melina take
you to pretty lady, who want you to eat supper wid her."

Thereupon, and allowing our hero no opportunity to decline this
extraordinary invitation, even had he been of a mind to do so, she
took him by the hand and led him toward the large and imposing house
which commanded the garden. "Indeed," says Jonathan to himself, as he
followed his sable guide--himself followed in turn by the gigantic
negro--"indeed, I am like to have my fill of adventure, if anything is
to be judged from such a beginning as this."

Nor did the interior sumptuousness of the mansion at all belie the
imposing character of its exterior, for, entering by way of an
illuminated veranda, and so coming into a brilliantly lighted hallway
beyond, Jonathan beheld himself to be surrounded by such a wealth of
exquisite and well-appointed tastefulness as it had never before been
his good fortune to behold.

Candles of clarified wax sparkled like stars in chandeliers of
crystal. These in turn, catching the illumination, glittered in
prismatic fragments with all the varied colors of the rainbow, so that
a mellow yet brilliant radiance filled the entire apartment. Polished
mirrors of a spotless clearness, framed in golden frames and built
into the walls, reflected the waxed floors, the rich Oriental carpets,
and the sumptuous paintings that hung against the ivory-tinted
paneling, so that in appearance the beauties of the apartment were
continued in bewildering vistas upon every side toward which the
beholder directed his gaze.

Bidding our hero to be seated, which he did with no small degree of
embarrassment and constraint, and upon the extreme edge of the gilt
and satin-covered chair, the negress who had been his conductor left
him for the time being to his own contemplation.

Almost before he had an opportunity to compose himself into anything
more than a part of his ordinary sedateness of demeanor, the silken
curtains at the doorway at the other end of the apartment were
suddenly divided, and Jonathan beheld before him a female figure
displaying the most exquisite contour of mold and of proportion. She
was clad entirely in white, and was enveloped from head to foot in the
folds of a veil of delicate silver gauze, which, though hiding her
countenance from recognition, nevertheless permitted sufficient of her
beauties to be discerned to suggest the extreme elegance and
loveliness of her lineaments. Advancing toward our hero, and extending
to him a tapering hand as white as alabaster, the fingers encircled
with a multitude of jeweled rings, she addressed him thus:

"Sir," she said, speaking in accents of the most silvery and musical
cadence, "you are no doubt vastly surprised to find yourself thus
unexpectedly, and almost as by violence, introduced into the house of
one who is such an entire stranger to you as myself. But though I am
unknown to you, I must inform you that I am better acquainted with my
visitor, for my agents have been observing you ever since you landed
this afternoon at the dock, and they have followed you ever since,
until a little while ago, when you stopped immediately opposite my
garden gate. These agents have observed you with a closeness of
scrutiny of which you are doubtless entirely unaware. They have even
informed me that, owing doubtless to your extreme interest in your new
surroundings, you have not as yet supped. Knowing this, and that you
must now be enjoying a very hearty appetite, I have to ask you if you
will do me the extreme favor of sitting at table with me at a repast
which you will doubtless be surprised to learn has been hastily
prepared entirely in your honor."

So saying, and giving Jonathan no time for reply, she offered him her
hand, and with the most polite insistence conducted him into an
exquisitely appointed dining room adjoining.

Here stood a table covered with a snow-white cloth, and embellished
with silver and crystal ornaments of every description. Having seated
herself and having indicated to Jonathan to take the chair opposite to
her, the two were presently served with a repast such as our hero had
not thought could have existed out of the pages of certain
extraordinary Oriental tales which one time had fallen to his lot to
read.

This supper (which in itself might successfully have tempted the taste
of a Sybarite) was further enhanced by several wines and cordials
which, filling the room with the aroma of the sunlit grapes from which
they had been expressed, stimulated the appetite, which without them
needed no such spur. The lady, who ate but sparingly herself,
possessed herself with patience until Jonathan's hunger had been
appeased. When, however, she beheld that he weakened in his attacks
upon the dessert of sweets with which the banquet was concluded, she
addressed him upon the business which was evidently entirely occupying
her mind.

"Sir," said she, "you are doubtless aware that everyone, whether man
or woman, is possessed of an enemy. In my own case I must inform you
that I have no less than three who, to compass their ends, would
gladly sacrifice my life itself to their purposes. At no time am I
safe from their machinations, nor have I anyone," cried she,
exhibiting a great emotion, "to whom I may turn in my need. It was
this that led me to hope to find in you a friend in my perils, for,
having observed through my agents that you are not only honest in
disposition and strong in person, but that you are possessed of a
considerable degree of energy and determination, I am most desirous of
imposing upon your good nature a trust of which you cannot for a
moment suspect the magnitude. Tell me, are you willing to assist a
poor, defenseless female in her hour of trial?"

"Indeed, friend," quoth Jonathan, with more vivacity than he usually
exhibited, with a lenity to which he had heretofore in his lifetime
been a stranger--being warmed into such a spirit, doubtless, by the
generous wines of which he had partaken--"indeed, friend, if I could
but see thy face it would doubtless make my decision in such a matter
the more favorable, since I am inclined to think, from the little I
can behold of it, that thy appearance must be extremely comely to the
eye."

"Sir," said the lady, exhibiting some amusement at this unexpected
sally, "I am, you must know, as God made me. Sometime, perhaps, I may
be very glad to satisfy your curiosity, and exhibit to you my poor
countenance such as it is. But now"--and here she reverted to her more
serious mood--"I must again put it to you: are you willing to help an
unprotected woman in a period of very great danger to herself? Should
you decline the assistance which I solicit, my slaves shall conduct
you to the gate through which you entered, and suffer you to depart in
peace. Should you, upon the other hand, accept the trust, you are to
receive no reward therefor, except the gratitude of one who thus
appeals to you in her helplessness."

For a few moments Jonathan fell silent, for here, indeed, was he
entering into an adventure which infinitely surpassed any anticipation
that he could have formed. He was, besides, of a cautious nature, and
was entirely disinclined to embark in any affair so obscure and
tangled as that in which he now found himself becoming involved.

"Friend," said he, at last, "I may tell thee that thy story has so far
moved me as to give me every inclination to help thee in thy
difficulties, but I must also inform thee that I am a man of caution,
having never before entered into any business of this sort. Therefore,
before giving any promise that may bind my future actions, I must, in
common wisdom, demand to know what are the conditions that thou hast
in mind to impose upon me."

"Indeed, sir," cried the lady, with great vivacity and with more
cheerful accents--as though her mind had been relieved of a burden of
fear that her companion might at once have declined even a
consideration of her request--"indeed, sir, you will find that the
trust which I would impose upon you is in appearance no such great
matter as my words may have led you to suppose.

"You must know that I am possessed of a little trinket which, in the
hands of anyone who, like yourself, is a stranger in these parts,
would possess no significance, but which while in my keeping is
fraught with infinite menace to me."

Hereupon, and having so spoken, she clapped her hands, and an
attendant immediately entered, disclosing the person of the same
negress who had first introduced Jonathan into the strange adventure
in which he now found himself involved. This creature, who appeared
still more deformed and repulsive in the brilliantly lighted room than
she had in the moonlight, carried in her hands a white napkin, which
she handed to her mistress. This being opened, disclosed a small ivory
ball of about the bigness of a lime. Nodding to the negress to
withdraw, the lady handed him the ivory ball, and Jonathan took it
with no small degree of curiosity and examined it carefully. It
appeared to be of an exceeding antiquity, and of so deep a yellow as
to be almost brown in color. It was covered over with strange figures
and characters of an Oriental sort, which appeared to our hero to be
of Chinese workmanship.

"I must tell you, sir," said the lady, after she had permitted her
guest to examine this for a while in silence, "that though this
appears to you to be of little worth, it is yet of extreme value.
After all, however, it is nothing but a curiosity that anyone who is
interested in such matters might possess. What I have to ask you is
this: will you be willing to take this into your charge, to guard it
with the utmost care and fidelity--yes, even as the apple of your
eye--during your continuance in these parts, and to return it to me in
safety the day before your departure? By so doing you will render me a
service which you may neither understand nor comprehend, but which
shall make me your debtor for my entire life."

By this time Jonathan had pretty well composed his mind for a reply.

"Friend," said he, "such a matter as this is entirely out of my
knowledge of business, which is, indeed, that of a clerk in the
mercantile profession. Nevertheless, I have every inclination to help
thee, though I trust thou mayest have magnified the dangers that beset
thee. This appears to me to be a little trifle for such an ado;
nevertheless, I will do as thou dost request. I will keep it in safety
and will return it to thee upon this day a week hence, by which time I
hope to have discharged my cargo and be ready to continue my voyage to
Demerara."

At these words the lady, who had been watching him all the time with a
most unaccountable eagerness, burst forth into words of such heartfelt
gratitude as to entirely overwhelm our hero. When her transports had
been somewhat assuaged she permitted him to depart, and the negress
conducted him back through the garden, whence she presently showed him
through the gate whither he had entered and out into the street.


III

_The Terrific Encounter with the One-Eyed Little Gentleman in Black_

Finding himself once more in the open street, Jonathan Rugg stood for
a while in the moonlight, endeavoring to compose his mind into
somewhat of that sobriety that was habitual with him; for, indeed, he
was not a little excited by the unexpected incidents that had just
befallen him. From this effort at composure he was aroused by
observing that a little gentleman clad all in black had stopped at a
little distance away and was looking very intently at him. In the
brightness of the moonlight our hero could see that the little
gentleman possessed but a single eye, and that he carried a
gold-headed cane in his hand. He had hardly time to observe these
particulars, when the other approached him with every appearance of
politeness and cordiality.

"Sir," said he, "surely I am not mistaken in recognizing in you the
supercargo of the ship _Susanna Hayes_, which arrived this afternoon
at this port?"

"Indeed," said Jonathan, "thou art right, friend. That is my
occupation, and that is whence I came."

"To be sure!" said the little gentleman. "To be sure! To be sure! The
_Susanna Hayes_, with a cargo of Indian-corn meal, and from my dear
good friend Jeremiah Doolittle, of Philadelphia. I know your good
master very well--very well indeed. And have you never heard him speak
of his friend Mr. Abner Greenway, of Kingston, Jamaica?"

"Why, no," replied Jonathan, "I have no such recollection of the
name--nor do I know that any such name hath ever appeared upon our
books."

"To be sure! To be sure!" repeated the little gentleman, briskly, and
with exceeding good nature. "Indeed, my name is not likely to have
ever appeared upon your employer's books, for I am not a business
correspondent, but one who, in times past, was his extremely intimate
friend. There is much I would like to ask about him, and, indeed, I
was in hopes that you would have been the bearer of a letter from him.
But I have lodgings at a little distance from here, so that if it is
not requesting too much of you maybe you will accompany me thither, so
that we may talk at our leisure. I would gladly accompany you to your
ship instead of urging you to come to my apartments, but I must tell
you I am possessed of a devil of a fever, so that my physician hath
forbidden me to be out of nights."

"Indeed," said Jonathan, who, you may have observed, was of a very
easy disposition--"indeed, I shall be very glad to accompany thee to
thy lodgings. There is nothing I would like better than to serve any
friend of good Jeremiah Doolittle's."

And thereupon, and with great amity, the two walked off together, the
little one-eyed gentleman in black linking his arm confidingly into
that of Jonathan's, and tapping the pavement continually with his cane
as he trotted on at a great pace. He was very well acquainted with the
town (of which he was a citizen), and so interesting was his
discourse that they had gone a considerable distance before Jonathan
observed they were entering into a quarter darker and less frequented
than that which they had quitted. Tall brick houses stood upon either
side, between which stretched a narrow, crooked roadway, with a kennel
running down the center.

In front of one of these houses--a tall and gloomy structure--our
hero's conductor stopped and, opening the door with a key, beckoned
for him to enter. Jonathan having complied, his new-found friend led
the way up a flight of steps, against which Jonathan's feet beat
noisily in the darkness, and at length, having ascended two stairways
and having reached a landing, he opened a door at the end of the
passage and ushered Jonathan into an apartment, unlighted, except for
the moonshine, which, coming in through a partly open shutter, lay in
a brilliant patch of light upon the floor.

His conductor having struck a light with a flint and steel, our hero
by the illumination of a single candle presently discovered himself to
be in a bedchamber furnished with no small degree of comfort, and even
elegance, and having every appearance of a bachelor's chamber.

"You will pardon me," said his new acquaintance, "if I shut these
shutters and the window, for that devilish fever of which I spoke is
of such a sort that I must keep the night air even out from my room,
or else I shall be shaking the bones out of my joints and chattering
the teeth out of my head by to-morrow morning."

So saying he was as good as his word, and not only drew the shutters
to, but shot the heavy iron bolt into its place. Having accomplished
this he bade our hero to be seated, and placing before him some
exceedingly superior rum, together with some equally excellent
tobacco, they presently fell into the friendliest discourse
imaginable. In the course of their talk, which after a while became
exceedingly confidential, Jonathan confided to his new friend the
circumstances of the adventure into which he had been led by the
beautiful stranger, and to all that he said concerning his adventure
his interlocutor listened with the closest and most scrupulously
riveted attention.

[Illustration: How the Buccaneers Kept Christmas

_Originally published in_
HARPER'S WEEKLY, _December 16, 1899_]

"Upon my word," said he, when Jonathan had concluded, "I hope that you
may not have been made the victim of some foolish hoax. Let me see
what it is she has confided to you."

"That I will," replied Jonathan. And thereupon he thrust his hand into
his breeches' pocket and brought forth the ivory ball.

No sooner did the one eye of the little gentleman in black light upon
the object than a most singular and extraordinary convulsion appeared
to seize upon him. Had a bullet penetrated his heart he could not have
started more violently, nor have sat more rigidly and breathlessly
staring.

Mastering his emotion with the utmost difficulty as Jonathan replaced
the ball in his pocket, he drew a deep and profound breath and wiped
the palm of his hand across his forehead as though arousing himself
from a dream.

"And you," he said, of a sudden, "are, I understand it, a Quaker. Do
you, then, never carry a weapon, even in such a place as this, where
at any moment in the dark a Spanish knife may be stuck betwixt your
ribs?"

"Why, no," said Jonathan, somewhat surprised that so foreign a topic
should have been so suddenly introduced into the discourse. "I am a
man of peace and not of blood. The people of the Society of Friends
never carry weapons, either of offense or defense."

As Jonathan concluded his reply the little gentleman suddenly arose
from his chair and moved briskly around to the other side of the room.
Our hero, watching him with some surprise, beheld him clap to the door
and with a single movement shoot the bolt and turn the key therein.
The next instant he turned to Jonathan a visage transformed as
suddenly as though he had dropped a mask from his face. The gossiping
and polite little old bachelor was there no longer, but in his stead
a man with a countenance convulsed with some furious and nameless
passion.

"That ball!" he cried, in a hoarse and raucous voice. "That ivory
ball! Give it to me upon the instant!"

As he spoke he whipped out from his bosom a long, keen Spanish knife
that in its every appearance spoke without equivocation of the most
murderous possibilities.

The malignant passions that distorted every lineament of the
countenance of the little old gentleman in black filled our hero with
such astonishment that he knew not whether he were asleep or awake;
but when he beheld the other advancing with the naked and shining
knife in his hand his reason returned to him like a flash. Leaping to
his feet, he lost no time in putting the table between himself and his
sudden enemy.

"Indeed, friend," he cried, in a voice penetrated with
terror--"indeed, friend, thou hadst best keep thy distance from me,
for though I am a man of peace and a shunner of bloodshed, I promise
thee that I will not stand still to be murdered without outcry or
without endeavoring to defend my life!"

"Cry as loud as you please!" exclaimed the other. "No one is near this
place to hear you! Cry until you are hoarse; no one in this
neighborhood will stop to ask what is the matter with you. I tell you
I am determined to possess myself of that ivory ball, and have it I
shall, even though I am obliged to cut out your heart to get it!" As
he spoke he grinned with so extraordinary and devilish a distortion of
his countenance, and with such an appearance of every intention of
carrying out his threat as to send the goose flesh creeping like icy
fingers up and down our hero's spine with the most incredible rapidity
and acuteness.

Nevertheless, mastering his fears, Jonathan contrived to speak up with
a pretty good appearance of spirit. "Indeed, friend," he said, "thou
appearest to forget that I am a man of twice thy bulk and half thy
years, and that though thou hast a knife I am determined to defend
myself to the last extremity. I am not going to give thee that which
thou demandest of me, and for thy sake I advise thee to open the door
and let me go free as I entered, or else harm may befall thee."

"Fool!" cried the other, hardly giving him time to end. "Do you, then,
think that I have time to chatter with you while two villains are
lying in wait for me, perhaps at the very door? Blame your own self
for your death!" And, gnashing his teeth with an indescribable menace,
and resting his hand upon the table, he vaulted with incredible
agility clean across it and upon our hero, who, entirely unprepared
for such an extraordinary attack, was flung back against the wall,
with an arm as strong as steel clutching his throat and a knife
flashing in his very eyes with dreadful portent of instant death.

With an instinct to preserve his life, he caught his assailant by the
wrist, and, bending it away from himself, set every fiber of his body
in a superhuman effort to guard and protect himself. The other, though
so much older and smaller, seemed to be composed entirely of fibers of
steel, and, in his murderous endeavors, put forth a strength so
extraordinary that for a moment our hero felt his heart melt within
him with terror for his life. The spittle appeared to dry up within
his mouth, and his hair to creep and rise upon his head. With a
vehement cry of despair and anguish, he put forth one stupendous
effort for defense, and, clapping his heel behind the other's leg, and
throwing his whole weight forward, he fairly tripped his antagonist
backward as he stood. Together they fell upon the floor, locked in the
most desperate embrace, and overturning a chair with a prodigious
clatter in their descent--our hero upon the top and the little
gentleman in black beneath him.

As they struck the floor the little man in black emitted a most
piercing and terrible scream, and instantly relaxing his efforts of
attack, fell to beating the floor with the back of his hands and
drubbing with his heels upon the rug in which he had become entangled.

Our hero leaped to his feet, and with dilating eyes and expanding
brain and swimming sight stared down upon the other like one turned to
a stone.

He beheld instantly what had occurred, and that he had, without so
intending, killed a fellow man. The knife, turned away from his own
person, had in their fall been plunged into the bosom of the other,
and he now lay quivering in the last throes of death. As Jonathan
gazed he beheld a thin red stream trickle out from the parted and
grinning lips; he beheld the eyes turn inward; he beheld the eyelids
contract; he beheld the figure stretch itself; he beheld it become
still in death.


IV

_The Momentous Adventure with the Stranger with the Silver Earrings_

So our hero stood stunned and bedazed, gazing down upon his victim,
like a man turned into a stone. His brain appeared to him to expand
like a bubble, the blood surged and hummed in his ears with every
gigantic beat of his heart, his vision swam, and his trembling hands
were bedewed with a cold and repugnant sweat. The dead figure upon the
floor at his feet gazed at him with a wide, glassy stare, and in the
confusion of his mind it appeared to Jonathan that he was, indeed, a
murderer.

What monstrous thing was this that had befallen him who, but a moment
before, had been so entirely innocent of the guilt of blood? What was
he now to do in such an extremity as this, with his victim lying dead
at his feet, a poniard in his heart? Who would believe him to be
guiltless of crime with such a dreadful evidence as this presented
against him? How was he, a stranger in a foreign land, to totally
defend himself against an accusation of mistaken justice? At these
thoughts a developed terror gripped at his vitals and a sweat as cold
as ice bedewed his entire body. No, he must tarry for no explanation
or defense! He must immediately fly from this terrible place, or else,
should he be discovered, his doom would certainly be sealed!

At that moment, and in the very extremity of his apprehensions, there
fell of a sudden a knock upon the door, sounding so loud and so
startling upon the silence of the room that every shattered nerve in
our hero's frame tingled and thrilled in answer to it. He stood
petrified, scarcely so much as daring to breathe; and then, observing
that his mouth was agape, he moistened his dry and parching lips, and
drew his jaws together with a snap.

Again there fell the same loud, insistent knock upon the panel,
followed by the imperative words, "Open within!"

The wretched Jonathan flung about him a glance at once of terror and
of despair, but there was for him no possible escape. He was shut
tight in the room with his dead victim, like a rat in a trap. Nothing
remained for him but to obey the summons from without. Indeed, in the
very extremity of his distraction, he possessed reason enough to
perceive that the longer he delayed opening the door the less innocent
he might hope to appear in the eyes of whoever stood without.

With the uncertain and spasmodic movements of an ill-constructed
automaton, he crossed the room, and stepping very carefully over the
prostrate body upon the floor, and with a hesitating reluctance that
he could in no degree master, he unlocked, unbolted, and opened the
door.

The figure that outlined itself in the light of the candle, against
the blackness of the passageway without, was of such a singular and
foreign aspect as to fit extremely well into the extraordinary tragedy
of which Jonathan was at once the victim and the cause.

It was that of a lean, tall man with a thin, yellow countenance,
embellished with a long, black mustache, and having a pair of
forbidding, deeply set, and extremely restless black eyes. A crimson
handkerchief beneath a lace cocked hat was tied tightly around the
head, and a pair of silver earrings, which caught the light of the
candle, gleamed and twinkled against the inky darkness of the
passageway beyond.

This extraordinary being, without favoring our hero with any word of
apology for his intrusion, immediately thrust himself forward into the
room, and stretching his long, lean, birdlike neck so as to direct his
gaze over the intervening table, fixed a gaping and concentrated stare
upon the figure lying still and motionless in the center of the room.

"Vat you do dare," said he, with a guttural and foreign accent, and
thereupon, without waiting for a reply, came forward and knelt down
beside the dead man. After thrusting his hand into the silent and
shrunken bosom, he presently looked up and fixed his penetrating eyes
upon our hero's countenance, who, benumbed and bedazed with his
despair, still stood like one enchained in the bonds of a nightmare.
"He vas dead!" said the stranger, and Jonathan nodded his head in
reply.

"Vy you keel ze man?" inquired his interlocutor.

"Indeed," cried Jonathan, finding a voice at last, but one so hoarse
that he could hardly recognize it for his own, "I know not what to
make of the affair! But, indeed, I do assure thee, friend, that I am
entirely innocent of what thou seest."

The stranger still kept his piercing gaze fixed upon our hero's
countenance, and Jonathan, feeling that something further was demanded
of him, continued: "I am, indeed, a victim of a most extravagant and
extraordinary adventure. This evening, coming an entire stranger to
this country, I was introduced into the house of a beautiful female,
who bestowed upon me a charge that appeared to me to be at once
insignificant and absurd. Behold this little ivory ball," said he,
drawing the globe from his pocket, and displaying it between his thumb
and finger. "It is this that appears to have brought all this disaster
upon me; for, coming from the house of the young woman, the man whom
thou now beholdest lying dead upon the floor induced me to come to
this place. Having inveigled me hither, he demanded of me to give him
at once this insignificant trifle. Upon my refusing to do so, he
assaulted me with every appearance of a mad and furious inclination to
deprive me of my life!"

At the sight of the ivory ball the stranger quickly arose from his
kneeling posture and fixed upon our hero a gaze the most extraordinary
that he had ever encountered. His eyes dilated like those of a cat,
the breath expelled itself from his bosom in so deep and profound an
expiration that it appeared as though it might never return again. Nor
was it until Jonathan had replaced the ball in his pocket that he
appeared to awaken from the trance that the sight of the object had
sent him into. But no sooner had the cause of this strange demeanor
disappeared into our hero's breeches' pocket than he arose as with an
electric shock. In an instant he became transformed as by the touch of
magic. A sudden and baleful light flamed into his eyes, his face grew
as red as blood, and he clapped his hand to his pocket with a sudden
and violent motion. "Ze ball!" he cried, in a hoarse and strident
voice. "Ze ball! Give me ze ball!" And upon the next instant our hero
beheld the round and shining nozzle of a pistol pointed directly
against his forehead.

For a moment he stood as though transfixed; then in the mortal peril
that faced him, he uttered a roar that sounded in his own ears like
the outcry of a wild beast, and thereupon flung himself bodily upon
the other with the violence and the fury of a madman.

The stranger drew the trigger, and the powder flashed in the pan. He
dropped the weapon, clattering, and in an instant tried to draw
another from his other pocket. Before he could direct his aim,
however, our hero had caught him by both wrists, and, bending his hand
backward, prevented the chance of any shot from taking immediate
effect upon his person. Then followed a struggle of extraordinary
ferocity and frenzy--the stranger endeavoring to free his hand, and
Jonathan striving with all the energy of despair to prevent him from
effecting his murderous purpose.

[Illustration]

In the struggle our hero became thrust against the edge of the table.
He felt as though his back were breaking, and became conscious that in
such a situation he could hope to defend himself only a few moments
longer. The stranger's face was pressed close to his own. His hot
breath, strong with the odor of garlic, fanned our hero's cheek, while
his lips, distended into a ferocious and ferine grin, displayed his
sharp teeth shining in the candlelight.

"Give me ze ball!" he said, in a harsh and furious whisper.

At the moment there rang in Jonathan's ears the sudden and astounding
detonation of a pistol shot, and for a moment he wondered whether he
had received a mortal wound without being aware of it. Then suddenly
he beheld an extraordinary and dreadful transformation take place in
the countenance thrust so close to his own; the eyes winked several
times with incredible rapidity, and then rolled upward and inward; the
jaws gaped into a dreadful and cavernous yawn; the pistol fell with a
clatter to the floor, and the next moment the muscles, so rigid but an
instant before, relaxed into a limp and listless flaccidity. The
joints collapsed, and the entire man fell into an indistinguishable
heap upon and across the dead figure stretched out upon the floor,
while at the same time a pungent and blinding cloud of gunpowder smoke
filled the apartment. For a few moments the hands twitched
convulsively; the neck stretched itself to an abominable length; the
long, lean legs slowly and gradually relaxed, and every fiber of the
body gradually collapsed into the lassitude of death. A spot of blood
appeared and grew upon the collar at the throat, and in the same
degree the color ebbed from the face, leaving it of a dull and leaden
pallor.

All these terrible and formidable changes of aspect our hero stood
watching with a motionless and riveted attention, and as though they
were to him matters of the utmost consequence and importance; and only
when the last flicker of life had departed from his second victim did
he lift his gaze from this terrible scene of dissolution to stare
about him, this way and that, his eyes blinded, and his breath stifled
by the thick cloud of sulphurous smoke that obscured the objects about
him in a pungent cloud.


V

_The Unexpected Encounter with the Sea Captain with the Broken Nose_

If our hero had been distracted and bedazed by the first catastrophe
that had befallen, this second and even more dreadful and violent
occurrence appeared to take away from him, for the moment, every
power of thought and of sensation. All that perturbation of emotion
that had before convulsed him he discovered to have disappeared, and
in its stead a benumbed and blinded intelligence alone remained to
him. As he stood in the presence of this second death, of which he had
been as innocent and as unwilling an instrument as he had of the
first, he could observe no signs either of remorse or of horror within
him. He picked up his hat, which had fallen upon the floor in the
first encounter, and, brushing away the dust with the cuff of his coat
sleeve with extraordinary care, adjusted the beaver upon his head with
the utmost nicety. Then turning, still stupefied as with the fumes of
some powerful drug, he prepared to quit the scene of tragic terrors
that had thus unexpectedly accumulated upon him.

But ere he could put his design into execution his ears were startled
by the sound of loud and hurried footsteps which, coming from below,
ascended the stairs with a prodigious clatter and bustle of speed. At
the landing these footsteps paused for a while, and then approached,
more cautious and deliberate, toward the room where the double tragedy
had been enacted, and where our hero yet stood silent and inert.

All this while Jonathan made no endeavor to escape, but stood passive
and submissive to what might occur. He felt himself the victim of
circumstances over which he himself had no control. Gazing at the
partly opened door, he waited for whatever adventure might next befall
him. Once again the footsteps paused, this time at the very threshold,
and then the door was slowly pushed open from without.

As our hero gazed at the aperture there presently became disclosed to
his view the strong and robust figure of one who was evidently of a
seafaring habit. From the gold braid upon his hat, the seals dangling
from the ribbon at his fob, and a certain particularity of custom, he
was evidently one of no small consideration in his profession. He was
of a strong and powerful build, with a head set close to his
shoulders, and upon a round, short bull neck. He wore a black cravat,
loosely tied into a knot, and a red waistcoat elaborately trimmed with
gold braid; a leather belt with a brass buckle and hanger, and huge
sea boots completed a costume singularly suggestive of his occupation
in life. His face was round and broad, like that of a cat, and a
complexion stained, by constant exposure to the sun and wind, to a
color of newly polished mahogany. But a countenance which otherwise
might have been humorous, in this case was rendered singularly
repulsive by the fact that his nose had been broken so flat to his
face that all that remained to distinguish that feature were two
circular orifices where the nostrils should have been. His eyes were
by no means so sinister as the rest of his visage, being of a
light-gray color and exceedingly vivacious--even good-natured in the
merry restlessness of their glance--albeit they were well-nigh hidden
beneath a black bush of overhanging eyebrows. When he spoke, his voice
was so deep and resonant that it was as though it issued from a barrel
rather than from the breast of a human being.

"How now, my hearty!" cried he, in stentorian tones, so loud that they
seemed to stun the tensely drawn drums of our hero's ears. "How now,
my hearty! What's to do here? Who is shooting pistols at this hour of
the night?" Then, catching sight of the figures lying in a huddle upon
the floor, his great, thick lips parted into a gape of wonder and his
gray eyes rolled in his head like two balls, so that what with his
flat face and the round holes of his nostrils he presented an
appearance which, under other circumstances, would have been at once
ludicrous and grotesque.

"By the blood!" cried he, "to be sure it is murder that has happened
here."

"Not murder!" cried Jonathan, in a shrill and panting voice. "Not
murder! It was all an accident, and I am as innocent as a baby."

The newcomer looked at him and then at the two figures upon the
floor, and then back at him again with eyes at once quizzical and
cunning. Then his face broke into a grin that might hardly be called
of drollery. "Accident!" quoth he. "By the blood! d'ye see 'tis a
strange accident, indeed, that lays two men by the heels and lets the
third go without a scratch!" Delivering himself thus, he came forward
into the room, and, taking the last victim of Jonathan's adventure by
the arm, with as little compunction as he would have handled a sack of
grain he dragged the limp and helpless figure from where it lay to the
floor beside the first victim. Then, lifting the lighted candle, he
bent over the two prostrate bodies, holding the illumination close to
the lineaments first of one and then of the other. He looked at them
very carefully for a long while, with the closest and most intent
scrutiny, and in perfect silence. "They are both as dead," says he,
"as Davy Jones, and, whoever you be, I protest that you have done your
business the most completest that I ever saw in all of my life."

"Indeed," cried Jonathan, in the same shrill and panting voice, "it
was themselves who did it. First one of them attacked me and then the
other, and I did but try to keep them from murdering me. This one fell
on his knife, and that one shot himself in his efforts to destroy me."

"That," says the seaman, "you may very well tell to a dry-lander, and
maybe he will believe you; but you cannot so easily pull the wool over
the eyes of Captain Benny Willitts. And what, if I may be so bold as
for to ask you, was the reason for their attacking so harmless a man
as you proclaim yourself to be?"

[Illustration: The Burning Ship

_Originally published in_
COLLIER'S WEEKLY, _1898_]

"That I know not," cried Jonathan; "but I am entirely willing to tell
thee all the circumstances. Thou must know that I am a member of the
Society of Friends. This day I landed here in Kingston, and met a
young woman of very comely appearance, who intrusted me with this
little ivory ball, which she requested me to keep for her a few days.
The sight of this ball--in which I can detect nothing that could be
likely to arouse any feelings of violence--appears to have driven
these two men entirely mad, so that they instantly made the most
ferocious and murderous assault upon me. See! wouldst thou have
believed that so small a thing as this would have caused so much
trouble?" And as he spoke he held up to the gaze of the other the
cause of the double tragedy that had befallen. But no sooner had
Captain Willitts's eyes lighted upon the ball than the most singular
change passed over his countenance. The color appeared to grow dull
and yellow in his ruddy cheeks, his fat lips dropped apart, and his
eyes stared with a fixed and glassy glare. He arose to his feet and,
still with the expression of astonishment and wonder upon his face,
gazed first at our hero and then at the ivory ball in his hands, as
though he were deprived both of reason and of speech. At last, as our
hero slipped the trifle back in his pocket again, the mariner slowly
recovered himself, though with a prodigious effort, and drew a deep
and profound breath as to the very bottom of his lungs. He wiped, with
the corner of his black-silk cravat, his brow, upon which the sweat
appeared to have gathered. "Well, messmate," says he, at last, with a
sudden change of voice, "you have, indeed, had a most wonderful
adventure." Then with another deep breath: "Well, by the blood! I may
tell you plainly that I am no poor hand at the reading of faces. Well,
I think you to be honest, and I am inclined to believe every word you
tell me. By the blood! I am prodigiously sorry for you, and am
inclined to help you out of your scrape.

"The first thing to do," he continued, "is to get rid of these two
dead men, and that is an affair I believe we shall have no trouble in
handling. One of them we will wrap up in the carpet here, and t'other
we can roll into yonder bed curtain. You shall carry the one and I the
other, and, the harbor being at no great distance, we can easily bring
them thither and tumble them overboard, and no one will be the wiser
of what has happened. For your own safety, as you may easily see, you
can hardly go away and leave these objects here to be found by the
first comer, and to rise up in evidence against you."

This reasoning, in our hero's present bewildered state, appeared to
him to be so extremely just that he raised not the least objection to
it. Accordingly, each of the two silent, voiceless victims of the
evening's occurrences was wrapped into a bundle that from without
appeared to be neither portentous nor terrible in appearance.

Thereupon, Jonathan shouldering the rug containing the little
gentleman in black, and the sea captain doing the like for the other,
they presently made their way down the stairs through the darkness,
and so out into the street. Here the sea captain became the conductor
of the expedition, and leading the way down several alleys and along
certain by-streets--now and then stopping to rest, for the burdens
were both heavy and clumsy to carry--they both came out at last to the
harbor front, without anyone having questioned them or having appeared
to suspect them of anything wrong. At the waterside was an open wharf
extending a pretty good distance out into the harbor. Thither the
captain led the way and Jonathan followed. So they made their way out
along the wharf or pier, stumbling now and then over loose boards,
until they came at last to where the water was of a sufficient depth
for their purpose. Here the captain, bending his shoulders, shot his
burden out into the dark, mysterious waters, and Jonathan, following
his example, did the same. Each body sank with a sullen and leaden
splash into the element, where, the casings which swathed them
becoming loosened, the rug and the curtain rose to the surface and
drifted slowly away with the tide.

As Jonathan stood gazing dully at the disappearance of these last
evidences of his two inadvertent murders, he was suddenly and
vehemently aroused by feeling a pair of arms of enormous strength
flung about him from behind. In their embrace his elbows were
instantly pinned tight to his side, and he stood for a moment helpless
and astounded, while the voice of the sea captain, rumbling in his
very ear, exclaimed, "Ye bloody, murthering Quaker, I'll have that
ivory ball, or I'll have your life!"

[Illustration]

These words produced the same effect upon Jonathan as though a douche
of cold water had suddenly been flung over him. He began instantly to
struggle to free himself, and that with a frantic and vehement
violence begotten at once of terror and despair. So prodigious were
his efforts that more than once he had nearly torn himself free, but
still the powerful arms of his captor held him as in a vise of iron.
Meantime, our hero's assailant made frequent though ineffectual
attempts to thrust a hand into the breeches' pocket where the ivory
ball was hidden, swearing the while under his breath with a terrifying
and monstrous string of oaths. At last, finding himself foiled in
every such attempt, and losing all patience at the struggles of his
victim, he endeavored to lift Jonathan off of his feet, as though to
dash him bodily upon the ground. In this he would doubtless have
succeeded had he not caught his heel in the crack of a loose board of
the wharf. Instantly they both fell, violently prostrate, the captain
beneath and Jonathan above him, though still encircled in his iron
embrace. Our hero felt the back of his head strike violently upon the
flat face of the other, and he heard the captain's skull sound with a
terrific crack like that of a breaking egg upon some post or billet of
wood, against which he must have struck. In their frantic struggles
they had approached extremely near the edge of the wharf, so that the
next instant, with an enormous and thunderous splash, Jonathan found
himself plunged into the waters of the harbor, and the arms of his
assailant loosened from about his body.

The shock of the water brought him instantly to his senses, and, being
a fairly good swimmer, he had not the least difficulty in reaching and
clutching the crosspiece of a wooden ladder that, coated with slimy
sea moss, led from the water level to the wharf above.

After reaching the safety of the dry land once more, Jonathan gazed
about him as though to discern whence the next attack might be
delivered upon him. But he stood entirely alone upon the dock--not
another living soul was in sight. The surface of the water exhibited
some commotion, as though disturbed by something struggling beneath;
but the sea captain, who had doubtless been stunned by the tremendous
crack upon his head, never arose again out of the element that had
engulfed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The moonlight shone with a peaceful and resplendent illumination, and,
excepting certain remote noises from the distant town, not a sound
broke the silence and the peacefulness of the balmy, tropical night.
The limpid water, illuminated by the resplendent moonlight, lapped
against the wharf. All the world was calm, serene, and enveloped in a
profound and entire repose.

[Illustration: Dead Men Tell No Tales

_Originally published in_
COLLIER'S WEEKLY, _December 17, 1899_]

Jonathan looked up at the round and brilliant globe of light floating
in the sky above his head, and wondered whether it were, indeed,
possible that all that had befallen him was a reality and not some
tremendous hallucination. Then suddenly arousing himself to a renewed
realization of that which had occurred, he turned and ran like one
possessed, up along the wharf, and so into the moonlit town once more.


VI

_The Conclusion of the Adventure with the Lady with the Silver Veil_

Nor did he check his precipitous flight until suddenly, being led
perhaps by some strange influence of which he was not at all the
master, he discovered himself to be standing before the garden gate
where not more than an hour before he had first entered upon the
series of monstrous adventures that had led to such tremendous
conclusions.

People were still passing and repassing, and one of these groups--a
party of young ladies and gentlemen--paused upon the opposite side of
the street to observe, with no small curiosity and amusement, his
dripping and bedraggled aspect. But only one thought and one intention
possessed our hero--to relieve himself as quickly as possible of that
trust which he had taken up so thoughtlessly, and with such monstrous
results to himself and to his victims. He ran to the gate of the
garden and began beating and kicking upon it with a vehemence that he
could neither master nor control. He was aware that the entire
neighborhood was becoming aroused, for he beheld lights moving and
loud voices of inquiry; yet he gave not the least thought to the
disturbance he was creating, but continued without intermission his
uproarious pounding upon the gate.

At length, in answer to the sound of his vehement blows, the little
wicket was opened and a pair of eyes appeared thereat. The next
instant the gate was cast ajar very hastily, and the pock-pitted
negress appeared. She caught him by the sleeve of his coat and drew
him quickly into the garden. "Buckra, Buckra!" she cried. "What you
doing? You wake de whole town!" Then, observing his dripping garments:
"You been in de water. You catch de fever and shake till you die."

"Thy mistress!" cried Jonathan, almost sobbing in the excess of his
emotion; "take me to her upon the instant, or I cannot answer for my
not going entirely mad!"

When our hero was again introduced to the lady he found her clad in a
loose and elegant negligee, infinitely becoming to her graceful
figure, and still covered with the veil of silver gauze that had
before enveloped her.

"Friend," he cried, vehemently, approaching her and holding out toward
her the little ivory ball, "take again this which thou gavest me! It
has brought death to three men, and I know not what terrible fate may
befall me if I keep it longer in my possession."

"What is it you say?" cried she, in a piercing voice. "Did you say it
hath caused the death of three men? Quick! Tell me what has happened,
for I feel somehow a presage that you bring me news of safety and
release from all my dangers."

"I know not what thou meanest!" cried Jonathan, still panting with
agitation. "But this I do know: that when I went away from thee I
departed an innocent man, and now I come back to thee burdened with
the weight of three lives, which, though innocent, I have been
instrumental in taking."

"Explain!" exclaimed the lady, tapping the floor with her foot.
"Explain! explain! explain!"

"That I will," cried Jonathan, "and as soon as I am able! When I left
thee and went out into the street I was accosted by a little gentleman
clad in black."

"Indeed!" cried the lady. "And had he but one eye, and did he carry a
gold-headed cane?"

"Exactly," said Jonathan; "and he claimed acquaintance with friend
Jeremiah Doolittle."

"He never knew him!" cried the lady, vehemently; "and I must tell you
that he was a villain named Hunt, who at one time was the intimate
consort of the pirate Keitt. He it was who plunged a deadly knife into
his captain's bosom, and so murdered him in this very house. He
himself, or his agents, must have been watching my gate when you went
forth."

"I know not how that may be," said Jonathan, "but he took me to his
apartment, and there, obtaining a knowledge of the trust thou didst
burden me with, he demanded it of me, and upon my refusing to deliver
it to him he presently fell to attacking me with a dagger. In my
efforts to protect my life I inadvertently caused him to plunge the
knife into his own bosom and to kill himself."

"And what then?" cried the lady, who appeared well-nigh distracted
with her emotions.

"Then," said Jonathan, "there came a strange man--a foreigner--who
upon his part assaulted me with a pistol, with every intention of
murdering me and thus obtaining possession of that same little
trifle."

"And did he," exclaimed the lady, "have long, black mustachios, and
did he have silver earrings in his ears?"

"Yes," said Jonathan, "he did."

"That," cried the lady, "could have been none other than Captain
Keitt's Portuguese sailing master, who must have been spying upon
Hunt! Tell me what happened next!"

"He would have taken my life," said Jonathan, "but in the struggle
that followed he shot himself accidentally with his own pistol, and
died at my very feet. I do not know what would have happened to me if
a sea captain had not come and proffered his assistance."

"A sea captain!" she exclaimed; "and had he a flat face and a broken
nose?"

"Indeed he had," replied Jonathan.

"That," said the lady, "must have been Captain Keitt's pirate
partner--Captain Willitts, of _The Bloody Hand_. He was doubtless
spying upon the Portuguese."

"He induced me," said Jonathan, "to carry the two bodies down to the
wharf. Having inveigled me there--where, I suppose, he thought no one
could interfere--he assaulted me, and endeavored to take the ivory
ball away from me. In my efforts to escape we both fell into the
water, and he, striking his head upon the edge of the wharf, was first
stunned and then drowned."

"Thank God!" cried the lady, with a transport of fervor, and clasping
her jeweled hands together. "At last I am free of those who have
heretofore persecuted me and threatened my very life itself! You have
asked to behold my face; I will now show it to you! Heretofore I have
been obliged to keep it concealed lest, recognizing me, my enemies
should have slain me." As she spoke she drew aside her veil, and
disclosed to the vision of our hero a countenance of the most
extraordinary and striking beauty. Her luminous eyes were like those
of a Jawa, and set beneath exquisitely arched and penciled brows. Her
forehead was like lustrous ivory and her lips like rose leaves. Her
hair, which was as soft as the finest silk, was fastened up in masses
of ravishing abundance. "I am," said she, "the daughter of that
unfortunate Captain Keitt, who, though weak and a pirate, was not so
wicked, I would have you know, as he has been painted. He would,
doubtless, have been an honest man had he not been led astray by the
villain Hunt, who so nearly compassed your destruction. He returned to
this island before his death, and made me the sole heir of all that
great fortune which he had gathered--perhaps not by the most honest
means--in the waters of the Indian Ocean. But the greatest
treasure of all that fortune bequeathed to me was a single jewel which
you yourself have just now defended with a courage and a fidelity that
I cannot sufficiently extol. It is that priceless gem known as the
Ruby of Kishmoor. I will show it to you."

[Illustration: "I AM THE DAUGHTER OF THAT UNFORTUNATE CAPTAIN KEITT"]

Hereupon she took the little ivory ball in her hand, and, with a turn
of her beautiful wrists, unscrewed a lid so nicely and cunningly
adjusted that no eye could have detected where it was joined to the
parent globe. Within was a fleece of raw silk containing an object
which she presently displayed before the astonished gaze of our hero.
It was a red stone of about the bigness of a plover's egg, and which
glowed and flamed with such an exquisite and ruddy brilliancy as to
dazzle even Jonathan's inexperienced eyes. Indeed, he did not need to
be informed of the priceless value of the treasure, which he beheld in
the rosy palm extended toward him. How long he gazed at this
extraordinary jewel he knew not, but he was aroused from his
contemplation by the sound of the lady's voice addressing him. "The
three villains," said she, "who have this day met their deserts in a
violent and bloody death, had by an accident obtained knowledge that
this jewel was in my possession. Since then my life has hung upon a
thread, and every step that I have taken has been watched by these
enemies, the most cruel and relentless that it was ever the lot of any
unfortunate to possess. From the mortal dangers of their machinations
you have saved me, exhibiting a courage and a determination that
cannot be sufficiently applauded. In this you have earned my deepest
admiration and regard. I would rather," she cried, "intrust my life
and my happiness to you than into the keeping of any man whom I have
ever known! I cannot hope to reward you in such a way as to recompense
you for the perils into which my necessities have thrust you; but
yet"--and here she hesitated, as though seeking for words in which to
express herself--"but yet if you are willing to accept of this jewel,
and all of the fortune that belongs to me, together with the person
of poor Evaline Keitt herself, not only the stone and the wealth, but
the woman also, are yours to dispose of as you see fit!"

Our hero was so struck aback at this unexpected turn that he knew not
upon the instant what reply to make. "Friend," said he, at last, "I
thank thee extremely for thy offer, and, though I would not be
ungracious, it is yet borne in upon me to testify to thee that as to
the stone itself and the fortune--of which thou speakest, and of which
I very well know the history--I have no inclination to receive either
the one or the other, both the fruits of theft, rapine, and murder.
The jewel I have myself beheld three times stained, as it were, with
the blood of my fellow man, so that it now has so little value in my
sight that I would not give a peppercorn to possess it. Indeed, there
is no inducement in the world that could persuade me to accept it, or
even to take it again into my hand. As to the rest of thy generous
offer, I have only to say that I am, four months hence, to be married
to a very comely young woman of Kensington, in Pennsylvania, by name
Martha Dobbs, and therefore I am not at all at liberty to consider my
inclinations in any other direction."

Having so delivered himself, Jonathan bowed with such ease as his
stiff and awkward joints might command, and thereupon withdrew from
the presence of the charmer, who, with cheeks suffused with blushes
and with eyes averted, made no endeavor to detain him.

So ended the only adventure of moment that ever happened him in all
his life. For thereafter he contented himself with such excitement as
his mercantile profession and his extremely peaceful existence might
afford.


_Epilogue_

In conclusion it may be said that when the worthy Jonathan Rugg was
married to Martha Dobbs, upon the following June, some mysterious
friend presented to the bride a rope of pearls of such considerable
value that when they were realized into money our hero was enabled to
enter into partnership with his former patron the worthy Jeremiah
Doolittle, and that, having made such a beginning, he by and by arose
to become, in his day, one of the leading merchants of his native town
of Philadelphia.

[Illustration]


The End

 


INTRODUCTION

The year 1400 opened with more than usual peacefulness in England. Only
a few months before, Richard II--weak, wicked, and treacherous--had been
dethroned, and Henry IV declared King in his stead. But it was only a
seeming peacefulness, lasting but for a little while; for though King
Henry proved himself a just and a merciful man--as justice and mercy
went with the men of iron of those days--and though he did not care
to shed blood needlessly, there were many noble families who had been
benefited by King Richard during his reign, and who had lost somewhat of
their power and prestige from the coming in of the new King.

Among these were a number of great lords--the Dukes of Albemarle,
Surrey, and Exeter, the Marquis of Dorset, the Earl of Gloucester, and
others--who had been degraded to their former titles and estates, from
which King Richard had lifted them. These and others brewed a secret
plot to take King Henry's life, which plot might have succeeded had not
one of their own number betrayed them.

Their plan had been to fall upon the King and his adherents, and to
massacre them during a great tournament, to be held at Oxford. But Henry
did not appear at the lists; whereupon, knowing that he had been lodging
at Windsor with only a few attendants, the conspirators marched thither
against him. In the mean time the King had been warned of the plot,
so that, instead of finding him in the royal castle, they discovered
through their scouts that he had hurried to London, whence he was
even then marching against them at the head of a considerable army. So
nothing was left them but flight. Some betook themselves one way, some
another; some sought sanctuary here, some there; but one and another,
they were all of them caught and killed.

The Earl of Kent--one time Duke of Surrey--and the Earl of
Salisbury were beheaded in the market-place at Cirencester; Lord Le
Despencer--once the Earl of Gloucester--and Lord Lumley met the same
fate at Bristol; the Earl of Huntingdon was taken in the Essex fens,
carried to the castle of the Duke of Gloucester, whom he had betrayed
to his death in King Richard's time, and was there killed by the castle
people. Those few who found friends faithful and bold enough to afford
them shelter, dragged those friends down in their own ruin.

Just such a case was that of the father of the boy hero of this
story, the blind Lord Gilbert Reginald Falworth, Baron of Falworth and
Easterbridge, who, though having no part in the plot, suffered through
it ruin, utter and complete.

He had been a faithful counsellor and adviser to King Richard, and
perhaps it was this, as much and more than his roundabout connection
with the plot, that brought upon him the punishment he suffered.



CHAPTER 1

Myles Falworth was but eight years of age at that time, and it was only
afterwards, and when he grew old enough to know more of the ins and outs
of the matter, that he could remember by bits and pieces the things that
afterwards happened; how one evening a knight came clattering into the
court-yard upon a horse, red-nostrilled and smeared with the sweat and
foam of a desperate ride--Sir John Dale, a dear friend of the blind
Lord.

Even though so young, Myles knew that something very serious had
happened to make Sir John so pale and haggard, and he dimly remembered
leaning against the knight's iron-covered knees, looking up into his
gloomy face, and asking him if he was sick to look so strange. Thereupon
those who had been too troubled before to notice him, bethought
themselves of him, and sent him to bed, rebellious at having to go so
early.

He remembered how the next morning, looking out of a window high up
under the eaves, he saw a great troop of horsemen come riding into the
courtyard beneath, where a powdering of snow had whitened everything,
and of how the leader, a knight clad in black armor, dismounted and
entered the great hall door-way below, followed by several of the band.

He remembered how some of the castle women were standing in a frightened
group upon the landing of the stairs, talking together in low voices
about a matter he did not understand, excepting that the armed men who
had ridden into the courtyard had come for Sir John Dale. None of the
women paid any attention to him; so, shunning their notice, he ran off
down the winding stairs, expecting every moment to be called back again
by some one of them.

A crowd of castle people, all very serious and quiet, were gathered
in the hall, where a number of strange men-at-arms lounged upon the
benches, while two billmen in steel caps and leathern jacks stood
guarding the great door, the butts of their weapons resting upon the
ground, and the staves crossed, barring the door-way.

In the anteroom was the knight in black armor whom Myles had seen from
the window. He was sitting at the table, his great helmet lying upon
the bench beside him, and a quart beaker of spiced wine at his elbow. A
clerk sat at the other end of the same table, with inkhorn in one hand
and pen in the other, and a parchment spread in front of him.

Master Robert, the castle steward, stood before the knight, who every
now and then put to him a question, which the other would answer, and
the clerk write the answer down upon the parchment.

His father stood with his back to the fireplace, looking down upon the
floor with his blind eyes, his brows drawn moodily together, and the
scar of the great wound that he had received at the tournament at
York--the wound that had made him blind--showing red across his
forehead, as it always did when he was angered or troubled.

There was something about it all that frightened Myles, who crept to his
father's side, and slid his little hand into the palm that hung limp and
inert. In answer to the touch, his father grasped the hand tightly,
but did not seem otherwise to notice that he was there. Neither did
the black knight pay any attention to him, but continued putting his
questions to Master Robert.

Then, suddenly, there was a commotion in the hall without, loud voices,
and a hurrying here and there. The black knight half arose, grasping a
heavy iron mace that lay upon the bench beside him, and the next moment
Sir John Dale himself, as pale as death, walked into the antechamber. He
stopped in the very middle of the room. "I yield me to my Lord's grace
and mercy," said he to the black knight, and they were the last words he
ever uttered in this world.

The black knight shouted out some words of command, and swinging up the
iron mace in his hand, strode forward clanking towards Sir John, who
raised his arm as though to shield himself from the blow. Two or three
of those who stood in the hall without came running into the room with
drawn swords and bills, and little Myles, crying out with terror, hid
his face in his father's long gown.

The next instant came the sound of a heavy blow and of a groan, then
another blow and the sound of one falling upon the ground. Then the
clashing of steel, and in the midst Lord Falworth crying, in a dreadful
voice, "Thou traitor! thou coward! thou murderer!"

Master Robert snatched Myles away from his father, and bore him out of
the room in spite of his screams and struggles, and he remembered just
one instant's sight of Sir John lying still and silent upon his face,
and of the black knight standing above him, with the terrible mace in
his hand stained a dreadful red.

It was the next day that Lord and Lady Falworth and little Myles,
together with three of the more faithful of their people, left the
castle.

His memory of past things held a picture for Myles of old Diccon Bowman
standing over him in the silence of midnight with a lighted lamp in his
hand, and with it a recollection of being bidden to hush when he would
have spoken, and of being dressed by Diccon and one of the women,
bewildered with sleep, shuddering and chattering with cold.

He remembered being wrapped in the sheepskin that lay at the foot of
his bed, and of being carried in Diccon Bowman's arms down the silent
darkness of the winding stair-way, with the great black giant shadows
swaying and flickering upon the stone wall as the dull flame of the lamp
swayed and flickered in the cold breathing of the night air.

Below were his father and mother and two or three others. A stranger
stood warming his hands at a newly-made fire, and little Myles, as he
peeped from out the warm sheepskin, saw that he was in riding-boots and
was covered with mud. He did not know till long years afterwards that
the stranger was a messenger sent by a friend at the King's court,
bidding his father fly for safety.

They who stood there by the red blaze of the fire were all very still,
talking in whispers and walking on tiptoes, and Myles's mother hugged
him in her arms, sheepskin and all, kissing him, with the tears
streaming down her cheeks, and whispering to him, as though he could
understand their trouble, that they were about to leave their home
forever.

Then Diccon Bowman carried him out into the strangeness of the winter
midnight.

Outside, beyond the frozen moat, where the osiers, stood stark and stiff
in their winter nakedness, was a group of dark figures waiting for them
with horses. In the pallid moonlight Myles recognized the well-known
face of Father Edward, the Prior of St. Mary's.

After that came a long ride through that silent night upon the
saddle-bow in front of Diccon Bowman; then a deep, heavy sleep, that
fell upon him in spite of the galloping of the horses.

When next he woke the sun was shining, and his home and his whole life
were changed.



CHAPTER 2

From the time the family escaped from Falworth Castle that midwinter
night to the time Myles was sixteen years old he knew nothing of the
great world beyond Crosbey-Dale. A fair was held twice in a twelvemonth
at the market-town of Wisebey, and three times in the seven years old
Diccon Bowman took the lad to see the sights at that place. Beyond these
three glimpses of the outer world he lived almost as secluded a life as
one of the neighboring monks of St. Mary's Priory.

Crosbey-Holt, their new home, was different enough from Falworth or
Easterbridge Castle, the former baronial seats of Lord Falworth. It was
a long, low, straw-thatched farm-house, once, when the church lands were
divided into two holdings, one of the bailiff's houses. All around were
the fruitful farms of the priory, tilled by well-to-do tenant holders,
and rich with fields of waving grain, and meadow-lands where sheep and
cattle grazed in flocks and herds; for in those days the church lands
were under church rule, and were governed by church laws, and there,
when war and famine and waste and sloth blighted the outside world,
harvests flourished and were gathered, and sheep were sheared and cows
were milked in peace and quietness.

The Prior of St. Mary's owed much if not all of the church's prosperity
to the blind Lord Falworth, and now he was paying it back with a haven
of refuge from the ruin that his former patron had brought upon himself
by giving shelter to Sir John Dale.

I fancy that most boys do not love the grinding of school life--the
lessons to be conned, the close application during study hours. It is
not often pleasant to brisk, lively lads to be so cooped up. I wonder
what the boys of to-day would have thought of Myles's training. With him
that training was not only of the mind, but of the body as well, and for
seven years it was almost unremitting. "Thou hast thine own way to
make in the world, sirrah," his father said more than once when the boy
complained of the grinding hardness of his life, and to make one's way
in those days meant a thousand times more than it does now; it meant not
only a heart to feel and a brain to think, but a hand quick and strong
to strike in battle, and a body tough to endure the wounds and blows in
return. And so it was that Myles's body as well as his mind had to be
trained to meet the needs of the dark age in which he lived.

Every morning, winter or summer, rain or shine he tramped away six long
miles to the priory school, and in the evenings his mother taught him
French.

Myles, being prejudiced in the school of thought of his day, rebelled
not a little at that last branch of his studies. "Why must I learn that
vile tongue?" said he.

"Call it not vile," said the blind old Lord, grimly; "belike, when thou
art grown a man, thou'lt have to seek thy fortune in France land, for
England is haply no place for such as be of Falworth blood." And in
after-years, true to his father's prediction, the "vile tongue" served
him well.

As for his physical training, that pretty well filled up the hours
between his morning studies at the monastery and his evening studies
at home. Then it was that old Diccon Bowman took him in hand, than whom
none could be better fitted to shape his young body to strength and his
hands to skill in arms. The old bowman had served with Lord Falworth's
father under the Black Prince both in France and Spain, and in long
years of war had gained a practical knowledge of arms that few could
surpass. Besides the use of the broadsword, the short sword, the
quarter-staff, and the cudgel, he taught Myles to shoot so skilfully
with the long-bow and the cross-bow that not a lad in the country-side
was his match at the village butts. Attack and defence with the lance,
and throwing the knife and dagger were also part of his training.

Then, in addition to this more regular part of his physical training,
Myles was taught in another branch not so often included in the military
education of the day--the art of wrestling. It happened that a fellow
lived in Crosbey village, by name Ralph-the-Smith, who was the greatest
wrestler in the country-side, and had worn the champion belt for three
years. Every Sunday afternoon, in fair weather, he came to teach Myles
the art, and being wonderfully adept in bodily feats, he soon grew so
quick and active and firm-footed that he could cast any lad under twenty
years of age living within a range of five miles.

"It is main ungentle armscraft that he learneth," said Lord Falworth one
day to Prior Edward. "Saving only the broadsword, the dagger, and the
lance, there is but little that a gentleman of his strain may use.
Neth'less, he gaineth quickness and suppleness, and if he hath true
blood in his veins he will acquire knightly arts shrewdly quick when the
time cometh to learn them."

But hard and grinding as Myles's life was, it was not entirely without
pleasures. There were many boys living in Crosbey-Dale and the village;
yeomen's and farmers' sons, to be sure, but, nevertheless, lads of his
own age, and that, after all, is the main requirement for friendship in
boyhood's world. Then there was the river to bathe in; there were the
hills and valleys to roam over, and the wold and woodland, with their
wealth of nuts and birds'-nests and what not of boyhood's treasures.

Once he gained a triumph that for many a day was very sweet under the
tongue of his memory. As was said before, he had been three times to the
market-town at fair-time, and upon the last of these occasions he had
fought a bout of quarterstaff with a young fellow of twenty, and had
been the conqueror. He was then only a little over fourteen years old.

Old Diccon, who had gone with him to the fair, had met some cronies of
his own, with whom he had sat gossiping in the ale-booth, leaving Myles
for the nonce to shift for himself. By-and-by the old man had noticed
a crowd gathered at one part of the fair-ground, and, snuffing a fight,
had gone running, ale-pot in hand. Then, peering over the shoulders of
the crowd, he had seen his young master, stripped to the waist, fighting
like a gladiator with a fellow a head taller than himself. Diccon was
about to force his way through the crowd and drag them asunder, but a
second look had showed his practised eye that Myles was not only holding
his own, but was in the way of winning the victory. So he had stood with
the others looking on, withholding himself from any interference and
whatever upbraiding might be necessary until the fight had been brought
to a triumphant close. Lord Falworth never heard directly of the
redoubtable affair, but old Diccon was not so silent with the common
folk of Crosbey-Dale, and so no doubt the father had some inkling of
what had happened. It was shortly after this notable event that Myles
was formally initiated into squirehood. His father and mother, as was
the custom, stood sponsors for him. By them, each bearing a lighted
taper, he was escorted to the altar. It was at St. Mary's Priory, and
Prior Edward blessed the sword and girded it to the lad's side. No
one was present but the four, and when the good Prior had given the
benediction and had signed the cross upon his forehead, Myles's mother
stooped and kissed his brow just where the priest's finger had drawn the
holy sign. Her eyes brimmed bright with tears as she did so. Poor
lady! perhaps she only then and for the first time realized how big her
fledgling was growing for his nest. Henceforth Myles had the right to
wear a sword.


Myles had ended his fifteenth year. He was a bonny lad, with brown face,
curling hair, a square, strong chin, and a pair of merry laughing
blue eyes; his shoulders were broad; his chest was thick of girth; his
muscles and thews were as tough as oak.

The day upon which he was sixteen years old, as he came whistling home
from the monastery school he was met by Diccon Bowman.

"Master Myles," said the old man, with a snuffle in his voice--"Master
Myles, thy father would see thee in his chamber, and bade me send thee
to him as soon as thou didst come home. Oh, Master Myles, I fear me that
belike thou art going to leave home to-morrow day."

Myles stopped short. "To leave home!" he cried.

"Aye," said old Diccon, "belike thou goest to some grand castle to
live there, and be a page there and what not, and then, haply, a
gentleman-at-arms in some great lord's pay."

"What coil is this about castles and lords and gentlemen-at-arms?" said
Myles. "What talkest thou of, Diccon? Art thou jesting?"

"Nay," said Diccon, "I am not jesting. But go to thy father, and then
thou wilt presently know all. Only this I do say, that it is like thou
leavest us to-morrow day."

And so it was as Diccon had said; Myles was to leave home the very
next morning. He found his father and mother and Prior Edward together,
waiting for his coming.

"We three have been talking it over this morning," said his father, "and
so think each one that the time hath come for thee to quit this poor
home of ours. An thou stay here ten years longer, thou'lt be no more fit
to go then than now. To-morrow I will give thee a letter to my kinsman,
the Earl of Mackworth. He has thriven in these days and I have fallen
away, but time was that he and I were true sworn companions, and
plighted together in friendship never to be sundered. Methinks, as I
remember him, he will abide by his plighted troth, and will give thee
his aid to rise in the world. So, as I said, to-morrow morning thou
shalt set forth with Diccon Bowman, and shall go to Castle Devlen, and
there deliver this letter which prayeth him to give thee a place in his
household. Thou mayst have this afternoon to thyself to make read such
things as thou shalt take with thee. And bid me Diccon to take the gray
horse to the village and have it shod."

Prior Edward had been standing looking out of the window. As Lord
Falworth ended he turned.

"And, Myles," said he, "thou wilt need some money, so I will give thee
as a loan forty shillings, which some day thou mayst return to me an
thou wilt. For this know, Myles, a man cannot do in the world without
money. Thy father hath it ready for thee in the chest, and will give it
thee to-morrow ere thou goest."

Lord Falworth had the grim strength of manhood's hard sense to upbear
him in sending his son into the world, but the poor lady mother had
nothing of that to uphold her. No doubt it was as hard then as it is
now for the mother to see the nestling thrust from the nest to shift for
itself. What tears were shed, what words of love were spoken to the only
man-child, none but the mother and the son ever knew.

The next morning Myles and the old bowman rode away, and no doubt to
the boy himself the dark shadows of leave-taking were lost in the golden
light of hope as he rode out into the great world to seek his fortune.



CHAPTER 3

WHAT MYLES remembered of Falworth loomed great and grand and big, as
things do in the memory of childhood, but even memory could not make
Falworth the equal of Devlen Castle, when, as he and Diccon Bowman rode
out of Devlentown across the great, rude stone bridge that spanned the
river, he first saw, rising above the crowns of the trees, those
huge hoary walls, and the steep roofs and chimneys clustered thickly
together, like the roofs and chimneys of a town.

The castle was built upon a plateau-like rise of ground, which was
enclosed by the outer wall. It was surrounded on three sides by a
loop-like bend of the river, and on the fourth was protected by a deep,
broad, artificial moat, almost as wide as the stream from which it was
fed. The road from the town wound for a little distance along by the
edge of this moat. As Myles and the old bowman galloped by, with the
answering echo of their horses' hoof-beats rattling back from the smooth
stone face of the walls, the lad looked up, wondering at the height and
strength of the great ancient fortress. In his air-castle building Myles
had pictured the Earl receiving him as the son of his one-time comrade
in arms--receiving him, perhaps, with somewhat of the rustic warmth that
he knew at Crosbey-Dale; but now, as he stared at those massive walls
from below, and realized his own insignificance and the greatness of
this great Earl, he felt the first keen, helpless ache of homesickness
shoot through his breast, and his heart yearned for Crosbey-Holt again.

Then they thundered across the bridge that spanned the moat, and through
the dark shadows of the great gaping gate-way, and Diccon, bidding him
stay for a moment, rode forward to bespeak the gate-keeper.

The gate-keeper gave the two in charge of one of the men-at-arms who
were lounging upon a bench in the archway, who in turn gave them into
the care of one of the house-servants in the outer court-yard. So,
having been passed from one to another, and having answered many
questions, Myles in due time found himself in the outer waiting-room
sitting beside Diccon Bowman upon a wooden bench that stood along the
wall under the great arch of a glazed window.

For a while the poor country lad sat stupidly bewildered. He was aware
of people coming and going; he was aware of talk and laughter sounding
around him; but he thought of nothing but his aching homesickness and
the oppression of his utter littleness in the busy life of this great
castle.

Meantime old Diccon Bowman was staring about him with huge interest,
every now and then nudging his young master, calling his attention now
to this and now to that, until at last the lad began to awaken somewhat
from his despondency to the things around. Besides those servants and
others who came and went, and a knot of six or eight men-at-arms with
bills and pole-axes, who stood at the farther door-way talking together
in low tones, now and then broken by a stifled laugh, was a group of
four young squires, who lounged upon a bench beside a door-way hidden by
an arras, and upon them Myles's eyes lit with a sudden interest. Three
of the four were about his own age, one was a year or two older, and
all four were dressed in the black-and-yellow uniform of the house of
Beaumont.

Myles plucked the bowman by the sleeve. "Be they squires, Diccon?" said
he, nodding towards the door.

"Eh?" said Diccon. "Aye; they be squires."

"And will my station be with them?" asked the boy.

"Aye; an the Earl take thee to service, thou'lt haply be taken as
squire."

Myles stared at them, and then of a sudden was aware that the young men
were talking of him. He knew it by the way they eyed him askance, and
spoke now and then in one another's ears. One of the four, a gay young
fellow, with long riding-boots laced with green laces, said a few words,
the others gave a laugh, and poor Myles, knowing how ungainly he must
seem to them, felt the blood rush to his cheeks, and shyly turned his
head.

Suddenly, as though stirred by an impulse, the same lad who had just
created the laugh arose from the bench, and came directly across the
room to where Myles and the bowman sat.

"Give thee good-den," said he. "What be'st thy name and whence comest
thou, an I may make bold so to ask?"

"My name is Myles Falworth," said Myles; "and I come from Crosbey-Dale
bearing a letter to my Lord."

"Never did I hear of Crosbey-Dale," said the squire. "But what seekest
here, if so be I may ask that much?"

"I come seeking service," said Myles, "and would enter as an esquire
such as ye be in my Lord's household."

Myles's new acquaintance grinned. "Thou'lt make a droll squire to wait
in a Lord's household," said he. "Hast ever been in such service?"

"Nay," said Myles, "I have only been at school, and learned Latin and
French and what not. But Diccon Bowman here hath taught me use of arms."

The young squire laughed outright. "By'r Lady, thy talk doth tickle
me, friend Myles," said he. "Think'st thou such matters will gain thee
footing here? But stay! Thou didst say anon that thou hadst a letter to
my Lord. From whom is it?"

"It is from my father," said Myles. "He is of noble blood, but fallen in
estate. He is a kinsman of my Lord's, and one time his comrade in arms."

"Sayst so?" said the other. "Then mayhap thy chances are not so
ill, after all." Then, after a moment, he added: "My name is Francis
Gascoyne, and I will stand thy friend in this matter. Get thy letter
ready, for my Lord and his Grace of York are within and come forth anon.
The Archbishop is on his way to Dalworth, and my Lord escorts him so far
as Uppingham. I and those others are to go along. Dost thou know my Lord
by sight?"

"Nay," said Myles, "I know him not."

"Then I will tell thee when he cometh. Listen!" said he, as a confused
clattering sounded in the court-yard without. "Yonder are the horses
now. They come presently. Busk thee with thy letter, friend Myles."

The attendants who passed through the anteroom now came and went more
hurriedly, and Myles knew that the Earl must be about to come forth.
He had hardly time to untie his pouch, take out the letter, and tie the
strings again when the arras at the door-way was thrust suddenly aside,
and a tall thin squire of about twenty came forth, said some words to
the young men upon the bench, and then withdrew again. Instantly the
squires arose and took their station beside the door-way. A sudden hush
fell upon all in the room, and the men-at-arms stood in a line against
the wall, stiff and erect as though all at once transformed to figures
of iron. Once more the arras was drawn back, and in the hush Myles heard
voices in the other room.

"My Lord cometh," whispered Gascoyne in his ear, and Myles felt his
heart leap in answer.

The next moment two noblemen came into the anteroom followed by a crowd
of gentlemen, squires, and pages. One of the two was a dignitary of the
Church; the other Myles instantly singled out as the Earl of Mackworth.



CHAPTER 4

He was a tall man, taller even than Myles's father. He had a thin
face, deep-set bushy eyebrows, and a hawk nose. His upper lip was clean
shaven, but from his chin a flowing beard of iron-gray hung nearly to
his waist. He was clad in a riding-gown of black velvet that hung a
little lower than the knee, trimmed with otter fur and embroidered with
silver goshawks--the crest of the family of Beaumont.

A light shirt of link mail showed beneath the gown as he walked, and a
pair of soft undressed leather riding-boots were laced as high as the
knee, protecting his scarlet hose from mud and dirt. Over his shoulders
he wore a collar of enamelled gold, from which hung a magnificent
jewelled pendant, and upon his fist he carried a beautiful Iceland
falcon.

As Myles stood staring, he suddenly heard Gascoyne's voice whisper in
his ear, "Yon is my Lord; go forward and give him thy letter."

Scarcely knowing what he did, he walked towards the Earl like a machine,
his heart pounding within him and a great humming in his ears. As he
drew near, the nobleman stopped for a moment and stared at him, and
Myles, as in a dream, kneeled, and presented the letter. The Earl took
it in his hand, turned it this way and that, looked first at the bearer,
then at the packet, and then at the bearer again.

"Who art thou?" said he; "and what is the matter thou wouldst have of
me?"

"I am Myles Falworth," said the lad, in a low voice; "and I come seeking
service with you."

The Earl drew his thick eyebrows quickly together, and shot a keen
look at the lad. "Falworth?" said he, sharply--"Falworth? I know no
Falworth!"

"The letter will tell you," said Myles. "It is from one once dear to
you."

The Earl took the letter, and handing it to a gentleman who stood near,
bade him break the seal. "Thou mayst stand," said he to Myles; "needst
not kneel there forever." Then, taking the opened parchment again, he
glanced first at the face and then at the back, and, seeing its length,
looked vexed. Then he read for an earnest moment or two, skipping from
line to line. Presently he folded the letter and thrust it into the
pouch at his side. "So it is, your Grace," said he to the lordly
prelate, "that we who have luck to rise in the world must ever suffer by
being plagued at all times and seasons. Here is one I chanced to know a
dozen years ago, who thinks he hath a claim upon me, and saddles me
with his son. I must e'en take the lad, too, for the sake of peace and
quietness." He glanced around, and seeing Gascoyne, who had drawn near,
beckoned to him. "Take me this fellow," said he, "to the buttery, and
see him fed; and then to Sir James Lee, and have his name entered in the
castle books. And stay, sirrah," he added; "bid me Sir James, if it may
be so done, to enter him as a squire-at-arms. Methinks he will be better
serving so than in the household, for he appeareth a soothly rough cub
for a page."

Myles did look rustic enough, standing clad in frieze in the midst of
that gay company, and a murmur of laughter sounded around, though he
was too bewildered to fully understand that he was the cause of the
merriment. Then some hand drew him back--it was Gascoyne's--there was a
bustle of people passing, and the next minute they were gone, and
Myles and old Diccon Bowman and the young squire were left alone in the
anteroom.

Gascoyne looked very sour and put out. "Murrain upon it!" said he; "here
is good sport spoiled for me to see thee fed. I wish no ill to thee,
friend, but I would thou hadst come this afternoon or to-morrow."

"Methinks I bring trouble and dole to every one," said Myles, somewhat
bitterly. "It would have been better had I never come to this place,
methinks."

His words and tone softened Gascoyne a little. "Ne'er mind," said the
squire; "it was not thy fault, and is past mending now. So come and fill
thy stomach, in Heaven's name."

Perhaps not the least hard part of the whole trying day for Myles
was his parting with Diccon. Gascoyne and he had accompanied the old
retainer to the outer gate, in the archway of which they now stood; for
without a permit they could go no farther. The old bowman led by the
bridle-rein the horse upon which Myles had ridden that morning. His own
nag, a vicious brute, was restive to be gone, but Diccon held him in
with tight rein. He reached down, and took Myles's sturdy brown hand in
his crooked, knotted grasp.

"Farewell, young master," he croaked, tremulously, with a watery glimmer
in his pale eyes. "Thou wilt not forget me when I am gone?"

"Nay," said Myles; "I will not forget thee."

"Aye, aye," said the old man, looking down at him, and shaking his head
slowly from side to side; "thou art a great tall sturdy fellow now, yet
have I held thee on my knee many and many's the time, and dandled thee
when thou wert only a little weeny babe. Be still, thou devil's limb!"
he suddenly broke off, reining back his restive raw-boned steed,
which began again to caper and prance. Myles was not sorry for the
interruption; he felt awkward and abashed at the parting, and at the old
man's reminiscences, knowing that Gascoyne's eyes were resting amusedly
upon the scene, and that the men-at-arms were looking on. Certainly
old Diccon did look droll as he struggled vainly with his vicious
high-necked nag. "Nay, a murrain on thee! an' thou wilt go, go!" cried
he at last, with a savage dig of his heels into the animal's ribs,
and away they clattered, the led-horse kicking up its heels as a final
parting, setting Gascoyne fairly alaughing. At the bend of the road the
old man turned and nodded his head; the next moment he had disappeared
around the angle of the wall, and it seemed to Myles, as he stood
looking after him, as though the last thread that bound him to his
old life had snapped and broken. As he turned he saw that Gascoyne was
looking at him.

"Dost feel downhearted?" said the young squire, curiously.

"Nay," said Myles, brusquely. Nevertheless his throat was tight and dry,
and the word came huskily in spite of himself.



CHAPTER 5

THE EARL of Mackworth, as was customary among the great lords in those
days, maintained a small army of knights, gentlemen, men-at-arms, and
retainers, who were expected to serve him upon all occasions of need,
and from whom were supplied his quota of recruits to fill such levies as
might be made upon him by the King in time of war.

The knights and gentlemen of this little army of horse and foot soldiers
were largely recruited from the company of squires and bachelors, as the
young novitiate soldiers of the castle were called.

This company of esquires consisted of from eighty to ninety lads,
ranging in age from eight to twenty years. Those under fourteen years
were termed pages, and served chiefly the Countess and her waiting
gentlewomen, in whose company they acquired the graces and polish of the
times, such as they were. After reaching the age of fourteen the lads
were entitled to the name of esquire or squire.

In most of the great houses of the time the esquires were the especial
attendants upon the Lord and Lady of the house, holding such positions
as body-squires, cup-bearers, carvers, and sometimes the office of
chamberlain. But Devlen, like some other of the princely castles of the
greatest nobles, was more like a military post or a fortress than an
ordinary household. Only comparatively few of the esquires could be
used in personal attendance upon the Earl; the others were trained
more strictly in arms, and served rather in the capacity of a sort of
body-guard than as ordinary squires. For, as the Earl rose in power and
influence, and as it so became well worth while for the lower nobility
and gentry to enter their sons in his family, the body of squires became
almost cumbersomely large. Accordingly, that part which comprised the
squires proper, as separate from the younger pages, was divided into
three classes--first, squires of the body, who were those just past
pagehood, and who waited upon the Earl in personal service; second,
squires of the household, who, having regular hours assigned for
exercise in the manual of arms, were relieved from personal service
excepting upon especial occasions; and thirdly and lastly, at the head
of the whole body of lads, a class called bachelors--young men ranging
from eighteen to twenty years of age. This class was supposed to
exercise a sort of government over the other and younger squires--to
keep them in order as much as possible, to marshal them upon occasions
of importance, to see that their arms and equipments were kept in good
order, to call the roll for chapel in the morning, and to see that those
not upon duty in the house were present at the daily exercise at arms.
Orders to the squires were generally transmitted through the bachelors,
and the head of that body was expected to make weekly reports of affairs
in their quarters to the chief captain of the body.

From this overlordship of the bachelors there had gradually risen a
system of fagging, such as is or was practised in the great English
public schools--enforced services exacted from the younger lads--which
at the time Myles came to Devlen had, in the five or six years it had
been in practice, grown to be an absolute though unwritten law of the
body--a law supported by all the prestige of long-continued usage. At
that time the bachelors numbered but thirteen, yet they exercised over
the rest of the sixty-four squires and pages a rule of iron, and were
taskmasters, hard, exacting, and oftentimes cruel.

The whole company of squires and pages was under the supreme command of
a certain one-eyed knight, by name Sir James Lee; a soldier seasoned by
the fire of a dozen battles, bearing a score of wounds won in fight and
tourney, and withered by hardship and labor to a leather-like toughness.
He had fought upon the King's side in all the late wars, and had at
Shrewsbury received a wound that unfitted him for active service, so
that now he was fallen to the post of Captain of Esquires at Devlen
Castle--a man disappointed in life, and with a temper imbittered by that
failure as well as by cankering pain.

Yet Perhaps no one could have been better fitted for the place he held
than Sir James Lee. The lads under his charge were a rude, rough, unruly
set, quick, like their elders, to quarrel, and to quarrel fiercely, even
to the drawing of sword or dagger. But there was a cold, iron sternness
about the grim old man that quelled them, as the trainer with a lash of
steel might quell a den of young wolves. The apartments in which he was
lodged, with his clerk, were next in the dormitory of the lads, and
even in the midst of the most excited brawlings the distant sound of his
harsh voice, "Silence, messieurs!" would bring an instant hush to the
loudest uproar.

It was into his grim presence that Myles was introduced by Gascoyne.
Sir James was in his office, a room bare of ornament or adornment or
superfluous comfort of any sort--without even so much as a mat of rushes
upon the cold stone pavement to make it less cheerless. The old one-eyed
knight sat gnawing his bristling mustaches. To anyone who knew him it
would have been apparent that, as the castle phrase went, "the devil sat
astride of his neck," which meant that some one of his blind wounds was
aching more sorely than usual.

His clerk sat beside him, with account-books and parchment spread upon
the table, and the head squire, Walter Blunt, a lad some three or four
years older than Myles, and half a head taller, black-browed, powerfully
built, and with cheek and chin darkened by the soft budding of his
adolescent beard, stood making his report.

Sir James listened in grim silence while Gascoyne told his errand.

"So, then, pardee, I am bid to take another one of ye, am I?" he
snarled. "As though ye caused me not trouble enow; and this one a cub,
looking a very boor in carriage and breeding. Mayhap the Earl thinketh I
am to train boys to his dilly-dally household service as well as to use
of arms."

"Sir," said Gascoyne, timidly, "my Lord sayeth he would have this one
entered direct as a squire of the body, so that he need not serve in the
household."

"Sayest so?" cried Sir James, harshly. "Then take thou my message back
again to thy Lord. Not for Mackworth--no, nor a better man than he--will
I make any changes in my government. An I be set to rule a pack of boys,
I will rule them as I list, and not according to any man's bidding.
Tell him, sirrah, that I will enter no lad as squire of the body without
first testing an he be fit at arms to hold that place." He sat for a
while glowering at Myles and gnawing his mustaches, and for the time
no one dared to break the grim silence. "What is thy name?" said he,
suddenly. And then, almost before Myles could answer, he asked the head
squire whether he could find a place to lodge him.

"There is Gillis Whitlock's cot empty," said Blunt. "He is in the
infirmary, and belike goeth home again when he cometh thence. The fever
hath gotten into his bones, and--"

"That will do," said the knight, interrupting him impatiently. "Let him
take that place, or any other that thou hast. And thou, Jerome," said he
to his clerk, "thou mayst enter him upon the roll, though whether it be
as page or squire or bachelor shall be as I please, and not as Mackworth
biddeth me. Now get ye gone."

"Old Bruin's wound smarteth him sore," Gascoyne observed, as the two
lads walked across the armory court. He had good-naturedly offered to
show the new-comer the many sights of interest around the castle, and in
the hour or so of ramble that followed, the two grew from acquaintances
to friends with a quickness that boyhood alone can bring about. They
visited the armory, the chapel, the stables, the great hall, the Painted
Chamber, the guard-house, the mess-room, and even the scullery and the
kitchen, with its great range of boilers and furnaces and ovens. Last of
all Myles's new friend introduced him to the armor-smithy.

"My Lord hath sent a piece of Milan armor thither to be repaired," said
he. "Belike thou would like to see it."

"Aye," said Myles, eagerly, "that would I."

The smith was a gruff, good-natured fellow, and showed the piece of
armor to Myles readily and willingly enough. It was a beautiful bascinet
of inlaid workmanship, and was edged with a rim of gold. Myles scarcely
dared touch it; he gazed at it with an unconcealed delight that warmed
the smith's honest heart.

"I have another piece of Milan here," said he. "Did I ever show thee my
dagger, Master Gascoyne?"

"Nay," said the squire.

The smith unlocked a great oaken chest in the corner of the shop, lifted
the lid, and brought thence a beautiful dagger with the handle of ebony
and silver-gilt, and a sheath of Spanish leather, embossed and gilt.
The keen, well-tempered blade was beautifully engraved and inlaid
with niello-work, representing a group of figures in a then popular
subject--the dance of Death. It was a weapon at once unique and
beautiful, and even Gascoyne showed an admiration scarcely less keen
than Myles's openly-expressed delight.

"To whom doth it belong?" said he, trying the point upon his thumb nail.

"There," said the smith, "is the jest of the whole, for it belongeth
to me. Sir William Beauclerk bade me order the weapon through Master
Gildersworthy, of London town, and by the time it came hither, lo! he
had died, and so it fell to my hands. No one here payeth the price for
the trinket, and so I must e'en keep it myself, though I be but a poor
man."

"How much dost thou hold it for?" said Gascoyne.

"Seventeen shillings buyeth it," said the armorer, carelessly.

"Aye, aye," said Gascoyne, with a sigh; "so it is to be poor, and not be
able to have such things as one loveth and would fain possess. Seventeen
shillings is nigh as much by half again as all my yearly wage."

Then a sudden thought came to Myles, and as it came his cheeks glowed
as hot as fire "Master Gascoyne," said he, with gruff awkwardness,
"thou hast been a very good, true friend to me since I have come to this
place, and hast befriended me in all ways thou mightest do, and I, as
well I know, but a poor rustic clod. Now I have forty shillings by me
which I may spend as I list, and so I do beseech thee that thou wilt
take yon dagger of me as a love-gift, and have and hold it for thy very
own."

Gascoyne stared open-mouthed at Myles. "Dost mean it?" said he, at last.

"Aye," said Myles, "I do mean it. Master Smith, give him the blade."

At first the smith grinned, thinking it all a jest; but he soon saw that
Myles was serious enough, and when the seventeen shillings were produced
and counted down upon the anvil, he took off his cap and made Myles a
low bow as he swept them into his pouch. "Now, by my faith and troth,"
quoth he, "that I do call a true lordly gift. Is it not so, Master
Gascoyne?"

"Aye," said Gascoyne, with a gulp, "it is, in soothly earnest." And
thereupon, to Myles's great wonderment, he suddenly flung his arms about
his neck, and, giving him a great hug, kissed him upon the cheek. "Dear
Myles," said he, "I tell thee truly and of a verity I did feel warm
towards thee from the very first time I saw thee sitting like a poor oaf
upon the bench up yonder in the anteroom, and now of a sooth I give thee
assurance that I do love thee as my own brother. Yea, I will take the
dagger, and will stand by thee as a true friend from this time forth.
Mayhap thou mayst need a true friend in this place ere thou livest long
with us, for some of us esquires be soothly rough, and knocks are more
plenty here than broad pennies, so that one new come is like to have a
hard time gaining a footing."

"I thank thee," said Myles, "for thy offer of love and friendship, and
do tell thee, upon my part, that I also of all the world would like best
to have thee for my friend."

Such was the manner In which Myles formed the first great friendship of
his life, a friendship that was destined to last him through many years
to come. As the two walked back across the great quadrangle, upon which
fronted the main buildings of the castle, their arms were wound across
one another's shoulders, after the manner, as a certain great writer
says, of boys and lovers.



CHAPTER 6

A boy's life is of a very flexible sort. It takes but a little while for
it to shape itself to any new surroundings in which it may be thrown, to
make itself new friends, to settle itself to new habits; and so it was
that Myles fell directly into the ways of the lads of Devlen. On his
first morning, as he washed his face and hands with the other squires
and pages in a great tank of water in the armory court-yard, he
presently found himself splashing and dashing with the others, laughing
and shouting as loud as any, and calling some by their Christian names
as though he had known them for years instead of overnight. During
chapel he watched with sympathetic delight the covert pranks of the
youngsters during the half-hour that Father Emmanuel droned his Latin,
and with his dagger point he carved his own name among the many cut
deep into the back of the bench before him. When, after breakfast, the
squires poured like school-boys into the great armory to answer to the
roll-call for daily exercise, he came storming in with the rest, beating
the lad in front of him with his cap.

Boys are very keen to feel the influence of a forceful character. A lad
with a strong will is quick to reach his proper level as a greater or
lesser leader among the others, and Myles was of just the masterful
nature to make his individuality felt among the Devlen squires. He was
quick enough to yield obedience upon all occasions to proper authority,
but would never bend an inch to the usurpation of tyranny. In the school
at St. Mary's Priory at Crosbey-Dale he would submit without a murmur or
offer of resistance to chastisement by old Father Ambrose, the
regular teacher; but once, when the fat old monk was sick, and a great
long-legged strapping young friar, who had temporarily taken his place,
undertook to administer punishment, Myles, with a wrestling trip, flung
him sprawling backward over a bench into the midst of a shoal of small
boys amid a hubbub of riotous confusion. He had been flogged soundly
for it under the supervision of Prior Edward himself; but so soon as
his punishment was over, he assured the prior very seriously that should
like occasion again happen he would act in the same manner, flogging or
no flogging.

It was this bold, outspoken spirit that gained him at once friends and
enemies at Devlen, and though it first showed itself in what was but a
little matter, nevertheless it set a mark upon him that singled him out
from the rest, and, although he did not suspect it at the time, called
to him the attention of Sir James Lee himself, who regarded him as a lad
of free and frank spirit.

The first morning after the roll-call in the armory, as Walter Blunt,
the head bachelor, rolled up the slip of parchment, and the temporary
silence burst forth into redoubled noise and confusion, each lad arming
himself from a row of racks that stood along the wall, he beckoned Myles
to him.

"My Lord himself hath spoken to Sir James Lee concerning thee," said he.
"Sir James maintaineth that he will not enter thee into the body till
thou hast first practised for a while at the pels, and shown what thou
canst do at broadsword. Hast ever fought at the pel?"

"Aye," answered Myles, "and that every day of my life sin I became
esquire four years ago, saving only Sundays and holy days."

"With shield and broadsword?"

"Sometimes," said Myles, "and sometimes with the short sword."

"Sir James would have thee come to the tilt-yard this morn; he himself
will take thee in hand to try what thou canst do. Thou mayst take the
arms upon yonder rack, and use them until otherwise bidden. Thou seest
that the number painted above it on the wall is seventeen; that will be
thy number for the nonce."

So Myles armed himself from his rack as the others were doing from
theirs. The armor was rude and heavy, used to accustom the body to the
weight of the iron plates rather than for any defence. It consisted of
a cuirass, or breastplate of iron, opening at the side with hinges, and
catching with hooks and eyes; epauliers, or shoulder-plates; arm-plates
and leg-pieces; and a bascinet, or open-faced helmet. A great triangular
shield covered with leather and studded with bosses of iron, and a heavy
broadsword, pointed and dulled at the edges, completed the equipment.

The practice at the pels which Myles was bidden to attend comprised the
chief exercise of the day with the esquires of young cadet soldiers of
that time, and in it they learned not only all the strokes, cuts, and
thrusts of sword-play then in vogue, but also toughness, endurance, and
elastic quickness. The pels themselves consisted of upright posts of
ash or oak, about five feet six inches in height, and in girth somewhat
thicker than a man's thigh. They were firmly planted in the ground, and
upon them the strokes of the broadsword were directed.

At Devlen the pels stood just back of the open and covered tilting
courts and the archery ranges, and thither those lads not upon household
duty were marched every morning excepting Fridays and Sundays, and were
there exercised under the direction of Sir James Lee and two assistants.
The whole company was divided into two, sometimes into three parties,
each of which took its turn at the exercise, delivering at the word
of command the various strokes, feints, attacks, and retreats as the
instructors ordered.

After five minutes of this mock battle the perspiration began to pour
down the faces, and the breath to come thick and short; but it was not
until the lads could absolutely endure no more that the order was given
to rest, and they were allowed to fling themselves panting upon the
ground, while another company took its place at the triple row of posts.

As Myles struck and hacked at the pel assigned to him, Sir James Lee
stood beside him watching him in grim silence. The lad did his best to
show the knight all that he knew of upper cut, under cut, thrust, and
back-hand stroke, but it did not seem to him that Sir James was very
well satisfied with his skill.

"Thou fightest like a clodpole," said the old man. "Ha, that stroke
was but ill-recovered. Strike me it again, and get thou in guard more
quickly."

Myles repeated the stroke.

"Pest!" cried Sir James. "Thou art too slow by a week. Here, strike thou
the blow at me."

Myles hesitated. Sir James held a stout staff in his hand, but otherwise
he was unarmed.

"Strike, I say!" said Sir James. "What stayest thou for? Art afeard?"

It was Myles's answer that set the seal of individuality upon him.
"Nay," said he, boldly, "I am not afeard. I fear not thee nor any man!"
So saying, he delivered the stroke at Sir James with might and main. It
was met with a jarring blow that made his wrist and arm tingle, and the
next instant he received a stroke upon the bascinet that caused his ears
to ring and the sparks to dance and fly before his eyes.

"Pardee!" said Sir James, grimly. "An I had had a mace in my hand, I
would have knocked thy cockerel brains out that time. Thou mayst take
that blow for answering me so pertly. And now we are quits. Now strike
me the stroke again an thou art not afeard."

Myles's eyes watered in spite of himself, and he shut the lids tight to
wink the dimness away. Nevertheless he spoke up undauntedly as before.
"Aye, marry, will I strike it again," said he; and this time he was
able to recover guard quickly enough to turn Sir James's blow with his
shield, instead of receiving it upon his head.

"So!" said Sir James. "Now mind thee of this, that when thou strikest
that lower cut at the legs, recover thyself more quickly. Now, then,
strike me it at the pel."

Gascoyne and other of the lads who were just then lying stretched out
upon the grass beneath, a tree at the edge of the open court where stood
the pels, were interested spectators of the whole scene. Not one of them
in their memory had heard Sir James so answered face to face as Myles
had answered him, and, after all, perhaps the lad himself would not
have done so had he been longer a resident in the squires' quarters at
Devlen.

"By 'r Lady! thou art a cool blade, Myles," said Gascoyne, as they
marched back to the armory again. "Never heard I one bespeak Sir James
as thou hast done this day."

"And, after all," said another of the young squires, "old Bruin was not
so ill-pleased, methinks. That was a shrewd blow he fetched thee on the
crown, Falworth. Marry, I would not have had it on my own skull for a
silver penny."



CHAPTER 7

So little does it take to make a body's reputation.

That night all the squires' quarters buzzed with the story of how the
new boy, Falworth, had answered Sir James Lee to his face without fear,
and had exchanged blows with him hand to hand. Walter Blunt himself was
moved to some show of interest.

"What said he to thee, Falworth?" asked he.

"He said naught," said Myles, brusquely. "He only sought to show me how
to recover from the under cut."

"It is passing strange that he should take so much notice of thee as to
exchange blows with thee with his own hand. Haply thou art either very
quick or parlous slow at arms."

"It is quick that he is," said Gascoyne, speaking up in his friend's
behalf. "For the second time that Falworth delivered the stroke, Sir
James could not reach him to return; so I saw with mine own eyes."

But that very sterling independence that had brought Myles so creditably
through this adventure was certain to embroil him with the rude,
half-savage lads about him, some of whom, especially among the
bachelors, were his superiors as well in age as in skill and training.
As said before, the bachelors had enforced from the younger boys a
fagging sort of attendance on their various personal needs, and it was
upon this point that Myles first came to grief. As it chanced, several
days passed before any demand was made upon him for service to the heads
of the squirehood, but when that demand was made, the bachelors were
very quick to see that the boy who was bold enough to speak up to Sir
James Lee was not likely to be a willing fag for them.

"I tell thee, Francis," he said, as Gascoyne and he talked over the
matter one day--"I tell thee I will never serve them. Prithee, what
shame can be fouler than to do such menial service, saving for one's
rightful Lord?"

"Marry!" quoth Gascoyne; "I reason not of shame at this or that. All I
know is that others serve them who are haply as good and maybe better
than I be, and that if I do not serve them I get knocked i' th' head
therefore, which same goeth soothly against my stomach."

"I judge not for thee," said Myles. "Thou art used to these castle
ways, but only I know that I will not serve them, though they be thirty
against me instead of thirteen."

"Then thou art a fool," said Gascoyne, dryly.

Now in this matter of service there was one thing above all others that
stirred Myles Falworth's ill-liking. The winter before he had come to
Devlen, Walter Blunt, who was somewhat of a Sybarite in his way, and who
had a repugnance to bathing in the general tank in the open armory court
in frosty weather, had had Dick Carpenter build a trough in the corner
of the dormitory for the use of the bachelors, and every morning it was
the duty of two of the younger squires to bring three pails of water to
fill this private tank for the use of the head esquires. It was seeing
two of his fellow-esquires fetching and carrying this water that Myles
disliked so heartily, and every morning his bile was stirred anew at the
sight.

"Sooner would I die than yield to such vile service," said he.

He did not know how soon his protestations would be put to the test.

One night--it was a week or two after Myles had come to Devlen--Blunt
was called to attend the Earl at livery. The livery was the last meal of
the day, and was served with great pomp and ceremony about nine o'clock
at night to the head of the house as he lay in bed. Curfew had not yet
rung, and the lads in the squires' quarters were still wrestling and
sparring and romping boisterously in and out around the long row of rude
cots in the great dormitory as they made ready for the night. Six or
eight flaring links in wrought-iron brackets that stood out from the
wall threw a great ruddy glare through the barrack-like room--a light of
all others to romp by. Myles and Gascoyne were engaged in defending the
passage-way between their two cots against the attack of three other
lads, and Myles held his sheepskin coverlet rolled up into a ball and
balanced in his hand, ready for launching at the head of one of the
others so soon as it should rise from behind the shelter of a cot. Just
then Walter Blunt, dressed with more than usual care, passed by on his
way to the Earl's house. He stopped for a moment and said, "Mayhaps I
will not be in until late to-night. Thou and Falworth, Gascoyne, may
fetch water to-morrow."

Then he was gone. Myles stood staring after his retreating figure with
eyes open and mouth agape, still holding the ball of sheepskin balanced
in his hand. Gascoyne burst into a helpless laugh at his blank,
stupefied face, but the next moment he laid his hand on his friend's
shoulder.

"Myles," he said, "thou wilt not make trouble, wilt thou?"

Myles made no answer. He flung down his sheepskin and sat him gloomily
down upon the side of the cot.

"I said that I would sooner die than fetch water for them," said he.

"Aye, aye," said Gascoyne; "but that was spoken in haste."

Myles said nothing, but shook his head.

But, after all, circumstances shape themselves. The next morning when he
rose up through the dark waters of sleep it was to feel some one shaking
him violently by the shoulder.

"Come!" cried Gascoyne, as Myles opened his eyes--"come, time passeth,
and we are late."

Myles, bewildered with his sudden awakening, and still fuddled with the
fumes of sleep, huddled into his doublet and hose, hardly knowing what
he was doing; tying a point here and a point there, and slipping
his feet into his shoes. Then he hurried after Gascoyne, frowzy,
half-dressed, and even yet only half-awake. It was not until he was
fairly out into the fresh air and saw Gascoyne filling the three
leathern buckets at the tank, that he fully awakened to the fact that he
was actually doing that hateful service for the bachelors which he had
protested he would sooner die than render.

The sun was just rising, gilding the crown of the donjon-keep with a
flame of ruddy light. Below, among the lesser buildings, the day was
still gray and misty. Only an occasional noise broke the silence of the
early morning: a cough from one of the rooms; the rattle of a pot or
a pan, stirred by some sleepy scullion; the clapping of a door or a
shutter, and now and then the crowing of a cock back of the long row of
stables--all sounding loud and startling in the fresh dewy stillness.

"Thou hast betrayed me," said Myles, harshly, breaking the silence at
last. "I knew not what I was doing, or else I would never have come
hither. Ne'theless, even though I be come, I will not carry the water
for them."

"So be it," said Gascoyne, tartly. "An thou canst not stomach it,
let be, and I will e'en carry all three myself. It will make me two
journeys, but, thank Heaven, I am not so proud as to wish to get me
hard knocks for naught." So saying, he picked up two of the buckets and
started away across the court for the dormitory.

Then Myles, with a lowering face, snatched up the third, and, hurrying
after, gave him his hand with the extra pail. So it was that he came to
do service, after all.

"Why tarried ye so long?" said one of the older bachelors, roughly, as
the two lads emptied the water into the wooden trough. He sat on the
edge of the cot, blowzed and untrussed, with his long hair tumbled and
disordered.

His dictatorial tone stung Myles to fury. "We tarried no longer than
need be," answered he, savagely. "Have we wings to fly withal at your
bidding?"

He spoke so loudly that all in the room heard him; the younger squires
who were dressing stared in blank amazement, and Blunt sat up suddenly
in his cot.

"Why, how now?" he cried. "Answerest thou back thy betters so pertly,
sirrah? By my soul, I have a mind to crack thy head with this clog for
thy unruly talk."

He glared at Myles as he spoke, and Myles glared back again with right
good-will. Matters might have come to a crisis, only that Gascoyne and
Wilkes dragged their friend away before he had opportunity to answer.

"An ill-conditioned knave as ever I did see," growled Blunt, glaring
after him.

"Myles, Myles," said Gascoyne, almost despairingly, "why wilt thou
breed such mischief for thyself? Seest thou not thou hast got thee
the ill-will of every one of the bachelors, from Wat Blunt to Robin de
Ramsey?"

"I care not," said Myles, fiercely, recurring to his grievance. "Heard
ye not how the dogs upbraided me before the whole room? That Blunt
called me an ill-conditioned knave."

"Marry!" said Gascoyne, laughing, "and so thou art."

Thus it is that boldness may breed one enemies as well as gain one
friends. My own notion is that one's enemies are more quick to act than
one's friends.



CHAPTER 8

Every one knows the disagreeable, lurking discomfort that follows a
quarrel--a discomfort that imbitters the very taste of life for the time
being. Such was the dull distaste that Myles felt that morning after
what had passed in the dormitory. Every one in the proximity of such
an open quarrel feels a reflected constraint, and in Myles's mind was a
disagreeable doubt whether that constraint meant disapproval of him or
of his late enemies.

It seemed to him that Gascoyne added the last bitter twang to his
unpleasant feelings when, half an hour later, they marched with the
others to chapel.

"Why dost thou breed such trouble for thyself, Myles?" said he,
recurring to what he had already said. "Is it not foolish for thee to
come hither to this place, and then not submit to the ways thereof, as
the rest of us do?"

"Thou talkest not like a true friend to chide me thus," said Myles,
sullenly; and he withdrew his arm from his friend's.

"Marry, come up!" said Gascoyne; "an I were not thy friend, I would let
thee jog thine own way. It aches not my bones to have thine drubbed."

Just then they entered the chapel, and words that might have led to a
quarrel were brought to a close.

Myles was not slow to see that he had the ill will of the head of their
company. That morning in the armory he had occasion to ask some question
of Blunt; the head squire stared coldly at him for a moment, gave him a
short, gruff answer, and then, turning his back abruptly, began talking
with one of the other bachelors. Myles flushed hot at the other's
insulting manner, and looked quickly around to see if any of the others
had observed what had passed. It was a comfort to him to see that all
were too busy arming themselves to think of anything else; nevertheless,
his face was very lowering as he turned away.

"Some day I will show him that I am as good a man as he," he muttered to
himself. "An evil-hearted dog to put shame upon me!"

The storm was brewing and ready to break.


That day was exceptionally hot and close, and permission had been asked
by and granted to those squires not on duty to go down to the river for
a bath after exercise at the pels. But as Myles replaced his arms in
the rack, a little page came with a bidding to come to Sir James in his
office.

"Look now," said Myles, "here is just my ill-fortune. Why might he not
have waited an hour longer rather than cause me to miss going with ye?"

"Nay," said Gascoyne, "let not that grieve thee, Myles. Wilkes and I
will wait for thee in the dormitory--will we not, Edmund? Make thou
haste and go to Sir James."

Sir James was sitting at the table studying over a scroll of parchment,
when Myles entered his office and stood before him at the table.

"Well, boy," said he, laying aside the parchment and looking up at the
lad, "I have tried thee fairly for these few days, and may say that I
have found thee worthy to be entered upon the rolls as esquire of the
body."

"I give thee thanks, sir," said Myles.

The knight nodded his head in acknowledgement, but did not at once give
the word of dismissal that Myles had expected. "Dost mean to write thee
a letter home soon?" said he, suddenly.

"Aye," said Myles, gaping in great wonderment at the strangeness of the
question.

"Then when thou dost so write," said Sir James, "give thou my deep
regards to thy father." Then he continued, after a brief pause. "Him did
I know well in times gone by, and we were right true friends in hearty
love, and for his sake I would befriend thee--that is, in so much as is
fitting."

"Sir," said Myles; but Sir James held up his hand, and he stopped short
in his thanks.

"But, boy," said he, "that which I sent for thee for to tell thee was of
more import than these. Dost thou know that thy father is an attainted
outlaw?"

"Nay," cried Myles, his cheeks blazing up as red as fire; "who sayeth
that of him lieth in his teeth."

"Thou dost mistake me," said Sir James, quietly. "It is sometimes no
shame to be outlawed and banned. Had it been so, I would not have told
thee thereof, nor have bidden thee send my true love to thy father, as
I did but now. But, boy, certes he standest continually in great
danger--greater than thou wottest of. Were it known where he lieth hid,
it might be to his undoing and utter ruin. Methought that belike thou
mightest not know that; and so I sent for thee for to tell thee that it
behoovest thee to say not one single word concerning him to any of these
new friends of thine, nor who he is, nor what he is."

"But how came my father to be so banned?" said Myles, in a constrained
and husky voice, and after a long time of silence.

"That I may not tell thee just now," said the old knight, "only
this--that I have been bidden to make it known to thee that thy father
hath an enemy full as powerful as my Lord the Earl himself, and
that through that enemy all his ill-fortune--his blindness and
everything--hath come. Moreover, did this enemy know where thy father
lieth, he would slay him right speedily."

"Sir," cried Myles, violently smiting his open palm upon the table,
"tell me who this man is, and I will kill him!"

Sir James smiled grimly. "Thou talkest like a boy," said he. "Wait until
thou art grown to be a man. Mayhap then thou mayst repent thee of these
bold words, for one time this enemy of thy father's was reckoned the
foremost knight in England, and he is now the King's dear friend and a
great lord."

"But," said Myles, after another long time of heavy silence, "will not
my Lord then befriend me for the sake of my father, who was one time his
dear comrade?"

Sir James shook his head. "It may not be," said he. "Neither thou nor
thy father must look for open favor from the Earl. An he befriended
Falworth, and it came to be known that he had given him aid or succor,
it might belike be to his own undoing. No, boy; thou must not even look
to be taken into the household to serve with gentlemen as the other
squires do serve, but must even live thine own life here and fight thine
own way."

Myles's eyes blazed. "Then," cried he, fiercely, "it is shame and
attaint upon my Lord the Earl, and cowardice as well, and never will I
ask favor of him who is so untrue a friend as to turn his back upon a
comrade in trouble as he turneth his back upon my father."

"Thou art a foolish boy," said Sir James with a bitter smile, "and
knowest naught of the world. An thou wouldst look for man to befriend
man to his own danger, thou must look elsewhere than on this earth. Was
I not one time Mackworth's dear friend as well as thy father? It could
cost him naught to honor me, and here am I fallen to be a teacher of
boys. Go to! thou art a fool."

Then, after a little pause of brooding silence, he went on to say that
the Earl was no better or worse than the rest of the world. That men of
his position had many jealous enemies, ever seeking their ruin, and
that such must look first of all each to himself, or else be certainly
ruined, and drag down others in that ruin. Myles was silenced, but the
bitterness had entered his heart, and abided with him for many a day
afterwards.

Perhaps Sir James read his feelings in his frank face, for he sat
looking curiously at him, twirling his grizzled mustache the while.
"Thou art like to have hard knocks of it, lad, ere thou hast gotten thee
safe through the world," said he, with more kindness in his harsh voice
than was usual. "But get thee not into fights before thy time." Then he
charged the boy very seriously to live at peace with his fellow-squires,
and for his father's sake as well as his own to enter into none of the
broils that were so frequent in their quarters.

It was with this special admonition against brawling that Myles was
dismissed, to enter, before five minutes had passed, into the first
really great fight of his life.


Besides Gascoyne and Wilkes, he found gathered in the dormitory six
or eight of the company of squires who were to serve that day upon
household duty; among others, Walter Blunt and three other bachelors,
who were changing their coarse service clothes for others more fit for
the household.

"Why didst thou tarry so long, Myles?" said Gascoyne, as he entered.
"Methought thou wert never coming."

"Where goest thou, Falworth?" called Blunt from the other end of the
room, where he was lacing his doublet.

Just now Myles had no heart in the swimming or sport of any sort, but he
answered, shortly, "I go to the river to swim."

"Nay," said Blunt, "thou goest not forth from the castle to-day. Hast
thou forgot how thou didst answer me back about fetching the water
this morning? This day thou must do penance, so go thou straight to the
armory and scour thou up my breastplate."

From the time he had arisen that morning everything had gone wrong with
Myles. He had felt himself already outrated in rendering service to
the bachelors, he had quarrelled with the head of the esquires, he had
nearly quarrelled with Gascoyne, and then had come the bitterest and
worst of all, the knowledge that his father was an outlaw, and that
the Earl would not stretch out a hand to aid him or to give him any
countenance. Blunt's words brought the last bitter cut to his heart,
and they stung him to fury. For a while he could not answer, but stood
glaring with a face fairly convulsed with passion at the young man, who
continued his toilet, unconscious of the wrath of the new recruit.

Gascoyne and Wilkes, accepting Myles's punishment as a thing of course,
were about to leave the dormitory when Myles checked them.

"Stop, Francis!" he cried, hoarsely. "Thinkest thou that I will stay
behind to do yon dog's dirty work? No; I go with ye."

A moment or two of dumb, silent amazement followed his bold words; then
Blunt cried, "Art thou mad?"

"Nay," answered Myles in the same hoarse voice, "I am not mad. I tell
thee a better man than thou shouldst not stay me from going an I list to
go.

"I will break thy cockerel head for that speech," said Blunt, furiously.
He stooped as he spoke, and picked up a heavy clog that lay at his feet.

It was no insignificant weapon either. The shoes of those days were
sometimes made of cloth, and had long pointed toes stuffed with tow or
wool. In muddy weather thick heavy clogs or wooden soles were strapped,
like a skate, to the bottom of the foot. That clog which Blunt had
seized was perhaps eighteen or twenty inches long, two or two and a half
inches thick at the heel, tapering to a point at the toe. As the older
lad advanced, Gascoyne stepped between him and his victim.

"Do not harm him, Blunt," he pleaded. "Bear thou in mind how new-come he
is among us. He knoweth not our ways as yet."

"Stand thou back, Gascoyne," said Blunt, harshly, as he thrust him
aside. "I will teach him our ways so that he will not soon forget them."

Close to Myles's feet was another clog like that one which Blunt held.
He snatched it up, and set his back against the wall, with a white face
and a heart beating heavily and tumultuously, but with courage steeled
to meet the coming encounter. There was a hard, grim look in his blue
eyes that, for a moment perhaps, quelled the elder lad. He hesitated.
"Tom! Wat! Ned!" he called to the other bachelors, "come hither, and
lend me a hand with this knave."

"An ye come nigh me," panted Myles, "I will brain the first within
reach."

Then Gascoyne dodged behind the others, and, without being seen, slipped
out of the room for help.

The battle that followed was quick, sharp, and short. As Blunt strode
forward, Myles struck, and struck with might and main, but he was too
excited to deliver his blow with calculation. Blunt parried it with the
clog he held, and the next instant, dropping his weapon, gripped Myles
tight about the body, pinning his arms to his sides.

Myles also dropped the clog he held, and, wrenching out his right
arm with a sudden heave, struck Blunt full in the face, and then with
another blow sent him staggering back. It all passed in an instant; the
next the three other bachelors were upon him, catching him by the body,
the arms, the legs. For a moment or two they swayed and stumbled hither
and thither, and then down they fell in a struggling heap.

Myles fought like a wild-cat, kicking, struggling, scratching; striking
with elbows and fists. He caught one of the three by his collar, and
tore his jacket open from the neck to the waist; he drove his foot into
the pit of the stomach of another, and knocked him breathless. The other
lads not in the fight stood upon the benches and the beds around, but
such was the awe inspired by the prestige of the bachelors that not one
of them dared to lend hand to help him, and so Myles fought his fierce
battle alone.

But four to one were odds too great, and though Myles struggled as
fiercely as ever, by-and-by it was with less and less resistance.

Blunt had picked up the clog he had dropped when he first attacked the
lad, and now stood over the struggling heap, white with rage, the blood
running from his lip, cut and puffed where Myles had struck him, and
murder looking out from his face, if ever it looked out of the face of
any mortal being.

"Hold him a little," said he, fiercely, "and I will still him for you."

Even yet it was no easy matter for the others to do his bidding, but
presently he got his chance and struck a heavy, cruel blow at Myles's
head. Myles only partly warded it with his arm. Hitherto he had fought
in silence, now he gave a harsh cry.

"Holy Saints!" cried Edmund Wilkes. "They will kill him."

Blunt struck two more blows, both of them upon the body, and then at
last they had the poor boy down, with his face upon the ground and his
arms pinned to his sides, and Blunt, bracing himself for the stroke,
with a grin of rage raised a heavy clog for one terrible blow that
should finish the fight.



CHAPTER 9

"How now, messieurs?" said a harsh voice, that fell upon the turmoil
like a thunder-clap, and there stood Sir James Lee. Instantly the
struggle ceased, and the combatants scrambled to their feet.

The older lads stood silent before their chief, but Myles was deaf and
blind and mad with passion, he knew not where he stood or what he said
or did. White as death, he stood for a while glaring about him, catching
his breath convulsively. Then he screamed hoarsely.

"Who struck me? Who struck me when I was down? I will have his blood
that struck me!" He caught sight of Blunt. "It was he that struck me!"
he cried. "Thou foul traitor! thou coward!" and thereupon leaped at his
enemy like a wild-cat.

"Stop!" cried Sir James Lee, clutching him by the arm.

Myles was too blinded by his fury to see who it was that held him. "I
will not stop!" he cried, struggling and striking at the knight. "Let me
go! I will have his life that struck me when I was down!"

The next moment he found himself pinned close against the wall, and
then, as though his sight came back, he saw the grim face of the old
one-eyed knight looking into his.

"Dost thou know who I am?" said a stern, harsh voice.

Instantly Myles ceased struggling, and his arms fell at his side. "Aye,"
he said, in a gasping voice, "I know thee." He swallowed spasmodically
for a moment or two, and then, in the sudden revulsion of feeling, burst
out sobbing convulsively.

Sir James marched the two off to his office, he himself walking
between them, holding an arm of each, the other lads following behind,
awe-struck and silent. Entering the office, Sir James shut the door
behind him, leaving the group of squires clustered outside about the
stone steps, speculating in whispers as to what would be the outcome of
the matter.

After Sir James had seated himself, the two standing facing him, he
regarded them for a while in silence. "How now, Walter Blunt," said he
at last, "what is to do?"

"Why, this," said Blunt, wiping his bleeding lip. "That fellow, Myles
Falworth, hath been breeding mutiny and revolt ever sin he came hither
among us, and because he was thus mutinous I would punish him therefor."

"In that thou liest!" burst out Myles. "Never have I been mutinous in my
life."

"Be silent, sir," said Sir James, sternly. "I will hear thee anon."

"Nay," said Myles, with his lips twitching and writhing, "I will not be
silent. I am friendless here, and ye are all against me, but I will not
be silent, and brook to have lies spoken of me."

Even Blunt stood aghast at Myles's boldness. Never had he heard any one
so speak to Sir James before. He did not dare for the moment even to
look up. Second after second of dead stillness passed, while Sir James
sat looking at Myles with a stern, terrifying calmness that chilled him
in spite of the heat of his passion.

"Sir," said the old man at last, in a hard, quiet voice, "thou dost know
naught of rules and laws of such a place as this. Nevertheless, it
is time for thee to learn them. So I will tell thee now that if thou
openest thy lips to say only one single word more except at my bidding,
I will send thee to the black vault of the donjon to cool thy hot
spirits on bread and water for a week." There was something in the
measured quietness of the old knight's tone that quelled Myles utterly
and entirely. A little space of silence followed. "Now, then, Blunt,"
said Sir James, turning to the bachelor, "tell me all the ins and outs
of this business without any more underdealing."

This time Blunt's story, though naturally prejudiced in his own favor,
was fairly true. Then Myles told his side of the case, the old knight
listening attentively.

"Why, how now, Blunt," said Sir James, when Myles had ended, "I myself
gave the lads leave to go to the river to bathe. Wherefore shouldst thou
forbid one of them?"

"I did it but to punish this fellow for his mutiny," said the bachelor.
"Methought we at their head were to have oversight concerning them."

"So ye are," said the knight; "but only to a degree. Ere ye take it upon
ye to gainsay any of my orders or permits, come ye first to me. Dost
thou understand?"

"Aye," answered Blunt, sullenly.

"So be it, and now get thee gone," said the knight; "and let me hear no
more of beating out brains with wooden clogs. An ye fight your battles,
let there not be murder in them. This is twice that the like hath
happed; gin I hear more of such doings--" He did utter his threat, but
stopped short, and fixed his one eye sternly upon the head squire. "Now
shake hands, and be ye friends," said he, abruptly.

Blunt made a motion to obey, but Myles put his hand behind him.

"Nay, I shake not hands with any one who struck me while I was down."

"So be it," said the knight, grimly. "Now thou mayst go, Blunt. Thou,
Falworth, stay; I would bespeak thee further."

"Tell me," said he, when the elder lad had left them, "why wilt thou not
serve these bachelors as the other squires do? Such is the custom here.
Why wilt thou not obey it?"

"Because," said Myles, "I cannot stomach it, and they shall not make me
serve them. An thou bid me do it, sir, I will do it; but not at their
command."

"Nay," said the knight, "I do not bid thee do them service. That lieth
with thee, to render or not, as thou seest fit. But how canst thou hope
to fight single-handed against the commands of a dozen lads all older
and mightier than thou?"

"I know not," said Myles; "but were they an hundred, instead of
thirteen, they should not make me serve them."

"Thou art a fool!" said the old knight, smiling faintly, "for that be'st
not courage, but folly. When one setteth about righting a wrong, one
driveth not full head against it, for in so doing one getteth naught but
hard knocks. Nay, go deftly about it, and then, when the time is ripe,
strike the blow. Now our beloved King Henry, when he was the Earl of
Derby, what could he have gained had he stood so against the old King
Richard, brooking the King face to face? I tell thee he would have been
knocked on the head as thou wert like to have been this day. Now were
I thee, and had to fight a fight against odds, I would first get me
friends behind me, and then--" He stopped short, but Myles understood
him well enough.

"Sir," said he, with a gulp, "I do thank thee for thy friendship, and
ask thy pardon for doing as I did anon."

"I grant thee pardon," said the knight, "but tell thee plainly, an thou
dost face me so again, I will truly send thee to the black cell for a
week. Now get thee away."

All the other lads were gone when Myles came forth, save only the
faithful Gascoyne, who sacrificed his bath that day to stay with his
friend; and perhaps that little act of self-denial moved Myles more than
many a great thing might have done.

"It was right kind of thee, Francis," said he, laying his hand
affectionately on his friend's shoulder. "I know not why thou lovest me
so."

"Why, for one thing, this matter," answered his friend; "because
methinks thou art the best fighter and the bravest one of all of us
squires."

Myles laughed. Nevertheless Gascoyne's words were a soothing balm for
much that had happened that day. "I will fight me no more just now,"
said he; and then he told his friend all that Sir James had advised
about biding his time.

Gascoyne blew a long whistle. "Beshrew me!" quoth he, "but methinks old
Bruin is on thy side of the quarrel, Myles. An that be so, I am with
thee also, and others that I can name as well."

"So be it," said Myles. "Then am I content to abide the time when we may
become strong enough to stand against them."



CHAPTER 10

Perhaps there is nothing more delightful in the romance of boyhood than
the finding of some secret hiding-place whither a body may creep away
from the bustle of the world's life, to nestle in quietness for an hour
or two. More especially is such delightful if it happen that, by
peeping from out it, one may look down upon the bustling matters of
busy every-day life, while one lies snugly hidden away unseen by any, as
though one were in some strange invisible world of one's own.

Such a hiding-place as would have filled the heart of almost any boy
with sweet delight Myles and Gascoyne found one summer afternoon. They
called it their Eyry, and the name suited well for the roosting-place
of the young hawks that rested in its windy stillness, looking down upon
the shifting castle life in the courts below.

Behind the north stable, a great, long, rambling building, thick-walled,
and black with age, lay an older part of the castle than that peopled
by the better class of life--a cluster of great thick walls, rudely but
strongly built, now the dwelling-place of stable-lads and hinds, swine
and poultry. From one part of these ancient walls, and fronting an inner
court of the castle, arose a tall, circular, heavy-buttressed tower,
considerably higher than the other buildings, and so mantled with a
dense growth of aged ivy as to stand a shaft of solid green. Above its
crumbling crown circled hundreds of pigeons, white and pied, clapping
and clattering in noisy flight through the sunny air. Several windows,
some closed with shutters, peeped here and there from out the leaves,
and near the top of the pile was a row of arched openings, as though of
a balcony or an airy gallery.

Myles had more than once felt an idle curiosity about this tower, and
one day, as he and Gascoyne sat together, he pointed his finger and
said, "What is yon place?"

"That," answered Gascoyne, looking over his shoulder--"that they call
Brutus Tower, for why they do say that Brutus he built it when he came
hither to Britain. I believe not the tale mine own self; ne'theless, it
is marvellous ancient, and old Robin-the-Fletcher telleth me that there
be stairways built in the wall and passage-ways, and a maze wherein
a body may get lost, an he know not the way aright, and never see the
blessed light of day again."

"Marry," said Myles, "those same be strange sayings. Who liveth there
now?"

"No one liveth there," said Gascoyne, "saving only some of the stable
villains, and that half-witted goose-herd who flung stones at us
yesterday when we mocked him down in the paddock. He and his wife and
those others dwell in the vaults beneath, like rabbits in any warren. No
one else hath lived there since Earl Robert's day, which belike was
an hundred years agone. The story goeth that Earl Robert's brother--or
step-brother--was murdered there, and some men say by the Earl himself.
Sin that day it hath been tight shut."

Myles stared at the tower for a while in silence. "It is a
strange-seeming place from without," said he, at last, "and mayhap it
may be even more strange inside. Hast ever been within, Francis?"

"Nay," said Gascoyne; "said I not it hath been fast locked since Earl
Robert's day?"

"By'r Lady," said Myles, "an I had lived here in this place so long as
thou, I wot I would have been within it ere this."

"Beshrew me," said Gascoyne, "but I have never thought of such a
matter." He turned and looked at the tall crown rising into the warm
sunlight with a new interest, for the thought of entering it smacked
pleasantly of adventure. "How wouldst thou set about getting within?"
said he, presently.

"Why, look," said Myles; "seest thou not yon hole in the ivy branches?
Methinks there is a window at that place. An I mistake not, it is in
reach of the stable eaves. A body might come up by the fagot pile to the
roof of the hen-house, and then by the long stable to the north stable,
and so to that hole."

Gascoyne looked thoughtfully at the Brutus Tower, and then suddenly
inquired, "Wouldst go there?"

"Aye," said Myles, briefly.

"So be it. Lead thou the way in the venture, I will follow after thee,"
said Gascoyne.

As Myles had said, the climbing from roof to roof was a matter easy
enough to an active pair of lads like themselves; but when, by-and-by,
they reached the wall of the tower itself, they found the hidden window
much higher from the roof than they had judged from below--perhaps ten
or twelve feet--and it was, besides, beyond the eaves and out of their
reach.

Myles looked up and looked down. Above was the bushy thickness of the
ivy, the branches as thick as a woman's wrist, knotted and intertwined;
below was the stone pavement of a narrow inner court between two of the
stable buildings.

"Methinks I can climb to yon place," said he.

"Thou'lt break thy neck an thou tryest," said Gascoyne, hastily.

"Nay," quoth Myles, "I trust not; but break or make, we get not there
without trying. So here goeth for the venture."

"Thou art a hare-brained knave as ever drew breath of life," quoth
Gascoyne, "and will cause me to come to grief some of these fine days.
Ne'theless, an thou be Jack Fool and lead the way, go, and I will be Tom
Fool and follow anon. If thy neck is worth so little, mine is worth no
more."

It was indeed a perilous climb, but that special providence which guards
reckless lads befriended them, as it has thousands of their kind before
and since. So, by climbing from one knotted, clinging stem to another,
they were presently seated snugly in the ivied niche in the window. It
was barred from within by a crumbling shutter, the rusty fastening of
which, after some little effort upon the part of the two, gave way, and
entering the narrow opening, they found themselves in a small triangular
passage-way, from which a steep flight of stone steps led down through a
hollow in the massive wall to the room below.

At the bottom of the steps was a heavy oaken door, which stood ajar,
hanging upon a single rusty hinge, and from the room within a dull, gray
light glimmered faintly. Myles pushed the door farther open; it creaked
and grated horribly on its rusty hinge, and, as in instant answer to
the discordant shriek, came a faint piping squeaking, a rustling and a
pattering of soft footsteps.

"The ghosts!" cried Gascoyne, in a quavering whisper, and for a moment
Myles felt the chill of goose-flesh creep up and down his spine. But the
next moment he laughed.

"Nay," said he, "they be rats. Look at yon fellow, Francis! Be'st as big
as Mother Joan's kitten. Give me that stone." He flung it at the rat,
and it flew clattering across the floor. There was another pattering
rustle of hundreds of feet, and then a breathless silence.

The boys stood looking around them, and a strange enough sight it was.
The room was a perfect circle of about twenty feet across, and was
piled high with an indistinguishable mass of lumber--rude tables, ruder
chairs, ancient chests, bits and remnants of cloth and sacking and
leather, old helmets and pieces of armor of a by-gone time, broken
spears and pole-axes, pots and pans and kitchen furniture of all sorts
and kinds.

A straight beam of sunlight fell through a broken shutter like a bar of
gold, and fell upon the floor in a long streak of dazzling light that
illuminated the whole room with a yellow glow.

"By 'r Lady!" said Gascoyne at last, in a hushed voice, "here is Father
Time's garret for sure. Didst ever see the like, Myles? Look at yon
arbalist; sure Brutus himself used such an one!"

"Nay," said Myles; "but look at this saddle. Marry, here be'st a rat's
nest in it."

Clouds of dust rose as they rummaged among the mouldering mass, setting
them coughing and sneezing. Now and then a great gray rat would shoot
out beneath their very feet, and disappear, like a sudden shadow, into
some hole or cranny in the wall.

"Come," said Myles at last, brushing the dust from his jacket, "an we
tarry here longer we will have chance to see no other sights; the sun is
falling low."

An arched stair-way upon the opposite side of the room from which they
had entered wound upward through the wall, the stone steps being lighted
by narrow slits of windows cut through the massive masonry. Above the
room they had just left was another of the same shape and size, but with
an oak floor, sagging and rising into hollows and hills, where the joist
had rotted away beneath. It was bare and empty, and not even a rat
was to be seen. Above was another room; above that, another; all the
passages and stairways which connected the one story with the other
being built in the wall, which was, where solid, perhaps fifteen feet
thick.

From the third floor a straight flight of steps led upward to a closed
door, from the other side of which shone the dazzling brightness of
sunlight, and whence came a strange noise--a soft rustling, a melodious
murmur. The boys put their shoulders against the door, which was
fastened, and pushed with might and main--once, twice; suddenly the
lock gave way, and out they pitched headlong into a blaze of sunlight.
A deafening clapping and uproar sounded in their ears, and scores of
pigeons, suddenly disturbed, rose in stormy flight.

They sat up and looked around them in silent wonder. They were in a
bower of leafy green. It was the top story of the tower, the roof of
which had crumbled and toppled in, leaving it open to the sky, with only
here and there a slanting beam or two supporting a portion of the tiled
roof, affording shelter for the nests of the pigeons crowded closely
together. Over everything the ivy had grown in a mantling sheet--a
net-work of shimmering green, through which the sunlight fell
flickering.

"This passeth wonder," said Gascoyne, at last breaking the silence.

"Aye," said Myles, "I did never see the like in all my life." Then,
"Look, yonder is a room beyond; let us see what it is, Francis."

Entering an arched door-way, the two found themselves in a beautiful
little vaulted chapel, about eighteen feet long and twelve or fifteen
wide. It comprised the crown of one of the large massive buttresses, and
from it opened the row of arched windows which could be seen from below
through the green shimmering of the ivy leaves. The boys pushed aside
the trailing tendrils and looked out and down. The whole castle lay
spread below them, with the busy people unconsciously intent upon the
matters of their daily work. They could see the gardener, with bowed
back, patiently working among the flowers in the garden, the stable-boys
below grooming the horses, a bevy of ladies in the privy garden playing
at shuttlecock with battledoors of wood, a group of gentlemen walking
up and down in front of the Earl's house. They could see the household
servants hurrying hither and thither, two little scullions at
fisticuffs, and a kitchen girl standing in the door-way scratching her
frowzy head.

It was all like a puppetshow of real life, each acting unconsciously a
part in the play. The cool wind came in through the rustling leaves and
fanned their cheeks, hot with the climb up the winding stair-way.

"We will call it our Eyry," said Gascoyne "and we will be the hawks that
live here." And that was how it got its name.

The next day Myles had the armorer make him a score of large spikes,
which he and Gascoyne drove between the ivy branches and into the cement
of the wall, and so made a safe passageway by which to reach the window
niche in the wall.



CHAPTER 11

THE TWO friends kept the secret of the Eyry to themselves for a little
while, now and then visiting the old tower to rummage among the lumber
stored in the lower room, or to loiter away the afternoon in the windy
solitudes of the upper heights. And in that little time, when the
ancient keep was to them a small world unknown to any but themselves--a
world far away above all the dull matters of every-day life--they talked
of many things that might else never have been known to one another.
Mostly they spoke the crude romantic thoughts and desires of boyhood's
time--chaff thrown to the wind, in which, however, lay a few stray
seeds, fated to fall to good earth, and to ripen to fruition in
manhood's day.

In the intimate talks of that time Myles imparted something of his
honest solidity to Gascoyne's somewhat weathercock nature, and to
Myles's ruder and more uncouth character Gascoyne lent a tone of his
gentler manners, learned in his pagehood service as attendant upon the
Countess and her ladies.

In other things, also, the character and experience of the one lad
helped to supply what was lacking in the other. Myles was replete with
old Latin gestes, fables, and sermons picked up during his school life,
in those intervals of his more serious studies when Prior Edward had
permitted him to browse in the greener pastures of the Gesta Romanorum
and the Disciplina Clericalis of the monastery library, and Gascoyne was
never weary of hearing him tell those marvellous stories culled from the
crabbed Latin of the old manuscript volumes.

Upon his part Gascoyne was full of the lore of the waiting-room and
the antechamber, and Myles, who in all his life had never known a lady,
young or old, excepting his mother, was never tired of lying silently
listening to Gascoyne's chatter of the gay doings of the castle
gentle-life, in which he had taken part so often in the merry days of
his pagehood.

"I do wonder," said Myles, quaintly, "that thou couldst ever find the
courage to bespeak a young maid, Francis. Never did I do so, nor ever
could. Rather would I face three strong men than one young damsel."

Whereupon Gascoyne burst out laughing. "Marry!" quoth he, "they be
no such terrible things, but gentle and pleasant spoken, and soft and
smooth as any cat."

"No matter for that," said Myles; "I would not face one such for
worlds."

It was during the short time when, so to speak, the two owned the
solitude of the Brutus Tower, that Myles told his friend of his father's
outlawry and of the peril in which the family stood. And thus it was.

"I do marvel," said Gascoyne one day, as the two lay stretched in the
Eyry, looking down into the castle court-yard below--"I do marvel, now
that thou art 'stablished here this month and more, that my Lord doth
never have thee called to service upon household duty. Canst thou riddle
me why it is so, Myles?"

The subject was a very sore one with Myles. Until Sir James had told him
of the matter in his office that day he had never known that his father
was attainted and outlawed. He had accepted the change from their
earlier state and the bald poverty of their life at Crosbey-Holt with
the easy carelessness of boyhood, and Sir James's words were the first
to awaken him to a realization of the misfortunes of the house of
Falworth. His was a brooding nature, and in the three or four weeks
that passed he had meditated so much over what had been told him, that
by-and-by it almost seemed as if a shadow of shame rested upon his
father's fair fame, even though the attaint set upon him was unrighteous
and unjust, as Myles knew it must be. He had felt angry and resentful
at the Earl's neglect, and as days passed and he was not noticed in any
way, his heart was at times very bitter.

So now Gascoyne's innocent question touched a sore spot, and Myles spoke
with a sharp, angry pain in his voice that made the other look quickly
up. "Sooner would my Lord have yonder swineherd serve him in the
household than me," said he.

"Why may that be, Myles?" said Gascoyne.

"Because," answered Myles, with the same angry bitterness in his voice,
"either the Earl is a coward that feareth to befriend me, or else he is
a caitiff, ashamed of his own flesh and blood, and of me, the son of his
one-time comrade."

Gascoyne raised himself upon his elbow, and opened his eyes wide in
wonder. "Afeard of thee, Myles!" quoth he. "Why should he be afeared to
befriend thee? Who art thou that the Earl should fear thee?"

Myles hesitated for a moment or two; wisdom bade him remain silent
upon the dangerous topic, but his heart yearned for sympathy and
companionship in his trouble. "I will tell thee," said he, suddenly,
and therewith poured out all of the story, so far as he knew it, to his
listening, wondering friend, and his heart felt lighter to be thus eased
of its burden. "And now," said he, as he concluded, "is not this Earl
a mean-hearted caitiff to leave me, the son of his one-time friend and
kinsman, thus to stand or to fall alone among strangers and in a
strange place without once stretching me a helping hand?" He waited, and
Gascoyne knew that he expected an answer.

"I know not that he is a mean-hearted caitiff, Myles," said he at last,
hesitatingly. "The Earl hath many enemies, and I have heard that he hath
stood more than once in peril, having been accused of dealings with
the King's foes. He was cousin to the Earl of Kent, and I do remember
hearing that he had a narrow escape at that time from ruin. There be
more reasons than thou wottest of why he should not have dealings with
thy father."

"I had not thought," said Myles, bitterly, after a little pause, "that
thou wouldst stand up for him and against me in this quarrel, Gascoyne.
Him will I never forgive so long as I may live, and I had thought that
thou wouldst have stood by me."

"So I do," said Gascoyne, hastily, "and do love thee more than any one
in all the world, Myles; but I had thought that it would make thee feel
more easy, to think that the Earl was not against thee. And, indeed,
from all thou has told me, I do soothly think that he and Sir James mean
to befriend thee and hold thee privily in kind regard."

"Then why doth he not stand forth like a man and befriend me and my
father openly, even if it be to his own peril?" said Myles, reverting
stubbornly to what he had first spoken.

Gascoyne did not answer, but lay for a long while in silence. "Knowest
thou," he suddenly asked, after a while, "who is this great enemy of
whom Sir James speaketh, and who seeketh so to drive thy father to
ruin?"

"Nay," said Myles, "I know not, for my father hath never spoken of these
things, and Sir James would not tell me. But this I know," said he,
suddenly, grinding his teeth together, "an I do not hunt him out some
day and slay him like a dog--" He stopped abruptly, and Gascoyne,
looking askance at him, saw that his eyes were full of tears, whereupon
he turned his looks away again quickly, and fell to shooting pebbles out
through the open window with his finger and thumb.

"Thou wilt tell no one of these things that I have said?" said Myles,
after a while.

"Not I," said Gascoyne. "Thinkest thou I could do such a thing?"

"Nay," said Myles, briefly.

Perhaps this talk more than anything else that had ever passed between
them knit the two friends the closer together, for, as I have said,
Myles felt easier now that he had poured out his bitter thoughts and
words; and as for Gascoyne, I think that there is nothing so flattering
to one's soul as to be made the confidant of a stronger nature.


But the old tower served another purpose than that of a spot in which
to pass away a few idle hours, or in which to indulge the confidences of
friendship, for it was there that Myles gathered a backing of strength
for resistance against the tyranny of the bachelors, and it is for that
more than for any other reason that it has been told how they found the
place and of what they did there, feeling secure against interruption.

Myles Falworth was not of a kind that forgets or neglects a thing upon
which the mind has once been set. Perhaps his chief objective since
the talk with Sir James following his fight in the dormitory had been
successful resistance to the exactions of the head of the body of
squires. He was now (more than a month had passed) looked upon by nearly
if not all of the younger lads as an acknowledged leader in his own
class. So one day he broached a matter to Gascoyne that had for some
time been digesting in his mind. It was the formation of a secret order,
calling themselves the "Knights of the Rose," their meeting-place to be
the chapel of the Brutus Tower, and their object to be the righting
of wrongs, "as they," said Myles, "of Arthur his Round-table did right
wrongs."

"But, prithee, what wrongs are there to right in this place?" quoth
Gascoyne, after listening intently to the plan which Myles set forth.

"Why, first of all, this," said Myles, clinching his fists, as he had a
habit of doing when anything stirred him deeply, "that we set those vile
bachelors to their right place; and that is, that they be no longer our
masters, but our fellows."

Gascoyne shook his head. He hated clashing and conflict above all
things, and was for peace. Why should they thus rush to thrust
themselves into trouble? Let matters abide as they were a little longer;
surely life was pleasant enough without turning it all topsy-turvy.
Then, with a sort of indignation, why should Myles, who had only come
among them a month, take such service more to heart than they who had
endured it for years? And, finally, with the hopefulness of so many of
the rest of us, he advised Myles to let matters alone, and they would
right themselves in time.

But Myles's mind was determined; his active spirit could not brook
resting passively under a wrong; he would endure no longer, and now or
never they must make their stand.

"But look thee, Myles Falworth," said Gascoyne, "all this is not to
be done withouten fighting shrewdly. Wilt thou take that fighting upon
thine own self? As for me, I tell thee I love it not."

"Why, aye," said Myles; "I ask no man to do what I will not do myself."

Gascoyne shrugged his shoulders. "So be it," said he. "An thou hast
appetite to run thy head against hard knocks, do it i' mercy's name! I
for one will stand thee back while thou art taking thy raps."

There was a spirit of drollery in Gascoyne's speech that rubbed against
Myles's earnestness.

"Out upon it!" cried he, his patience giving way. "Seest not that I
am in serious earnest? Why then dost thou still jest like Mad Noll, my
Lord's fool? An thou wilt not lend me thine aid in this matter, say so
and ha' done with it, and I will bethink me of somewhere else to turn."

Then Gascoyne yielded at once, as he always did when his friend lost his
temper, and having once assented to it, entered into the scheme heart
and soul. Three other lads--one of them that tall thin squire Edmund
Wilkes, before spoken of--were sounded upon the subject. They also
entered into the plan of the secret organization with an enthusiasm
which might perhaps not have been quite so glowing had they realized how
very soon Myles designed embarking upon active practical operations.
One day Myles and Gascoyne showed them the strange things that they
had discovered in the old tower--the inner staircases, the winding
passage-ways, the queer niches and cupboard, and the black shaft of a
well that pierced down into the solid wall, and whence, perhaps, the old
castle folk had one time drawn their supply of water in time of siege,
and with every new wonder of the marvellous place the enthusiasm of the
three recruits rose higher and higher. They rummaged through the lumber
pile in the great circular room as Myles and Gascoyne had done, and at
last, tired out, they ascended to the airy chapel, and there sat cooling
themselves in the rustling freshness of the breeze that came blowing
briskly in through the arched windows.

It was then and there that the five discussed and finally determined
upon the detailed plans of their organization, canvassing the names of
the squirehood, and selecting from it a sufficient number of bold and
daring spirits to make up a roll of twenty names in all.

Gascoyne had, as I said, entered into the matter with spirit, and
perhaps it was owing more to him than to any other that the project
caught its delightful flavor of romance.

"Perchance," said he, as the five lads lay in the rustling stillness
through which sounded the monotonous and ceaseless cooing of the
pigeons--"perchance there may be dwarfs and giants and dragons and
enchanters and evil knights and what not even nowadays. And who knows
but that if we Knights of the Rose hold together we may go forth into
the world, and do battle with them, and save beautiful ladies, and
have tales and gestes written about us as they are writ about the Seven
Champions and Arthur his Round-table."

Perhaps Myles, who lay silently listening to all that was said, was the
only one who looked upon the scheme at all in the light of real utility,
but I think that even with him the fun of the matter outweighed the
serious part of the business.

So it was that the Sacred Order of the Twenty Knights of the Rose
came to be initiated. They appointed a code of secret passwords and
countersigns which were very difficult to remember, and which were only
used when they might excite the curiosity of the other and uninitiated
boys by their mysterious sound. They elected Myles as their Grand High
Commander, and held secret meetings in the ancient tower, where many
mysteries were soberly enacted.

Of course in a day or two all the body of squires knew nearly everything
concerning the Knights of the Rose, and of their secret meetings in
the old tower. The lucky twenty were the objects of envy of all not so
fortunate as to be included in this number, and there was a marked air
of secrecy about everything they did that appealed to every romantic
notion of the youngsters looking on. What was the stormy outcome of it
all is now presently to be told.



CHAPTER 12

Thus it was that Myles, with an eye to open war with the bachelors,
gathered a following to his support. It was some little while before
matters were brought to a crisis--a week or ten days. Perhaps even Myles
had no great desire to hasten matters. He knew that whenever war was
declared, he himself would have to bear the brunt of the battle, and
even the bravest man hesitates before deliberately thrusting himself
into a fight.

One morning Myles and Gascoyne and Wilkes sat under the shade of two
trees, between which was a board nailed to the trunks, making a rude
bench--always a favorite lounging-place for the lads in idle moments.
Myles was polishing his bascinet with lard and wood-ashes, rubbing the
metal with a piece of leather, and wiping it clean with a fustian rag.
The other two, who had just been relieved from household duty, lay at
length idly looking on.

Just then one of the smaller pages, a boy of twelve or thirteen, by name
Robin Ingoldsby, crossed the court. He had been crying; his face was red
and blubbered, and his body was still shaken with convulsive sniffs.

Myles looked up. "Come hither, Robin," he called from where he sat.
"What is to do?"

The little fellow came slowly up to where the three rested in the shade.
"Mowbray beat me with a strap," said he, rubbing his sleeve across his
eyes, and catching his breath at the recollection.

"Beat thee, didst say?" said Myles, drawing his brows together. "Why did
he beat thee?"

"Because," said Robin, "I tarried overlong in fetching a pot of beer
from the buttery for him and Wyatt." Then, with a boy's sudden and easy
quickness in forgetting past troubles, "Tell me, Falworth," said he,
"when wilt thou give me that knife thou promised me--the one thou break
the blade of yesterday?"

"I know not," said Myles, bluntly, vexed that the boy did not take
the disgrace of his beating more to heart. "Some time soon, mayhap. Me
thinks thou shouldst think more of thy beating than of a broken knife.
Now get thee gone to thy business."

The youngster lingered for a moment or two watching Myles at his work.
"What is that on the leather scrap, Falworth?" said he, curiously.

"Lard and ashes," said Myles, testily. "Get thee gone, I say, or I
will crack thy head for thee;" and he picked up a block of wood, with a
threatening gesture.

The youngster made a hideous grimace, and then scurried away, ducking
his head, lest in spite of Myles's well-known good-nature the block
should come whizzing after him.

"Hear ye that now!" cried Myles, flinging down the block again and
turning to his two friends. "Beaten with straps because, forsooth, he
would not fetch and carry quickly enough to please the haste of these
bachelors. Oh, this passeth patience, and I for one will bear it no
longer."

"Nay, Myles," said Gascoyne, soothingly, "the little imp is as lazy as a
dormouse and as mischievous as a monkey. I'll warrant the hiding was his
due, and that more of the like would do him good."

"Why, how dost thou talk, Francis!" said Myles, turning upon him
indignantly. "Thou knowest that thou likest to see the boy beaten no
more than I." Then, after a meditative pause, "How many, think ye, we
muster of our company of the Rose today?"

Wilkes looked doubtfully at Gascoyne. "There be only seventeen of us
here now," said he at last. "Brinton and Lambourne are away to Roby
Castle in Lord George's train, and will not be back till Saturday next.
And Watt Newton is in the infirmary.

"Seventeen be'st enou," said Myles, grimly. "Let us get together this
afternoon, such as may, in the Brutus Tower, for I, as I did say, will
no longer suffer these vile bachelors."

Gascoyne and Wilkes exchanged looks, and then the former blew a long
whistle.

So that afternoon a gloomy set of young faces were gathered together in
the Eyry--fifteen of the Knights of the Rose--and all knew why they were
assembled. The talk which followed was conducted mostly by Myles. He
addressed the others with a straightforward vim and earnestness, but the
response was only half-hearted, and when at last, having heated himself
up with his own fire, he sat down, puffing out his red cheeks and
glaring round, a space of silence followed, the lads looked doubtfully
at one another. Myles felt the chill of their silence strike coldly on
his enthusiasm, and it vexed him.

"What wouldst thou do, Falworth?" said one of the knights, at last.
"Wouldst have us open a quarrel with the bachelors?"

"Nay," said Myles, gruffly. "I had thought that ye would all lend me a
hand in a pitched battle but now I see that ye ha' no stomach for that.
Ne'theless, I tell ye plainly I will not submit longer to the bachelors.
So now I will ask ye not to take any venture upon yourselves, but only
this: that ye will stand by me when I do my fighting, and not let five
or seven of them fall upon me at once.

"There is Walter Blunt; he is parlous strong," said one of the others,
after a time of silence. "Methinks he could conquer any two of us."

"Nay," said Myles; "ye do fear him too greatly. I tell ye I fear not to
stand up to try battle with him and will do so, too, if the need arise.
Only say ye that ye will stand by my back."

"Marry," said Gascoyne, quaintly, "an thou wilt dare take the heavy end
upon thee, I for one am willing to stand by and see that thou have thy
fill of fighting."

"I too will stand thee by, Myles," said Edmund Wilkes.

"And I, and I, and I," said others, chiming in.

Those who would still have held back were carried along by the stream,
and so it was settled that if the need should arise for Myles to do
a bit of fighting, the others should stand by to see that he had fair
play.

"When thinkest thou that thou wilt take thy stand against them, Myles?"
asked Wilkes.

Myles hesitated a moment. "To-morrow," said he, grimly.

Several of the lads whistled softly.

Gascoyne was prepared for an early opening of the war, but perhaps not
for such an early opening as this. "By 'r Lady, Myles, thou art hungry
for brawling," said he.



CHAPTER 13

After the first excitement of meeting, discussing, and deciding had
passed, Myles began to feel the weight of the load he had so boldly
taken upon himself. He began to reckon what a serious thing it was for
him to stand as a single champion against the tyranny that had grown
so strong through years of custom. Had he let himself do so, he might
almost have repented, but it was too late now for repentance. He had
laid his hand to the plough, and he must drive the furrow.

Somehow the news of impending battle had leaked out among the rest of
the body of squires, and a buzz of suppressed excitement hummed through
the dormitory that evening. The bachelors, to whom, no doubt, vague
rumors had been blown, looked lowering, and talked together in low
voices, standing apart in a group. Some of them made a rather marked
show of secreting knives in the straw of their beds, and no doubt it had
its effect upon more than one young heart that secretly thrilled at the
sight of the shining blades. However, all was undisturbed that evening.
The lights were put out, and the lads retired with more than usual
quietness, only for the murmur of whispering.

All night Myles's sleep was more or less disturbed by dreams in which he
was now conquering, now being conquered, and before the day had fairly
broken he was awake. He lay upon his cot, keying himself up for the
encounter which he had set upon himself to face, and it would not be
the truth to say that the sight of those knives hidden in the straw
the night before had made no impression upon him. By-and-by he knew the
others were beginning to awake, for he heard them softly stirring, and
as the light grew broad and strong, saw them arise, one by one, and
begin dressing in the gray morning. Then he himself arose and put on his
doublet and hose, strapping his belt tightly about his waist; then he
sat down on the side of his cot.

Presently that happened for which he was waiting; two of the younger
squires started to bring the bachelors' morning supply of water. As they
crossed the room Myles called to them in a loud voice--a little uneven,
perhaps: "Stop! We draw no more water for any one in this house, saving
only for ourselves. Set ye down those buckets, and go back to your
places!"

The two lads stopped, half turned, and then stood still, holding the
three buckets undecidedly.

In a moment all was uproar and confusion, for by this time every one
of the lads had arisen, some sitting on the edge of their beds, some
nearly, others quite dressed. A half-dozen of the Knights of the Rose
came over to where Myles stood, gathering in a body behind him and the
others followed, one after another.

The bachelors were hardly prepared for such prompt and vigorous action.

"What is to do?" cried one of them, who stood near the two lads with the
buckets. "Why fetch ye not the water?"

"Falworth says we shall not fetch it," answered one of the lads, a boy
by the name of Gosse.

"What mean ye by that, Falworth?" the young man called to Myles.

Myles's heart was beating thickly and heavily within him, but
nevertheless he spoke up boldly enough. "I mean," said he, "that from
henceforth ye shall fetch and carry for yourselves."

"Look'ee, Blunt," called the bachelor; "here is Falworth says they
squires will fetch no more water for us."

The head bachelor had heard all that had passed, and was even then
hastily slipping on his doublet and hose. "Now, then, Falworth," said he
at last, striding forward, "what is to do? Ye will fetch no more water,
eh? By 'r Lady, I will know the reason why."

He was still advancing towards Myles, with two or three of the older
bachelors at his heels, when Gascoyne spoke.

"Thou hadst best stand back, Blunt," said he, "else thou mayst be hurt.
We will not have ye bang Falworth again as ye once did, so stand thou
back!"

Blunt stopped short and looked upon the lads standing behind Myles, some
of them with faces a trifle pale perhaps, but all grim and determined
looking enough. Then he turned upon his heel suddenly, and walked back
to the far end of the dormitory, where the bachelors were presently
clustered together. A few words passed between them, and then the
thirteen began at once arming themselves, some with wooden clogs,
and some with the knives which they had so openly concealed the
night before. At the sign of imminent battle, all those not actively
interested scuttled away to right and left, climbing up on the benches
and cots, and leaving a free field to the combatants. The next moment
would have brought bloodshed.

Now Myles, thanks to the training of the Crosbey-Dale smith, felt
tolerably sure that in a wrestling bout he was a match--perhaps more
than a match--for any one of the body of squires, and he had determined,
if possible, to bring the battle to a single-handed encounter upon that
footing. Accordingly he suddenly stepped forward before the others.

"Look'ee, fellow," he called to Blunt, "thou art he who struck me whilst
I was down some while since. Wilt thou let this quarrel stand between
thee and me, and meet me man to man without weapon? See, I throw me
down mine own, and will meet thee with bare hands." And as he spoke, he
tossed the clog he held in his hand back upon the cot.

"So be it," said Blunt, with great readiness, tossing down a similar
weapon which he himself held.

"Do not go, Myles," cried Gascoyne, "he is a villain and a traitor, and
would betray thee to thy death. I saw him when he first gat from bed
hide a knife in his doublet."

"Thou liest!" said Blunt. "I swear, by my faith, I be barehanded as ye
see me! Thy friend accuses me, Myles Falworth, because he knoweth thou
art afraid of me."

"There thou liest most vilely!" exclaimed Myles. "Swear that thou hast
no knife, and I will meet thee."

"Hast thou not heard me say that I have no knife?" said Blunt. "What
more wouldst thou have?"

"Then I will meet thee halfway," said Myles.

Gascoyne caught him by the sleeve, and would have withheld him, assuring
him that he had seen the bachelor conceal a knife. But Myles, hot for
the fight, broke away from his friend without listening to him.

As the two advanced steadily towards one another a breathless silence
fell upon the dormitory in sharp contrast to the uproar and confusion
that had filled it a moment before. The lads, standing some upon
benches, some upon beds, all watched with breathless interest the
meeting of the two champions.

As they approached one another they stopped and stood for a moment a
little apart, glaring the one upon the other. They seemed ill enough
matched; Blunt was fully half a head taller than Myles, and was
thick-set and close-knit in young manhood. Nothing but Myles's undaunted
pluck could have led him to dare to face an enemy so much older and
stouter than himself.

The pause was only for a moment. They who looked saw Blunt slide his
hand furtively towards his bosom. Myles saw too, and in the flash of an
instant knew what the gesture meant, and sprang upon the other before
the hand could grasp what it sought. As he clutched his enemy he felt
what he had in that instant expected to feel--the handle of a dagger.
The next moment he cried, in a loud voice: "Oh, thou villain! Help,
Gascoyne! He hath a knife under his doublet!"

In answer to his cry for help, Myles's friends started to his aid. But
the bachelors shouted, "Stand back and let them fight it out alone, else
we will knife ye too." And as they spoke, some of them leaped from the
benches whereon they stood, drawing their knives and flourishing them.

For just a few seconds Myles's friends stood cowed, and in those few
seconds the fight came to an end with a suddenness unexpected to all.

A struggle fierce and silent followed between the two; Blunt striving
to draw his knife, and Myles, with the energy of despair, holding him
tightly by the wrist. It was in vain the elder lad writhed and twisted;
he was strong enough to overbear Myles, but still was not able to clutch
the haft of his knife.

"Thou shalt not draw it!" gasped Myles at last. "Thou shalt not stab
me!"

Then again some of his friends started forward to his aid, but they were
not needed, for before they came, the fight was over.

Blunt, finding that he was not able to draw the weapon, suddenly ceased
his endeavors, and flung his arms around Myles, trying to bear him down
upon the ground, and in that moment his battle was lost.

In an instant--so quick, so sudden, so unexpected that no one could see
how it happened--his feet were whirled away from under him, he spun with
flying arms across Myles's loins, and pitched with a thud upon the stone
pavement, where he lay still, motionless, while Myles, his face white
with passion and his eyes gleaming, stood glaring around like a young
wild-boar beset by the dogs.

The next moment the silence was broken, and the uproar broke forth
with redoubled violence. The bachelors, leaping from the benches, came
hurrying forward on one side, and Myles's friends from the other.

"Thou shalt smart for this, Falworth," said one of the older lads.
"Belike thou hast slain him!"

Myles turned upon the speaker like a flash, and with such a passion of
fury in his face that the other, a fellow nearly a head taller than he,
shrank back, cowed in spite of himself. Then Gascoyne came and laid his
hand on his friend's shoulder.

"Who touches me?" cried Myles, hoarsely, turning sharply upon him; and
then, seeing who it was, "Oh, Francis, they would ha' killed me!"

"Come away, Myles," said Gascoyne; "thou knowest not what thou doest;
thou art mad; come away. What if thou hadst killed him?"

The words called Myles somewhat to himself. "I care not!" said he, but
sullenly and not passionately, and then he suffered Gascoyne and Wilkes
to lead him away.

Meantime Blunt's friends had turned him over, and, after feeling his
temples, his wrist, and his heart, bore him away to a bench at the far
end of the room. There they fell to chafing his hands and sprinkling
water in his face, a crowd of the others gathering about. Blunt was
hidden from Myles by those who stood around, and the lad listened to the
broken talk that filled the room with its confusion, his anxiety growing
keener as he became cooler. But at last, with a heartfelt joy, he
gathered from the confused buzz of words that the other lad had opened
his eyes and, after a while, he saw him sit up, leaning his head upon
the shoulder of one of his fellow-bachelors, white and faint and sick as
death.

"Thank Heaven that thou didst not kill him!" said Edmund Wilkes, who
had been standing with the crowd looking on at the efforts of Blunt's
friends to revive him, and who had now come and sat down upon the bed
not far from Myles.

"Aye," said Myles, gruffly, "I do thank Heaven for that."



CHAPTER 14

If Myles fancied that one single victory over his enemy would cure the
evil against which he fought, he was grievously mistaken; wrongs are not
righted so easily as that. It was only the beginning. Other and far more
bitter battles lay before him ere he could look around him and say, "I
have won the victory."

For a day--for two days--the bachelors were demoralized at the fall of
their leader, and the Knights of the Rose were proportionately uplifted.

The day that Blunt met his fall, the wooden tank in which the water
had been poured every morning was found to have been taken away. The
bachelors made a great show of indignation and inquiry. Who was it stole
their tank? If they did but know, he should smart for it.

"Ho! ho!" roared Edmund Wilkes, so that the whole dormitory heard him,
"smoke ye not their tricks, lads? See ye not that they have stolen their
own water-tank, so that they might have no need for another fight over
the carrying of the water?"

The bachelors made an obvious show of not having heard what he said, and
a general laugh went around. No one doubted that Wilkes had spoken the
truth in his taunt, and that the bachelors had indeed stolen their own
tank. So no more water was ever carried for the head squires, but it was
plain to see that the war for the upperhand was not yet over.

Even if Myles had entertained comforting thoughts to the contrary, he
was speedily undeceived. One morning, about a week after the fight, as
he and Gascoyne were crossing the armory court, they were hailed by
a group of the bachelors standing at the stone steps of the great
building.

"Holloa, Falworth!" they cried. "Knowest thou that Blunt is nigh well
again?"

"Nay," said Myles, "I knew it not. But I am right glad to hear it."

"Thou wilt sing a different song anon," said one of the bachelors. "I
tell thee he is hot against thee, and swears when he cometh again he
will carve thee soothly."

"Aye, marry!" said another. "I would not be in thy skin a week hence for
a ducat! Only this morning he told Philip Mowbray that he would have thy
blood for the fall thou gavest him. Look to thyself, Falworth; he cometh
again Wednesday or Thursday next; thou standest in a parlous state."

"Myles," said Gascoyne, as they entered the great quadrangle, "I do
indeed fear me that he meaneth to do thee evil."

"I know not," said Myles, boldly; "but I fear him not." Nevertheless his
heart was heavy with the weight of impending ill.

One evening the bachelors were more than usually noisy in their end of
the dormitory, laughing and talking and shouting to one another.

"Holloa, you sirrah, Falworth!" called one of them along the length of
the room. "Blunt cometh again to-morrow day."

Myles saw Gascoyne direct a sharp glance at him; but he answered nothing
either to his enemy's words or his friend's look.

As the bachelor had said, Blunt came the next morning. It was just after
chapel, and the whole body of squires was gathered in the armory waiting
for the orders of the day and the calling of the roll of those chosen
for household duty. Myles was sitting on a bench along the wall, talking
and jesting with some who stood by, when of a sudden his heart gave a
great leap within him.

It was Walter Blunt. He came walking in at the door as if nothing had
passed, and at his unexpected coming the hubbub of talk and laughter
was suddenly checked. Even Myles stopped in his speech for a moment, and
then continued with a beating heart and a carelessness of manner that
was altogether assumed. In his hand Blunt carried the house orders for
the day, and without seeming to notice Myles, he opened it and read the
list of those called upon for household service.

Myles had risen, and was now standing listening with the others. When
Blunt had ended reading the list of names, he rolled up the parchment,
and thrust it into his belt; then swinging suddenly on his heel, he
strode straight up to Myles, facing him front to front. A moment or two
of deep silence followed; not a sound broke the stillness. When Blunt
spoke every one in the armory heard his words.

"Sirrah!" said he, "thou didst put foul shame upon me some time sin.
Never will I forget or forgive that offence, and will have a reckoning
with thee right soon that thou wilt not forget to the last day of thy
life."

When Myles had seen his enemy turn upon him, he did not know at first
what to expect; he would not have been surprised had they come to blows
there and then, and he held himself prepared for any event. He faced
the other pluckily enough and without flinching, and spoke up boldly in
answer. "So be it, Walter Blunt; I fear thee not in whatever way thou
mayst encounter me."

"Dost thou not?" said Blunt. "By'r Lady, thou'lt have cause to fear me
ere I am through with thee." He smiled a baleful, lingering smile, and
then turned slowly and walked away.

"What thinkest thou, Myles?" said Gascoyne, as the two left the armory
together.

"I think naught," said Myles gruffly. "He will not dare to touch me
to harm me. I fear him not." Nevertheless, he did not speak the full
feelings of his heart.

"I know not, Myles," said Gascoyne, shaking his head doubtfully. "Walter
Blunt is a parlous evil-minded knave, and methinks will do whatever evil
he promiseth."

"I fear him not," said Myles again; but his heart foreboded trouble.

The coming of the head squire made a very great change in the condition
of affairs. Even before that coming the bachelors had somewhat recovered
from their demoralization, and now again they began to pluck up their
confidence and to order the younger squires and pages upon this personal
service or upon that.

"See ye not," said Myles one day, when the Knights of the Rose were
gathered in the Brutus Tower--"see ye not that they grow as bad as ever?
An we put not a stop to this overmastery now, it will never stop."

"Best let it be, Myles," said Wilkes. "They will kill thee an thou cease
not troubling them. Thou hast bred mischief enow for thyself already."

"No matter for that," said Myles; "it is not to be borne that they order
others of us about as they do. I mean to speak to them to-night, and
tell them it shall not be."

He was as good as his word. That night, as the youngsters were shouting
and romping and skylarking, as they always did before turning in, he
stood upon his cot and shouted: "Silence! List to me a little!" And
then, in the hush that followed--"I want those bachelors to hear this:
that we squires serve them no longer, and if they would ha' some to wait
upon them, they must get them otherwheres than here. There be twenty of
us to stand against them and haply more, and we mean that they shall ha'
service of us no more."

Then he jumped down again from his elevated stand, and an uproar of
confusion instantly filled the place. What was the effect of his words
upon the bachelors he could not see. What was the result he was not slow
in discovering.

The next day Myles and Gascoyne were throwing their daggers for a
wager at a wooden target against the wall back of the armorer's smithy.
Wilkes, Gosse, and one or two others of the squires were sitting on
a bench looking on, and now and then applauding a more than usually
well-aimed cast of the knife. Suddenly that impish little page spoken of
before, Robin Ingoldsby, thrust his shock head around the corner of
the smithy, and said: "Ho, Falworth! Blunt is going to serve thee out
to-day, and I myself heard him say so. He says he is going to slit thine
ears." And then he was gone as suddenly as he had appeared.

Myles darted after him, caught him midway in the quadrangle, and brought
him back by the scuff of the neck, squalling and struggling.

"There!" said he, still panting from the chase and seating the boy by no
means gently upon the bench beside Wilkes. "Sit thou there, thou imp of
evil! And now tell me what thou didst mean by thy words anon--an thou
stop not thine outcry, I will cut thy throat for thee," and he made a
ferocious gesture with his dagger.

It was by no means easy to worm the story from the mischievous little
monkey; he knew Myles too well to be in the least afraid of his threats.
But at last, by dint of bribing and coaxing, Myles and his friends
managed to get at the facts. The youngster had been sent to clean the
riding-boots of one of the bachelors, instead of which he had lolled
idly on a cot in the dormitory, until he had at last fallen asleep. He
had been awakened by the opening of the dormitory door and by the sound
of voices--among them was that of his taskmaster. Fearing punishment for
his neglected duty, he had slipped out of the cot, and hidden himself
beneath it.

Those who had entered were Walter Blunt and three of the older
bachelors. Blunt's companions were trying to persuade him against
something, but without avail. It was--Myles's heart thrilled and his
blood boiled--to lie in wait for him, to overpower him by numbers,
and to mutilate him by slitting his ears--a disgraceful punishment
administered, as a rule, only for thieving and poaching.

"He would not dare to do such a thing!" cried Myles, with heaving breast
and flashing eyes.

"Aye, but he would," said Gascoyne. "His father, Lord Reginald Blunt,
is a great man over Nottingham way, and my Lord would not dare to punish
him even for such a matter as that. But tell me, Robin Ingoldsby, dost
know aught more of this matter? Prithee tell it me, Robin. Where do they
propose to lie in wait for Falworth?"

"In the gate-way of the Buttery Court, so as to catch him when he passes
by to the armory," answered the boy.

"Are they there now?" said Wilkes.

"Aye, nine of them," said Robin. "I heard Blunt tell Mowbray to go and
gather the others. He heard thee tell Gosse, Falworth, that thou wert
going thither for thy arbalist this morn to shoot at the rooks withal."

"That will do, Robin," said Myles. "Thou mayst go."

And therewith the little imp scurried off, pulling the lobes of his ears
suggestively as he darted around the corner.

The others looked at one another for a while in silence.

"So, comrades," said Myles at last, "what shall we do now?"

"Go, and tell Sir James," said Gascoyne, promptly.

"Nay," said Myles, "I take no such coward's part as that. I say an they
hunger to fight, give them their stomachful."

The others were very reluctant for such extreme measures, but Myles, as
usual, carried his way, and so a pitched battle was decided upon. It was
Gascoyne who suggested the plan which they afterwards followed.

Then Wilkes started away to gather together those of the Knights of the
Rose not upon household duty, and Myles, with the others, went to the
armor smith to have him make for them a set of knives with which to meet
their enemies--knives with blades a foot long, pointed and double-edged.

The smith, leaning with his hammer upon the anvil, listened to them as
they described the weapons.

"Nay, nay, Master Myles," said he, when Myles had ended by telling the
use to which he intended putting them. "Thou art going all wrong in this
matter. With such blades, ere this battle is ended, some one would be
slain, and so murder done. Then the family of him who was killed would
haply have ye cited, and mayhap it might e'en come to the hanging, for
some of they boys ha' great folkeys behind them. Go ye to Tom Fletcher,
Master Myles, and buy of him good yew staves, such as one might break a
head withal, and with them, gin ye keep your wits, ye may hold your own
against knives or short swords. I tell thee, e'en though my trade be
making of blades, rather would I ha' a good stout cudgel in my hand than
the best dagger that ever was forged."

Myles stood thoughtfully for a moment or two; then, looking up,
"Methinks thou speaketh truly, Robin," said he; "and it were ill done to
have blood upon our hands."



CHAPTER 15

From the long, narrow stone-paved Armory Court, and connecting it with
the inner Buttery Court, ran a narrow arched passage-way, in which was
a picket-gate, closed at night and locked from within. It was in this
arched passage-way that, according to little Robert Ingoldsby's report,
the bachelors were lying in wait for Myles. Gascoyne's plan was that
Myles should enter the court alone, the Knights of the Rose lying
ambushed behind the angle of the armory building until the bachelors
should show themselves.

It was not without trepidation that Myles walked alone into the court,
which happened then to be silent and empty. His heart beat more quickly
than it was wont, and he gripped his cudgel behind his back, looking
sharply this way and that, so as not to be taken unawares by a flank
movement of his enemies. Midway in the court he stopped and hesitated
for a moment; then he turned as though to enter the armory. The next
moment he saw the bachelors come pouring out from the archway.

Instantly he turned and rushed back towards where his friends lay
hidden, shouting: "To the rescue! To the rescue!"

"Stone him!" roared Blunt. "The villain escapes!"

He stopped and picked up a cobble-stone as he spoke, flinging it after
his escaping prey. It narrowly missed Myles's head; had it struck him,
there might have been no more of this story to tell.

"To the rescue! To the rescue!" shouted Myles's friends in answer, and
the next moment he was surrounded by them. Then he turned, and swinging
his cudgel, rushed back upon his foes.

The bachelors stopped short at the unexpected sight of the lads with
their cudgels. For a moment they rallied and drew their knives; then
they turned and fled towards their former place of hiding.

One of them turned for a moment, and flung his knife at Myles with a
deadly aim; but Myles, quick as a cat, ducked his body, and the weapon
flew clattering across the stony court. Then he who had flung it turned
again to fly, but in his attempt he had delayed one instant too long.
Myles reached him with a long-arm stroke of his cudgel just as he
entered the passage-way, knocking him over like a bottle, stunned and
senseless.

The next moment the picket-gate was banged in their faces and the bolt
shot in the staples, and the Knights of the Rose were left shouting and
battering with their cudgels against the palings.

By this time the uproar of fight had aroused those in the rooms and
offices fronting upon the Armory Court; heads were thrust from many of
the windows with the eager interest that a fight always evokes.

"Beware!" shouted Myles. "Here they come again!" He bore back towards
the entrance of the alley-way as he spoke, those behind him scattering
to right and left, for the bachelors had rallied, and were coming again
to the attack, shouting.

They were not a moment too soon in this retreat, either, for the next
instant the pickets flew open, and a volley of stones flew after the
retreating Knights of the Rose. One smote Wilkes upon the head,
knocking him down headlong. Another struck Myles upon his left shoulder,
benumbing his arm from the finger-tips to the armpit, so that he thought
at first the limb was broken.

"Get ye behind the buttresses!" shouted those who looked down upon the
fight from the windows--"get ye behind the buttresses!" And in answer
the lads, scattering like a newly-flushed covey of partridges, fled
to and crouched in the sheltering angles of masonry to escape from the
flying stones.

And now followed a lull in the battle, the bachelors fearing to leave
the protection of the arched passage-way lest their retreat should be
cut off, and the Knights of the Rose not daring to quit the shelter of
the buttresses and angles of the wall lest they should be knocked down
by the stones.

The bachelor whom Myles had struck down with his cudgel was sitting up
rubbing the back of his head, and Wilkes had gathered his wits enough to
crawl to the shelter of the nearest buttress. Myles, peeping around the
corner behind which he stood, could see that the bachelors were gathered
into a little group consulting together. Suddenly it broke asunder, and
Blunt turned around.

"Ho, Falworth!" he cried. "Wilt thou hold truce whiles we parley with
ye?"

"Aye," answered Myles.

"Wilt thou give me thine honor that ye will hold your hands from harming
us whiles we talk together?"

"Yea," said Myles, "I will pledge thee mine honor."

"I accept thy pledge. See! here we throw aside our stones and lay
down our knives. Lay ye by your clubs, and meet us in parley at the
horse-block yonder."

"So be it," said Myles, and thereupon, standing his cudgel in the angle
of the wall, he stepped boldly out into the open court-yard. Those of
his party came scatteringly from right and left, gathering about him;
and the bachelors advanced in a body, led by the head squire.

"Now what is it thou wouldst have, Walter Blunt?" said Myles, when both
parties had met at the horse-block.

"It is to say this to thee, Myles Falworth," said the other. "One time,
not long sin, thou didst challenge me to meet thee hand to hand in the
dormitory. Then thou didst put a vile affront upon me, for the which I
ha' brought on this battle to-day, for I knew not then that thou wert
going to try thy peasant tricks of wrestling, and so, without guarding
myself, I met thee as thou didst desire."

"But thou hadst thy knife, and would have stabbed him couldst thou ha'
done so," said Gascoyne.

"Thou liest!" said Blunt. "I had no knife." And then, without giving
time to answer, "Thou canst not deny that I met thee then at thy
bidding, canst thou, Falworth?"

"Nay," said Myles, "nor haply canst thou deny it either." And at this
covert reminder of his defeat Myles's followers laughed scoffingly and
Blunt bit his lip.

"Thou hast said it," said he. "Then sin. I met thee at thy bidding,
I dare to thee to meet me now at mine, and to fight this battle out
between our two selves, with sword and buckler and bascinet as gentles
should, and not in a wrestling match like two country hodges."

"Thou art a coward caitiff, Walter Blunt!" burst out Wilkes, who stood
by with a swelling lump upon his head, already as big as a walnut. "Well
thou knowest that Falworth is no match for thee at broadsword play. Is
he not four years younger than thou, and hast thou not had three times
the practice in arms that he hath had? I say thou art a coward to seek
to fight with cutting weapons."

Blunt made no answer to Wilkes's speech, but gazed steadfastly at Myles,
with a scornful smile curling the corners of his lips. Myles stood
looking upon the ground without once lifting his eyes, not knowing what
to answer, for he was well aware that he was no match for Blunt with the
broadsword.

"Thou art afraid to fight me, Myles Falworth," said Blunt, tauntingly,
and the bachelors gave a jeering laugh in echo.

Then Myles looked up, and I cannot say that his face was not a trifle
whiter than usual. "Nay," said he, "I am not afraid, and I will fight
thee, Blunt."

"So be it," said Blunt. "Then let us go at it straightway in the armory
yonder, for they be at dinner in the Great Hall, and just now there
be'st no one by to stay us."

"Thou shalt not fight him, Myles!" burst out Gascoyne. "He will murther
thee! Thou shalt not fight him, I say!"

Myles turned away without answering him.

"What is to do?" called one of those who were still looking out of the
windows as the crowd of boys passed beneath.

"Blunt and Falworth are going to fight it out hand to hand in the
armory," answered one of the bachelors, looking up.

The brawling of the squires was a jest to all the adjoining part of the
house. So the heads were withdrawn again, some laughing at the "sparring
of the cockerels."

But it was no jesting matter to poor Myles.



CHAPTER 16

I have no intention to describe the fight between Myles Falworth and
Walter Blunt. Fisticuffs of nowadays are brutal and debasing enough, but
a fight with a sharp-edged broadsword was not only brutal and debasing,
but cruel and bloody as well.

From the very first of the fight Myles Falworth was palpably and
obviously overmatched. After fifteen minutes had passed, Blunt stood
hale and sound as at first; but poor Myles had more than one red stain
of warm blood upon doublet and hose, and more than one bandage had been
wrapped by Gascoyne and Wilkes about sore wounds.

He had received no serious injury as yet, for not only was his body
protected by a buckler, or small oblong shield, which he carried upon
his left arm, and his head by a bascinet, or light helmet of steel, but
perhaps, after all, Blunt was not over-anxious to do him any dangerous
harm. Nevertheless, there could be but one opinion as to how the fight
tended, and Myles's friends were gloomy and downcast; the bachelors
proportionately exultant, shouting with laughter, and taunting Myles at
every unsuccessful stroke.

Once, as he drew back panting, leaning upon Gascoyne's shoulder, the
faithful friend whispered, with trembling lips: "Oh, dear Myles, carry
it no further. Thou hurtest him not, and he will slay thee ere he have
done with thee."

Thereupon Blunt, who caught the drift of the speech, put in a word.
"Thou art sore hurt, Myles Falworth," said he, "and I would do thee no
grievous harm. Yield thee and own thyself beaten, and I will forgive
thee. Thou hast fought a good fight, and there is no shame in yielding
now."

"Never!" cried Myles, hoarsely--"never will I yield me! Thou mayst slay
me, Walter Blunt, and I reck not if thou dost do so, but never else wilt
thou conquer me."

There was a tone of desperation in his voice that made all look serious.

"Nay," said Blunt; "I will fight thee no more, Myles Falworth; thou hast
had enough."

"By heavens!" cried Myles, grinding his teeth, "thou shalt fight me,
thou coward! Thou hast brought this fight upon us, and either thou or I
get our quittance here. Let go, Gascoyne!" he cried, shaking loose his
friend's hold; "I tell thee he shall fight me!"

From that moment Blunt began to lose his head. No doubt he had not
thought of such a serious fight as this when he had given his challenge,
and there was a savage bull-dog tenacity about Myles that could not but
have had a somewhat demoralizing effect upon him.

A few blows were given and taken, and then Myles's friends gave a shout.
Blunt drew back, and placed his hand to his shoulder. When he drew
it away again it was stained with red, and another red stain grew and
spread rapidly down the sleeve of his jacket. He stared at his hand for
a moment with a half-dazed look, and then glanced quickly to right and
left.

"I will fight no more," said he, sullenly.

"Then yield thee!" cried Myles, exultantly.

The triumphant shouts of the Knights of the Rose stung Blunt like a
lash, and the battle began again. Perhaps some of the older lads were of
a mind to interfere at this point, certainly some looked very serious,
but before they interposed, the fight was ended.

Blunt, grinding his teeth, struck one undercut at his opponent--the
same undercut that Myles had that time struck at Sir James Lee at the
knight's bidding when he first practised at the Devlen pels. Myles
met the blow as Sir James had met the blow that he had given, and then
struck in return as Sir James had struck--full and true. The bascinet
that Blunt wore glanced the blow partly, but not entirely. Myles felt
his sword bite through the light steel cap, and Blunt dropped his own
blade clattering upon the floor. It was all over in an instant, but in
that instant what he saw was stamped upon Myles's mind with an indelible
imprint. He saw the young man stagger backward; he saw the eyes roll
upward; and a red streak shoot out from under the cap and run down
across the cheek.

Blunt reeled half around, and then fell prostrate upon his face; and
Myles stood staring at him with the delirious turmoil of his battle
dissolving rapidly into a dumb fear at that which he had done.

Once again he had won the victory--but what a victory! "Is he dead?" he
whispered to Gascoyne.

"I know not," said Gascoyne, with a very pale face. "But come away,
Myles." And he led his friend out of the room.

Some little while later one of the bachelors came to the dormitory where
Myles, his wounds smarting and aching and throbbing, lay stretched upon
his cot, and with a very serious face bade him to go presently to Sir
James, who had just come from dinner, and was then in his office.

By this time Myles knew that he had not slain his enemy, and his heart
was light in spite of the coming interview. There was no one in
the office but Sir James and himself, and Myles, without concealing
anything, told, point by point, the whole trouble. Sir James sat looking
steadily at him for a while after he had ended.

"Never," said he, presently, "did I know any one of ye squires, in all
the time that I have been here, get himself into so many broils as thou,
Myles Falworth. Belike thou sought to take this lad's life."

"Nay," said Myles, earnestly; "God forbid!"

"Ne'theless," said Sir James, "thou fetched him a main shrewd blow; and
it is by good hap, and no fault of thine, that he will live to do more
mischief yet. This is thy second venture at him; the third time, haply,
thou wilt end him for good." Then suddenly assuming his grimmest and
sternest manner: "Now, sirrah, do I put a stop to this, and no more
shall ye fight with edged tools. Get thee to the dormitory, and abide
there a full week without coming forth. Michael shall bring thee bread
and water twice a day for that time. That is all the food thou shalt
have, and we will see if that fare will not cool thy hot humors withal."

Myles had expected a punishment so much more severe than that which was
thus meted to him, that in the sudden relief he broke into a convulsive
laugh, and then, with a hasty sweep, wiped a brimming moisture from his
eyes.

Sir James looked keenly at him for a moment. "Thou art white i' the
face," said he. "Art thou wounded very sorely?"

"Nay" said Myles, "it is not much; but I be sick in my stomach."

"Aye, aye," said Sir James; "I know that feeling well. It is thus
that one always feeleth in coming out from a sore battle when one hath
suffered wounds and lost blood. An thou wouldst keep thyself hale, keep
thyself from needless fighting. Now go thou to the dormitory, and, as I
said, come thou not forth again for a week. Stay, sirrah!" he added; "I
will send Georgebarber to thee to look to thy sores. Green wounds are
best drawn and salved ere they grow cold."

I wonder what Myles would have thought had he known that so soon as
he had left the office, Sir James had gone straight to the Earl and
recounted the whole matter to him, with a deal of dry gusto, and that
the Earl listened laughing.

"Aye," said he, when Sir James had done, "the boy hath mettle, sure.
Nevertheless, we must transplant this fellow Blunt to the office of
gentleman-in-waiting. He must be old enough now, and gin he stayeth in
his present place, either he will do the boy a harm, or the boy will do
him a harm."

So Blunt never came again to trouble the squires' quarters; and
thereafter the youngsters rendered no more service to the elders.

Myles's first great fight in life was won.



CHAPTER 17

The summer passed away, and the bleak fall came. Myles had long since
accepted his position as one set apart from the others of his kind, and
had resigned himself to the evident fact that he was never to serve
in the household in waiting upon the Earl. I cannot say that it never
troubled him, but in time there came a compensation of which I shall
have presently to speak.

And then he had so much the more time to himself. The other lads were
sometimes occupied by their household duties when sports were afoot
in which they would liked to have taken part. Myles was always free
to enter into any matter of the kind after his daily exercise had been
performed at the pels, the butts, or the tilting-court.

But even though he was never called to do service in "my Lord's house,"
he was not long in gaining a sort of second-hand knowledge of all the
family. My Lady, a thin, sallow, faded dame, not yet past middle age,
but looking ten years older. The Lady Anne, the daughter of the house;
a tall, thin, dark-eyed, dark-haired, handsome young dame of twenty or
twenty-one years of age, hawk-nosed like her father, and silent, proud,
and haughty, Myles heard the squires say. Lady Alice, the Earl of
Mackworth's niece and ward, a great heiress in her own right, a
strikingly pretty black-eyed girl of fourteen or fifteen.

These composed the Earl's personal family; but besides them was Lord
George Beaumont, his Earl's brother, and him Myles soon came to know
better than any of the chief people of the castle excepting Sir James
Lee.

For since Myles's great battle in the armory, Lord George had taken a
laughing sort of liking to the lad, encouraging him at times to talk of
his adventures, and of his hopes and aspirations.

Perhaps the Earl's younger brother--who was himself somewhat a soldier
of fortune, having fought in Spain, France, and Germany--felt a certain
kinship in spirit with the adventurous youngster who had his unfriended
way to make in the world. However that might have been, Lord George was
very kind and friendly to the lad, and the willing service that Myles
rendered him reconciled him not a little to the Earl's obvious neglect.

Besides these of the more immediate family of the Earl were a number
of knights, ladies, and gentlemen, some of them cadets, some of them
retainers, of the house of Beaumont, for the princely nobles of those
days lived in state little less royal than royalty itself.

Most of the knights and gentlemen Myles soon came to know by sight,
meeting them in Lord George's apartments in the south wing of the great
house, and some of them, following the lead of Lord George, singled him
out for friendly notice, giving him a nod or a word in passing.


Every season has its pleasures for boys, and the constant change that
they bring is one of the greatest delights of boyhood's days.

All of us, as we grow older, have in our memory pictures of by-gone
times that are somehow more than usually vivid, the colors of some not
blurring by time as others do. One of which, in remembering, always
filled Myles's heart in after-years with an indefinable pleasure, was
the recollection of standing with others of his fellow squires in the
crisp brown autumn grass of the paddock, and shooting with the long-bow
at wildfowl, which, when the east wind was straining, flew low overhead
to pitch to the lake in the forbidden precincts of the deer park beyond
the brow of the hill. More than once a brace or two of these wildfowl,
shot in their southward flight by the lads and cooked by fat,
good-natured Mother Joan, graced the rude mess-table of the squires in
the long hall, and even the toughest and fishiest drake, so the fruit
of their skill, had a savor that, somehow or other, the daintiest fare
lacked in after-years.

Then fall passed and winter came, bleak, cold, and dreary--not winter as
we know it nowadays, with warm fires and bright lights to make the long
nights sweet and cheerful with comfort, but winter with all its grimness
and sternness. In the great cold stone-walled castles of those days the
only fire and almost the only light were those from the huge blazing
logs that roared and crackled in the great open stone fireplace, around
which the folks gathered, sheltering their faces as best they could from
the scorching heat, and cloaking their shoulders from the biting cold,
for at the farther end of the room, where giant shadows swayed and
bowed and danced huge and black against the high walls, the white frost
glistened in the moonlight on the stone pavements, and the breath went
up like smoke.

In those days were no books to read, but at the best only rude stories
and jests, recited by some strolling mummer or minstrel to the listening
circle, gathered around the blaze and welcoming the coarse, gross jests,
and coarser, grosser songs with roars of boisterous laughter.

Yet bleak and dreary as was the winter in those days, and cold and
biting as was the frost in the cheerless, windy halls and corridors of
the castle, it was not without its joys to the young lads; for then, as
now, boys could find pleasure even in slushy weather, when the sodden
snow is fit for nothing but to make snowballs of.

Thrice that bitter winter the moat was frozen over, and the lads, making
themselves skates of marrow-bones, which they bought from the hall cook
at a groat a pair, went skimming over the smooth surface, red-checked
and shouting, while the crows and the jackdaws looked down at them from
the top of the bleak gray walls.

Then at Yule-tide, which was somewhat of a rude semblance to the Merry
Christmas season of our day, a great feast was held in the hall, and all
the castle folk were fed in the presence of the Earl and the Countess.
Oxen and sheep were roasted whole; huge suet puddings, made of barley
meal sweetened with honey and stuffed with plums, were boiled in great
caldrons in the open courtyard; whole barrels of ale and malmsey were
broached, and all the folk, gentle and simple, were bidden to the feast.
Afterwards the minstrels danced and played a rude play, and in the
evening a miracle show was performed on a raised platform in the north
hall.

For a week afterwards the castle was fed upon the remains of the good
things left from that great feast, until everyone grew to loathe fine
victuals, and longed for honest beef and mustard again.

Then at last in that constant change the winter was gone, and even the
lads who had enjoyed its passing were glad when the winds blew warm once
more, and the grass showed green in sunny places, and the leader of the
wild-fowl blew his horn, as they who in the fall had flown to the south
flew, arrow-like, northward again; when the buds swelled and the leaves
burst forth once more, and crocuses and then daffodils gleamed in the
green grass, like sparks and flames of gold.

With the spring came the out-door sports of the season; among others
that of ball--for boys were boys, and played at ball even in those
faraway days--a game called trap-ball. Even yet in some parts of England
it is played just as it was in Myles Falworth's day, and enjoyed just as
Myles and his friends enjoyed it.

So now that the sun was warm and the weather pleasant the game of
trap-ball was in full swing every afternoon, the play-ground being an
open space between the wall that surrounded the castle grounds and that
of the privy garden--the pleasance in which the ladies of the Earl's
family took the air every day, and upon which their apartments opened.

Now one fine breezy afternoon, when the lads were shouting and playing
at this, then their favorite game, Myles himself was at the trap
barehanded and barearmed. The wind was blowing from behind him, and,
aided perhaps by it, he had already struck three of four balls nearly
the whole length of the court--an unusual distance--and several of the
lads had gone back almost as far as the wall of the privy garden to
catch any ball that might chance to fly as far as that. Then once more
Myles struck, throwing all his strength into the blow. The ball shot up
into the air, and when it fell, it was to drop within the privy garden.

The shouts of the young players were instantly stilled, and Gascoyne,
who stood nearest Myles, thrust his hands into his belt, giving a long
shrill whistle.

"This time thou hast struck us all out, Myles," said he. "There be no
more play for us until we get another ball."

The outfielders came slowly trooping in until they had gathered in a
little circle around Myles.

"I could not help it," said Myles, in answer to their grumbling. "How
knew I the ball would fly so far? But if I ha' lost the ball, I can get
it again. I will climb the wall for it."

"Thou shalt do naught of the kind, Myles," said Gascoyne, hastily.
"Thou art as mad as a March hare to think of such a venture! Wouldst get
thyself shot with a bolt betwixt the ribs, like poor Diccon Cook?"

Of all places about the castle the privy garden was perhaps the most
sacred. It was a small plot of ground, only a few rods long and wide,
and was kept absolutely private for the use of the Countess and her
family. Only a little while before Myles had first come to Devlen,
one of the cook's men had been found climbing the wall, whereupon the
soldier who saw him shot him with his cross bow. The poor fellow dropped
from the wall into the garden, and when they found him, he still held
a bunch of flowers in his hand, which he had perhaps been gathering for
his sweetheart.

Had Myles seen him carried on a litter to the infirmary as Gascoyne
and some of the others had done, he might have thought twice before
venturing to enter the ladies' private garden. As it was, he only shook
his stubborn head, and said again, "I will climb the wall and fetch it."

Now at the lower extremity of the court, and about twelve or fifteen
feet distant from the garden wall, there grew a pear-tree, some of the
branches of which overhung into the garden beyond. So, first making sure
that no one was looking that way, and bidding the others keep a sharp
lookout, Myles shinned up this tree, and choosing one of the thicker
limbs, climbed out upon it for some little distance. Then lowering his
body, he hung at arm's-length, the branch bending with his weight, and
slowly let himself down hand under hand, until at last he hung directly
over the top of the wall, and perhaps a foot above it. Below him he
could see the leafy top of an arbor covered with a thick growth of
clematis, and even as he hung there he noticed the broad smooth
walks, the grassy terrace in front of the Countess's apartments in the
distance, the quaint flower-beds, the yew-trees trimmed into odd shapes,
and even the deaf old gardener working bare-armed in the sunlight at a
flower-bed in the far corner by the tool-house.

The top of the wall was pointed like a house roof, and immediately below
him was covered by a thick growth of green moss, and it flashed through
his mind as he hung there that maybe it would offer a very slippery
foothold for one dropping upon the steep slopes of the top. But it was
too late to draw back now.

Bracing himself for a moment, he loosed his hold upon the limb above.
The branch flew back with a rush, and he dropped, striving to grasp the
sloping angle with his feet. Instantly the treacherous slippery moss
slid away from beneath him; he made a vain clutch at the wall, his
fingers sliding over the cold stones, then, with a sharp exclamation,
down he pitched bodily into the garden beneath! A thousand thoughts
flew through his brain like a cloud of flies, and then a leafy greenness
seemed to strike up against him. A splintering crash sounded in his
ears as the lattice top of the arbor broke under him, and with one final
clutch at the empty air he fell heavily upon the ground beneath.

He heard a shrill scream that seemed to find an instant echo; even as
he fell he had a vision of faces and bright colors, and when he sat up,
dazed and bewildered, he found himself face to face with the Lady Anne,
the daughter of the house, and her cousin, the Lady Alice, who clutching
one another tightly, stood staring at him with wide scared eyes.



CHAPTER 18

For a little time there was a pause of deep silence, during which the
fluttering leaves came drifting down from the broken arbor above.

It was the Lady Anne who first spoke. "Who art thou, and whence comest
thou?" said she, tremulously.

Then Myles gathered himself up sheepishly. "My name is Myles Falworth,"
said he, "and I am one of the squires of the body."

"Oh! aye!" said the Lady Alice, suddenly. "Me thought I knew thy face.
Art thou not the young man that I have seen in Lord George's train?"

"Yes, lady," said Myles, wrapping and twining a piece of the broken vine
in and out among his fingers. "Lord George hath often had me of late
about his person."

"And what dost thou do here, sirrah?" said Lady Anne, angrily. "How
darest thou come so into our garden?"

"I meant not to come as I did," said Myles, clumsily, and with a face
hot and red. "But I slipped over the top of the wall and fell hastily
into the garden. Truly, lady, I meant ye no harm or fright thereby."

He looked so drolly abashed as he stood before them, with his clothes
torn and soiled from the fall, his face red, and his eyes downcast, all
the while industriously twisting the piece of clematis in and around his
fingers, that Lady Anne's half-frightened anger could not last. She and
her cousin exchanged glances, and smiled at one another.

"But," said she at last, trying to draw her pretty brows together into a
frown, "tell me; why didst thou seek to climb the wall?"

"I came to seek a ball," said Myles, "which I struck over hither from
the court beyond."

"And wouldst thou come into our privy garden for no better reason than
to find a ball?" said the young lady.

"Nay," said Myles; "it was not so much to find the ball, but, in good
sooth, I did truly strike it harder than need be, and so, gin I lost the
ball, I could do no less than come and find it again, else our sport is
done for the day. So it was I came hither."

The two young ladies had by now recovered from their fright. The Lady
Anne slyly nudged her cousin with her elbow, and the younger could not
suppress a half-nervous laugh. Myles heard it, and felt his face grow
hotter and redder than ever.

"Nay," said Lady Anne, "I do believe Master Giles--"

"My name be'st Myles," corrected Myles.

"Very well, then, Master Myles, I say I do believe that thou meanest
no harm in coming hither; ne'theless it was ill of thee so to do. An my
father should find thee here, he would have thee shrewdly punished for
such trespassing. Dost thou not know that no one is permitted to enter
this place--no, not even my uncle George? One fellow who came hither to
steal apples once had his ears shaven close to his head, and not more
than a year ago one of the cook's men who climbed the wall early one
morning was shot by the watchman."

"Aye," said Myles, "I knew of him who was shot, and it did go somewhat
against my stomach to venture, knowing what had happed to him.
Ne'theless, an I gat not the ball, how were we to play more to-day at
the trap?"

"Marry, thou art a bold fellow, I do believe me," said the young lady,
"and sin thou hast come in the face of such peril to get thy ball, thou
shalt not go away empty. Whither didst thou strike it?"

"Over yonder by the cherry-tree," said Myles, jerking his head in that
direction. "An I may go get it, I will trouble ye no more." As he spoke
he made a motion to leave them.

"Stay!" said the Lady Anne, hastily; "remain where thou art. An thou
cross the open, some one may haply see thee from the house, and will
give the alarm, and thou wilt be lost. I will go get thy ball."

And so she left Myles and her cousin, crossing the little plots of grass
and skirting the rosebushes to the cherry-tree.

When Myles found himself alone with Lady Alice, he knew not where to
look or what to do, but twisted the piece of clematis which he still
held in and out more industriously than ever.

Lady Alice watched him with dancing eyes for a little while. "Haply thou
wilt spoil that poor vine," said she by-and-by, breaking the silence and
laughing, then turning suddenly serious again. "Didst thou hurt thyself
by thy fall?"

"Nay," said Myles, looking up, "such a fall as that was no great matter.
Many and many a time I have had worse."

"Hast thou so?" said the Lady Alice. "Thou didst fright me parlously,
and my coz likewise."

Myles hesitated for a moment, and then blurted out, "Thereat I grieve,
for thee I would not fright for all the world."

The young lady laughed and blushed. "All the world is a great matter,"
said she.

"Yea," said he, "it is a great matter; but it is a greater matter to
fright thee, and so I would not do it for that, and more."

The young lady laughed again, but she did not say anything further, and
a space of silence fell so long that by-and-by she forced herself to
say, "My cousin findeth not the ball presently."

"Nay," said Myles, briefly, and then again neither spoke, until
by-and-by the Lady Anne came, bringing the ball. Myles felt a great
sense of relief at that coming, and yet was somehow sorry. Then he took
the ball, and knew enough to bow his acknowledgment in a manner neither
ill nor awkward.

"Didst thou hurt thyself?" asked Lady Anne.

"Nay," said Myles, giving himself a shake; "seest thou not I be whole,
limb and bone? Nay, I have had shrewdly worse falls than that. Once I
fell out of an oak-tree down by the river and upon a root, and bethought
me I did break a rib or more. And then one time when I was a boy in
Crosbey-Dale--that was where I lived before I came hither--I did catch
me hold of the blade of the windmill, thinking it was moving slowly, and
that I would have a ride i' th' air, and so was like to have had a fall
ten thousand times worse than this."

"Oh, tell us more of that!" said the Lady Anne, eagerly. "I did never
hear of such an adventure as that. Come, coz, and sit down here upon the
bench, and let us have him tell us all of that happening."

Now the lads upon the other side of the wall had been whistling
furtively for some time, not knowing whether Myles had broken his neck
or had come off scot-free from his fall. "I would like right well to
stay with ye," said he, irresolutely, "and would gladly tell ye that and
more an ye would have me to do so; but hear ye not my friends call me
from beyond? Mayhap they think I break my back, and are calling to see
whether I be alive or no. An I might whistle them answer and toss me
this ball to them, all would then be well, and they would know that I
was not hurt, and so, haply, would go away."

"Then answer them," said the Lady Anne, "and tell us of that thing thou
spokest of anon--how thou tookest a ride upon the windmill. We young
ladies do hear little of such matters, not being allowed to talk with
lads. All that we hear of perils are of knights and ladies and jousting,
and such like. It would pleasure us right well to have thee tell of thy
adventures."

So Myles tossed back the ball, and whistled in answer to his friends.

Then he told the two young ladies not only of his adventure upon the
windmill, but also of other boyish escapades, and told them well, with
a straightforward smack and vigor, for he enjoyed adventure and loved to
talk of it. In a little while he had regained his ease; his shyness and
awkwardness left him, and nothing remained but the delightful fact that
he was really and actually talking to two young ladies, and that with
just as much ease and infinitely more pleasure than could be had in
discourse with his fellow-squires. But at last it was time for him to
go. "Marry," said he, with a half-sigh, "methinks I did never ha' so
sweet and pleasant a time in all my life before. Never did I know a
real lady to talk with, saving only my mother, and I do tell ye
plain methinks I would rather talk with ye than with any he in
Christendom--saving, perhaps, only my friend Gascoyne. I would I might
come hither again."

The honest frankness of his speech was irresistible; the two girls
exchanged glances and then began laughing. "Truly," said Lady Anne, who,
as was said before, was some three or four years older than Myles,
"thou art a bold lad to ask such a thing. How wouldst thou come hither?
Wouldst tumble through our clematis arbor again, as thou didst this
day?"

"Nay," said Myles, "I would not do that again, but if ye will bid me do
so, I will find the means to come hither."

"Nay," said Lady Anne, "I dare not bid thee do such a foolhardy thing.
Nevertheless, if thou hast the courage to come--"

"Yea," said Myles, eagerly, "I have the courage."

"Then, if thou hast so, we will be here in the garden on Saturday next
at this hour. I would like right well to hear more of thy adventures.
But what didst thou say was thy name? I have forgot it again."

"It is Myles Falworth."

"Then we shall yclep thee Sir Myles, for thou art a soothly
errant-knight. And stay! Every knight must have a lady to serve. How
wouldst thou like my Cousin Alice here for thy true lady?"

"Aye," said Myles, eagerly, "I would like it right well." And then he
blushed fiery red at his boldness.

"I want no errant-knight to serve me," said the Lady Alice, blushing,
in answer. "Thou dost ill tease me, coz! An thou art so free in choosing
him a lady to serve, thou mayst choose him thyself for thy pains."

"Nay," said the Lady Anne, laughing; "I say thou shalt be his true lady,
and he shall be thy true knight. Who knows? Perchance he may serven thee
in some wondrous adventure, like as Chaucer telleth of. But now, Sir
Errant-Knight, thou must take thy leave of us, and I must e'en let thee
privily out by the postern-wicket. And if thou wilt take the risk upon
thee and come hither again, prithee be wary in that coming, lest in
venturing thou have thine ears clipped in most unknightly fashion."

That evening, as he and Gascoyne sat together on a bench under the trees
in the great quadrangle, Myles told of his adventure of the afternoon,
and his friend listened with breathless interest.

"But, Myles," cried Gascoyne, "did the Lady Anne never once seem proud
and unkind?"

"Nay," said Myles; "only at first, when she chid me for falling through
the roof of their arbor. And to think, Francis! Lady Anne herself
bade me hold the Lady Alice as my true lady, and to serve her in all
knightliness!" Then he told his friend that he was going to the privy
garden again on the next Saturday, and that the Lady Anne had given him
permission so to do.

Gascoyne gave a long, wondering whistle, and then sat quite still,
staring into the sky. By-and-by he turned to his friend and said, "I
give thee my pledge, Myles Falworth, that never in all my life did I
hear of any one that had such marvellous strange happenings befall him
as thou."


Whenever the opportunity occurred for sending a letter to Crosbey-Holt,
Myles wrote one to his mother; and one can guess how they were treasured
by the good lady, and read over and over again to the blind old Lord as
he sat staring into darkness with his sightless eyes.

About the time of this escapade he wrote a letter telling of those
doings, wherein, after speaking of his misadventure of falling from the
wall, and of his acquaintance with the young ladies, he went on to speak
of the matter in which he repeated his visits. The letter was worded
in the English of that day--the quaint and crabbed language in which
Chaucer wrote. Perhaps few boys could read it nowadays, so, modernizing
it somewhat, it ran thus:

"And now to let ye weet that thing that followed that happening that
made me acquaint with they two young Damoiselles. I take me to the south
wall of that garden one day four and twenty great spikes, which Peter
Smith did forge for me and for which I pay him fivepence, and that all
the money that I had left of my half-year's wage, and wot not where I
may get more at these present, withouten I do betake me to Sir James,
who, as I did tell ye, hath consented to hold those moneys that Prior
Edward gave me till I need them.

"Now these same spikes, I say, I take me them down behind the corner of
the wall, and there drave them betwixt the stones, my very dear comrade
and true friend Gascoyne holping me thereto to do. And so come Saturday,
I climb me over the wall and to the roof of the tool-house below,
seeking a fitting opportunity when I might so do without being in too
great jeopardy.

"Yea; and who should be there but they two ladies, biding my coming,
who, seeing me, made as though they had expected me not, and gave me
greatest rebuke for adventuring so moughtily. Yet, methinks, were they
right well pleasured that I should so aventure, which indeed I might not
otherwise do, seeing as I have telled to thee, that one of them is mine
own true lady for to serven, and so was the only way that I might come
to speech with her."

Such was Myles's own quaint way of telling how he accomplished his aim
of visiting the forbidden garden, and no doubt the smack of adventure
and the savor of danger in the undertaking recommended him not a little
to the favor of the young ladies.

After this first acquaintance perhaps a month passed, during which Myles
had climbed the wall some half a dozen times (for the Lady Anne
would not permit of too frequent visits), and during which the first
acquaintance of the three ripened rapidly to an honest, pleasant
friendship. More than once Myles, when in Lord George's train, caught
a covert smile or half nod from one or both of the girls, not a little
delightful in its very secret friendliness.



CHAPTER 19

As was said, perhaps a month passed; then Myles's visits came to an
abrupt termination, and with it ended, in a certain sense, a chapter of
his life.

One Saturday afternoon he climbed the garden wall, and skirting behind
a long row of rosebushes that screened him from the Countess's terrace,
came to a little summer-house where the two young ladies had appointed
to meet him that day.

A pleasant half-hour or so was passed, and then it was time for Myles
to go. He lingered for a while before he took his final leave, leaning
against the door-post, and laughingly telling how he and some of his
brother squires had made a figure of straw dressed in men's clothes, and
had played a trick with it one night upon a watchman against whom they
bore a grudge.

The young ladies were listening with laughing faces, when suddenly, as
Myles looked, he saw the smile vanish from Lady Alice's eyes and a wide
terror take its place. She gave a half-articulate cry, and rose abruptly
from the bench upon which she was sitting.

Myles turned sharply, and then his very heart seemed to stand still
within him; for there, standing in the broad sunlight without, and
glaring in upon the party with baleful eyes, was the Earl of Mackworth
himself.

How long was the breathless silence that followed, Myles could never
tell. He knew that the Lady Anne had also risen, and that she and her
cousin were standing as still as statues. Presently the Earl pointed to
the house with his staff, and Myles noted stupidly how it trembled in
his hand.

"Ye wenches," said he at last, in a hard, harsh voice--"ye wenches, what
meaneth this? Would ye deceive me so, and hold parlance thus secretly
with this fellow? I will settle with him anon. Meantime get ye
straightway to the house and to your rooms, and there abide until I give
ye leave to come forth again. Go, I say!"

"Father," said Lady Anne, in a breathless voice--she was as white as
death, and moistened her lips with her tongue before she spoke--"father,
thou wilt not do harm to this young man. Spare him, I do beseech thee,
for truly it was I who bade him come hither. I know that he would not
have come but at our bidding."

The Earl stamped his foot upon the gravel. "Did ye not hear me?" said
he, still pointing towards the house with his trembling staff. "I bade
ye go to your rooms. I will settle with this fellow, I say, as I deem
fitting."

"Father," began Lady Anne again; but the Earl made such a savage gesture
that poor Lady Alice uttered a faint shriek, and Lady Anne stopped
abruptly, trembling. Then she turned and passed out the farther door of
the summerhouse, poor little Lady Alice following, holding her tight
by the skirts, and trembling and shuddering as though with a fit of the
ague.

The Earl stood looking grimly after them from under his shaggy eyebrows,
until they passed away behind the yew-trees, appeared again upon the
terrace behind, entered the open doors of the women's house, and were
gone. Myles heard their footsteps growing fainter and fainter, but he
never raised his eyes. Upon the ground at his feet were four pebbles,
and he noticed how they almost made a square, and would do so if he
pushed one of them with his toe, and then it seemed strange to him that
he should think of such a little foolish thing at that dreadful time.

He knew that the Earl was looking gloomily at him, and that his face
must be very pale. Suddenly Lord Mackworth spoke. "What hast thou to
say?" said he, harshly.

Then Myles raised his eyes, and the Earl smiled grimly as he looked his
victim over. "I have naught to say," said the lad, huskily.

"Didst thou not hear what my daughter spake but now?" said the Earl.
"She said that thou came not of thy own free-will; what sayst thou to
that, sirrah--is it true?"

Myles hesitated for a moment or two; his throat was tight and dry.
"Nay," said he at last, "she belieth herself. It was I who first came
into the garden. I fell by chance from the tree yonder--I was seeking
a ball--then I asked those two if I might not come hither again, and so
have done some several times in all. But as for her--nay; it was not at
her bidding that I came, but through mine own asking."

The Earl gave a little grunt in his throat. "And how often hast thou
been here?" said he, presently.

Myles thought a moment or two. "This maketh the seventh time," said he.

Another pause of silence followed, and Myles began to pluck up some
heart that maybe all would yet be well. The Earl's next speech dashed
that hope into a thousand fragments. "Well thou knowest," said he, "that
it is forbid for any to come here. Well thou knowest that twice have men
been punished for this thing that thou hast done, and yet thou camest in
spite of all. Now dost thou know what thou wilt suffer?"

Myles picked with nervous fingers at a crack in the oaken post against
which he leaned. "Mayhap thou wilt kill me," said he at last, in a dull,
choking voice.

Again the Earl smiled a grim smile. "Nay," said he, "I would not slay
thee, for thou hast gentle blood. But what sayest thou should I shear
thine ears from thine head, or perchance have thee scourged in the great
court?"

The sting of the words sent the blood flying back to Myles's face again,
and he looked quickly up. "Nay," said he, with a boldness that surprised
himself; "thou shalt do no such unlordly thing upon me as that. I be thy
peer, sir, in blood; and though thou mayst kill me, thou hast no right
to shame me."

Lord Mackworth bowed with a mocking courtesy. "Marry!" said he.
"Methought it was one of mine own saucy popinjay squires that I caught
sneaking here and talking to those two foolish young lasses, and lo! it
is a young Lord--or mayhap thou art a young Prince--and commandeth
me that I shall not do this and I shall not do that. I crave your
Lordship's honorable pardon, if I have said aught that may have galled
you."

The fear Myles had felt was now beginning to dissolve in rising wrath.
"Nay," said he, stoutly, "I be no Lord and I be no Prince, but I be as
good as thou. For am I not the son of thy onetime very true comrade and
thy kinsman--to wit, the Lord Falworth, whom, as thou knowest, is poor
and broken, and blind, and helpless, and outlawed, and banned? Yet,"
cried he, grinding his teeth, as the thought of it all rushed in upon
him, "I would rather be in his place than in yours; for though he be
ruined, you--"

He had just sense enough to stop there.

The Earl, gripping his staff behind his back, and with his head a little
bent, was looking keenly at the lad from under his shaggy gray brows.
"Well," said he, as Myles stopped, "thou hast gone too far now to draw
back. Say thy say to the end. Why wouldst thou rather be in thy father's
stead than in mine?"

Myles did not answer.

"Thou shalt finish thy speech, or else show thyself a coward. Though thy
father is ruined, thou didst say I am--what?"

Myles keyed himself up to the effort, and then blurted out, "Thou art
attainted with shame."

A long breathless silence followed.

"Myles Falworth," said the Earl at last (and even in the whirling of his
wits Myles wondered that he had the name so pat)--"Myles Falworth, of
all the bold, mad, hare-brained fools, thou art the most foolish. How
dost thou dare say such words to me? Dost thou not know that thou makest
thy coming punishment ten times more bitter by such a speech?"

"Aye!" cried Myles, desperately; "but what else could I do? An I did not
say the words, thou callest me coward, and coward I am not."

"By 'r Lady!" said the Earl, "I do believe thee. Thou art a bold,
impudent varlet as ever lived--to beard me so, forsooth! Hark'ee; thou
sayst I think naught of mine old comrade. I will show thee that thou
dost belie me. I will suffer what thou hast said to me for his sake, and
for his sake will forgive thee thy coming hither--which I would not do
in another case to any other man. Now get thee gone straightway, and
come hither no more. Yonder is the postern-gate; mayhap thou knowest the
way. But stay! How camest thou hither?"

Myles told him of the spikes he had driven in the wall, and the Earl
listened, stroking his beard. When the lad had ended, he fixed a sharp
look upon him. "But thou drove not those spikes alone," said he; "who
helped thee do it?"

"That I may not tell," said Myles, firmly.

"So be it," said the Earl. "I will not ask thee to tell his name. Now
get thee gone! And as for those spikes, thou mayst e'en knock them out
of the wall, sin thou drave them in. Play no more pranks an thou wouldst
keep thy skin whole. And now go, I say!"

Myles needed no further bidding, but turned and left the Earl without
another word. As he went out the postern-gate he looked over his
shoulder, and saw the tall figure, in its long fur-trimmed gown, still
standing in the middle of the path, looking after him from under the
shaggy eyebrows.

As he ran across the quadrangle, his heart still fluttering in his
breast, he muttered to himself, "The old grizzle-beard; an I had not
faced him a bold front, mayhap he would have put such shame upon me
as he said. I wonder why he stood so staring after me as I left the
garden."

Then for the time the matter slipped from his mind, saving only that
part that smacked of adventure.



CHAPTER 20

So for a little while Myles was disposed to congratulate himself upon
having come off so well from his adventure with the Earl. But after a
day or two had passed, and he had time for second thought, he began to
misdoubt whether, after all, he might not have carried it with a better
air if he had shown more chivalrous boldness in the presence of his true
lady; whether it would not have redounded more to his credit if he had
in some way asserted his rights as the young dame's knight-errant and
defender. Was it not ignominious to resign his rights and privileges so
easily and tamely at a signal from the Earl?

"For, in sooth," said he to Gascoyne, as the two talked the matter over,
"she hath, in a certain way, accepted me for her knight, and yet I stood
me there without saying so much as one single word in her behalf."

"Nay," said Gascoyne, "I would not trouble me on that score. Methinks
that thou didst come off wondrous well out of the business. I would not
have thought it possible that my Lord could ha' been so patient with
thee as he showed himself. Methinks, forsooth, he must hold thee privily
in right high esteem."

"Truly," said Myles, after a little pause of meditative silence, "I know
not of any esteem, yet I do think he was passing patient with me in this
matter. But ne'theless, Francis, that changeth not my stand in the case.
Yea, I did shamefully, so to resign my lady without speaking one word;
nor will I so resign her even yet. I have bethought me much of this
matter of late, Francis, and now I come to thee to help me from my evil
case. I would have thee act the part of a true friend to me--like that
one I have told thee of in the story of the Emperor Justinian. I would
have thee, when next thou servest in the house, to so contrive that my
Lady Alice shall get a letter which I shall presently write, and wherein
I may set all that is crooked straight again."

"Heaven forbid," said Gascoyne, hastily, "that I should be such a fool
as to burn my fingers in drawing thy nuts from the fire! Deliver thy
letter thyself, good fellow!"

So spoke Gascoyne, yet after all he ended, as he usually did, by
yielding to Myles's superior will and persistence. So the letter was
written and one day the good-natured Gascoyne carried it with him to the
house, and the opportunity offering, gave it to one of the young ladies
attendant upon the Countess's family--a lass with whom he had friendly
intimacy--to be delivered to Lady Alice.

But if Myles congratulated himself upon the success of this new
adventure, it was not for long. That night, as the crowd of pages and
squires were making themselves ready for bed, the call came through the
uproar for "Myles Falworth! Myles Falworth!"

"Here I be," cried Myles, standing up on his cot. "Who calleth me?"

It was the groom of the Earl's bedchamber, and seeing Myles standing
thus raised above the others, he came walking down the length of the
room towards him, the wonted hubbub gradually silencing as he advanced
and the youngsters turning, staring, and wondering.

"My Lord would speak with thee, Myles Falworth," said the groom, when he
had come close enough to where Myles stood. "Busk thee and make ready;
he is at livery even now."

The groom's words fell upon Myles like a blow. He stood for a while
staring wide-eyed. "My Lord speak with me, sayst thou!" he ejaculated at
last.

"Aye," said the other, impatiently; "get thee ready quickly. I must
return anon."

Myles's head was in a whirl as he hastily changed his clothes for a
better suit, Gascoyne helping him. What could the Earl want with him at
this hour? He knew in his heart what it was; the interview could concern
nothing but the letter that he had sent to Lady Alice that day. As he
followed the groom through the now dark and silent courts, and across
the corner of the great quadrangle, and so to the Earl's house, he tried
to brace his failing courage to meet the coming interview. Nevertheless,
his heart beat tumultuously as he followed the other down the long
corridor, lit only by a flaring link set in a wrought-iron bracket. Then
his conductor lifted the arras at the door of the bedchamber, whence
came the murmuring sound of many voices, and holding it aside, beckoned
him to enter, and Myles passed within. At the first, he was conscious
of nothing but a crowd of people, and of the brightness of many lighted
candles; then he saw that he stood in a great airy room spread with a
woven mat of rushes. On three sides the walls were hung with tapestry
representing hunting and battle scenes, at the farther end, where the
bed stood, the stone wall of the fourth side was covered with cloth of
blue, embroidered with silver goshawks. Even now, in the ripe springtime
of May, the room was still chilly, and a great fire roared and crackled
in the huge gaping mouth of the stone fireplace. Not far from the blaze
were clustered the greater part of those present, buzzing in talk, now
and then swelled by murmuring laughter. Some of those who knew Myles
nodded to him, and two or three spoke to him as he stood waiting, whilst
the groom went forward to speak to the Earl; though what they said and
what he answered, Myles, in his bewilderment and trepidation, hardly
knew.

As was said before, the livery was the last meal of the day, and was
taken in bed. It was a simple repast--a manchette, or small loaf of
bread of pure white flour, a loaf of household bread, sometimes a lump
of cheese, and either a great flagon of ale or of sweet wine, warm
and spiced. The Earl was sitting upright in bed, dressed in a furred
dressing-gown, and propped up by two cylindrical bolsters of crimson
satin. Upon the coverlet, and spread over his knees, was a large wide
napkin of linen fringed with silver thread, and on it rested a silver
tray containing the bread and some cheese. Two pages and three gentlemen
were waiting upon him, and Mad Noll, the jester, stood at the head of
the bed, now and then jingling his bawble and passing some quaint jest
upon the chance of making his master smile. Upon a table near by were
some dozen or so waxen tapers struck upon as many spiked candlesticks
of silver-gilt, and illuminating that end of the room with their bright
twinkling flames. One of the gentlemen was in the act of serving the
Earl with a goblet of wine, poured from a silver ewer by one of the
squires, as the groom of the chamber came forward and spoke. The Earl,
taking the goblet, turned his head, and as Myles looked, their eyes met.
Then the Earl turned away again and raised the cup to his lips, while
Myles felt his heart beat more rapidly than ever.

But at last the meal was ended, and the Earl washed his hands and his
mouth and his beard from a silver basin of scented water held by another
one of the squires. Then, leaning back against the pillows, he beckoned
to Myles.

In answer Myles walked forward the length of the room, conscious that
all eyes were fixed upon him. The Earl said something, and those who
stood near drew back as he came forward. Then Myles found himself
standing beside the bed, looking down upon the quilted counterpane,
feeling that the other was gazing fixedly at him.

"I sent for thee," said the Earl at last, still looking steadily at
him, "because this afternoon came a letter to my hand which thou hadst
written to my niece, the Lady Alice. I have it here," said he, thrusting
his hand under the bolster, "and have just now finished reading it."
Then, after a moment's pause, whilst he opened the parchment and scanned
it again, "I find no matter of harm in it, but hereafter write no more
such." He spoke entirely without anger, and Myles looked up in wonder.
"Here, take it," said the Earl, folding the letter and tossing it to
Myles, who instinctively caught it, "and henceforth trouble thou my
niece no more either by letter or any other way. I thought haply thou
wouldst be at some such saucy trick, and I made Alice promise to let me
know when it happed. Now, I say, let this be an end of the matter. Dost
thou not know thou mayst injure her by such witless folly as that of
meeting her privily, and privily writing to her?"

"I meant no harm," said Myles.

"I believe thee," said the Earl. "That will do now; thou mayst go."

Myles hesitated.

"What wouldst thou say?" said Lord Mackworth.

"Only this," said Myles, "an I have thy leave so to do, that the Lady
Alice hath chosen me to be her knight, and so, whether I may see her or
speak with her or no, the laws of chivalry give me, who am gentle born,
the right to serve her as a true knight may."

"As a true fool may," said the Earl, dryly. "Why, how now, thou art not
a knight yet, nor anything but a raw lump of a boy. What rights do the
laws of chivalry give thee, sirrah? Thou art a fool!"

Had the Earl been ever so angry, his words would have been less bitter
to Myles than his cool, unmoved patience; it mortified his pride and
galled it to the quick.

"I know that thou dost hold me in contempt," he mumbled.

"Out upon thee!" said the Earl, testily. "Thou dost tease me beyond
patience. I hold thee in contempt, forsooth! Why, look thee, hadst thou
been other than thou art, I would have had thee whipped out of my house
long since. Thinkest thou I would have borne so patiently with another
one of ye squires had such an one held secret meeting with my daughter
and niece, and tampered, as thou hast done, with my household, sending
through one of my people that letter? Go to; thou art a fool, Myles
Falworth!"

Myles stood staring at the Earl without making an effort to speak. The
words that he had heard suddenly flashed, as it were, a new light into
his mind. In that flash he fully recognized, and for the first time,
the strange and wonderful forbearance the great Earl had shown to him,
a poor obscure boy. What did it mean? Was Lord Mackworth his secret
friend, after all, as Gascoyne had more than once asserted? So Myles
stood silent, thinking many things.

Meantime the other lay back upon the cylindrical bolsters, looking
thoughtfully at him. "How old art thou?" said he at last.

"Seventeen last April," answered Myles.

"Then thou art old enough to have some of the thoughts of a man, and to
lay aside those of a boy. Haply thou hast had foolish things in thy
head this short time past; it is time that thou put them away. Harkee,
sirrah! the Lady Alice is a great heiress in her own right, and mayst
command the best alliance in England--an Earl--a Duke. She groweth apace
to a woman, and then her kind lieth in Courts and great houses. As for
thee, thou art but a poor lad, penniless and without friends to aid thee
to open advancement. Thy father is attainted, and one whisper of where
he lieth hid would bring him thence to the Tower, and haply to the
block. Besides that, he hath an enemy, as Sir James Lee hath already
told thee--an enemy perhaps more great and powerful than myself. That
enemy watcheth for thy father and for thee; shouldst thou dare raise thy
head or thy fortune ever so little, he would haply crop them both, and
that parlously quick. Myles Falworth, how dost thou dare to lift thine
eyes to the Lady Alice de Mowbray?"

Poor Myles stood silent and motionless. "Sir," said he at last, in a
dry choking voice, "thou art right, and I have been a fool. Sir, I will
never raise mine eyes to look upon the Lady Alice more."

"I say not that either, boy," said the Earl; "but ere thou dost so dare,
thou must first place thyself and thy family whence ye fell. Till then,
as thou art an honest man, trouble her not. Now get thee gone."

As Myles crossed the dark and silent courtyards, and looked up at the
clear, still twinkle of the stars, he felt a kind of dull wonder that
they and the night and the world should seem so much the same, and he be
so different.

The first stroke had been given that was to break in pieces his boyhood
life--the second was soon to follow.



CHAPTER 21

There are now and then times in the life of every one when new and
strange things occur with such rapidity that one has hardly time to
catch one's breath between the happenings. It is as though the old were
crumbling away--breaking in pieces--to give place to the new that is
soon to take its place.

So it was with Myles Falworth about this time. The very next day after
this interview in the bed-chamber, word came to him that Sir James Lee
wished to speak with him in the office. He found the lean, grizzled old
knight alone, sitting at the heavy oaken table with a tankard of spiced
ale at his elbow, and a dish of wafers and some fragments of cheese on a
pewter platter before him. He pointed to his clerk's seat--a joint stool
somewhat like a camp-chair, but made of heavy oaken braces and with a
seat of hog-skin--and bade Myles be seated.

It was the first time that Myles had ever heard of such courtesy being
extended to one of the company of squires, and, much wondering, he
obeyed the invitation, or rather command, and took the seat.

The old knight sat regarding him for a while in silence, his one eye,
as bright and as steady as that of a hawk, looking keenly from under the
penthouse of its bushy brows, the while he slowly twirled and twisted
his bristling wiry mustaches, as was his wont when in meditation. At
last he broke the silence. "How old art thou?" said he, abruptly.

"I be turned seventeen last April," Myles answered, as he had the
evening before to Lord Mackworth.

"Humph!" said Sir James; "thou be'st big of bone and frame for thine
age. I would that thy heart were more that of a man likewise, and less
that of a giddy, hare-brained boy, thinking continually of naught but
mischief."

Again he fell silent, and Myles sat quite still, wondering if it was
on account of any special one of his latest escapades that he had been
summoned to the office--the breaking of the window in the Long Hall by
the stone he had flung at the rook, or the climbing of the South Tower
for the jackdaw's nest.

"Thou hast a friend," said Sir James, suddenly breaking into his
speculations, "of such a kind that few in this world possess. Almost
ever since thou hast been here he hath been watching over thee. Canst
thou guess of whom I speak?"

"Haply it is Lord George Beaumont," said Myles; "he hath always been
passing kind to me.

"Nay," said Sir James, "it is not of him that I speak, though methinks
he liketh thee well enow. Canst thou keep a secret, boy?" he asked,
suddenly.

"Yea," answered Myles.

"And wilt thou do so in this case if I tell thee who it is that is thy
best friend here?"

"Yea."

"Then it is my Lord who is that friend--the Earl himself; but see that
thou breathe not a word of it."

Myles sat staring at the old knight in utter and profound amazement, and
presently Sir James continued: "Yea, almost ever since thou hast come
here my Lord hath kept oversight upon all thy doings, upon all thy mad
pranks and thy quarrels and thy fights, thy goings out and comings in.
What thinkest thou of that, Myles Falworth?"

Again the old knight stopped and regarded the lad, who sat silent,
finding no words to answer. He seemed to find a grim pleasure in the
youngster's bewilderment and wonder. Then a sudden thought came to
Myles.

"Sir," said he, "did my Lord know that I went to the privy garden as I
did?"

"Nay," said Sir James; "of that he knew naught at first until thy father
bade thy mother write and tell him."

"My father!" ejaculated Myles.

"Aye," said Sir James, twisting his mustaches more vigorously than ever.
"So soon as thy father heard of that prank, he wrote straightway to
my Lord that he should put a stop to what might in time have bred
mischief."

"Sir," said Myles, in an almost breathless voice, "I know not how to
believe all these things, or whether I be awake or a-dreaming."

"Thou be'st surely enough awake," answered the old man; "but there are
other matters yet to be told. My Lord thinketh, as others of us do--Lord
George and myself--that it is now time for thee to put away thy boyish
follies, and learn those things appertaining to manhood. Thou hast been
here a year now, and hast had freedom to do as thou might list; but,
boy,"--and the old warrior spoke seriously, almost solemnly--"upon thee
doth rest matters of such great import that did I tell them to thee thou
couldst not grasp them. My Lord deems that thou hast, mayhap, promise
beyond the common of men; ne'theless it remaineth yet to be seen an he
be right; it is yet to test whether that promise may be fulfilled. Next
Monday I and Sir Everard Willoughby take thee in hand to begin training
thee in the knowledge and the use of the jousting lance, of arms, and of
horsemanship. Thou art to go to Ralph Smith, and have him fit a suit of
plain armor to thee which he hath been charged to make for thee against
this time. So get thee gone, think well over all these matters, and
prepare thyself by next Monday. But stay, sirrah," he added, as Myles,
dazed and bewildered, turned to obey; "breathe to no living soul what
I ha' told thee--that my Lord is thy friend--neither speak of anything
concerning him. Such is his own heavy command laid upon thee."

Then Myles turned again without a word to leave the room. But as he
reached the door Sir James stopped him a second time.

"Stay!" he called. "I had nigh missed telling thee somewhat else. My
Lord hath made thee a present this morning that thou wottest not of. It
is"--then he stopped for a few moments, perhaps to enjoy the full flavor
of what he had to say--"it is a great Flemish horse of true breed and
right mettle; a horse such as a knight of the noblest strain might be
proud to call his own. Myles Falworth, thou wert born upon a lucky day!"

"Sir," cried Myles, and then stopped short. Then, "Sir," he cried again,
"didst thou say it--the horse--was to be mine?"

"Aye, it is to be thine."

"My very own?"

"Thy very own."

How Myles Falworth left that place he never knew. He was like one in
some strange, some wonderful dream. He walked upon air, and his heart
was so full of joy and wonder and amazement that it thrilled almost to
agony. Of course his first thought was of Gascoyne. How he ever found
him he never could tell, but find him he did.

"Come, Francis!" he cried, "I have that to tell thee so marvellous that
had it come upon me from paradise it could not be more strange."

Then he dragged him away to their Eyry--it had been many a long day
since they had been there--and to all his friend's speeches, to all his
wondering questions, he answered never a word until they had climbed the
stairs, and so come to their old haunt. Then he spoke.

"Sit thee down, Francis," said he, "till I tell thee that which passeth
wonder." As Gascoyne obeyed, he himself stood looking about him. "This
is the last time I shall ever come hither," said he. And thereupon he
poured out his heart to his listening friend in the murmuring solitude
of the airy height. He did not speak of the Earl, but of the wonderful
new life that had thus suddenly opened before him, with its golden
future of limitless hopes, of dazzling possibilities, of heroic
ambitions. He told everything, walking up and down the while--for he
could not remain quiet--his cheeks glowing and his eyes sparkling.

Gascoyne sat quite still, staring straight before him. He knew that his
friend was ruffling eagle pinions for a flight in which he could never
hope to follow, and somehow his heart ached, for he knew that this must
be the beginning of the end of the dear, delightful friendship of the
year past.



CHAPTER 22

And so ended Myles Falworth's boyhood. Three years followed, during
which he passed through that state which immediately follows boyhood in
all men's lives--a time when they are neither lads nor grown men, but
youths passing from the one to the other period through what is often an
uncouth and uncomfortable age.

He had fancied, when he talked with Gascoyne in the Eyry that time,
that he was to become a man all at once; he felt just then that he had
forever done with boyish things. But that is not the way it happens in
men's lives. Changes do not come so suddenly and swiftly as that, but by
little and little. For three or four days, maybe, he went his new way of
life big with the great change that had come upon him, and then, now
in this and now in that, he drifted back very much into his old ways
of boyish doings. As was said, one's young days do not end all at once,
even when they be so suddenly and sharply shaken, and Myles was not
different from others. He had been stirred to the core by that first
wonderful sight of the great and glorious life of manhood opening before
him, but he had yet many a sport to enjoy, many a game to play, many a
boisterous romp to riot in the dormitory, many an expedition to make
to copse and spinney and river on days when he was off duty, and when
permission had been granted.

Nevertheless, there was a great and vital change in his life; a change
which he hardly felt or realized. Even in resuming his old life there
was no longer the same vitality, the same zest, the same enjoyment in
all these things. It seemed as though they were no longer a part of
himself. The savor had gone from them, and by-and-by it was pleasanter
to sit looking on at the sports and the games of the younger lads than
to take active part in them.

These three years of his life that had thus passed had been very full;
full mostly of work, grinding and monotonous; of training dull, dry,
laborious. For Sir James Lee was a taskmaster as hard as iron and
seemingly as cold as a stone. For two, perhaps for three, weeks Myles
entered into his new exercises with all the enthusiasm that novelty
brings; but these exercises hardly varied a tittle from day to day, and
soon became a duty, and finally a hard and grinding task. He used, in
the earlier days of his castle life, to hate the dull monotony of the
tri-weekly hacking at the pels with a heavy broadsword as he hated
nothing else; but now, though he still had that exercise to perform, it
was almost a relief from the heavy dulness of riding, riding, riding in
the tilt-yard with shield and lance--couch--recover--en passant.

But though he had nowadays but little time for boyish plays and
escapades, his life was not altogether without relaxation. Now and
then he was permitted to drive in mock battle with other of the younger
knights and bachelors in the paddock near the outer walls. It was a
still more welcome change in the routine of his life when, occasionally,
he would break a light lance in the tilting-court with Sir Everard
Willoughby; Lord George, perhaps, and maybe one or two others of the
Hall folk, looking on.

Then one gilded day, when Lord Dudleigh was visiting at Devlen, Myles
ran a course with a heavier lance in the presence of the Earl, who came
down to the tilt-yard with his guest to see the young novitiate ride
against Sir Everard. He did his best, and did it well. Lord Dudleigh
praised his poise and carriage, and Lord George, who was present, gave
him an approving smile and nod. But the Earl of Mackworth only sat
stroking his beard impassively, as was his custom. Myles would have
given much to know his thoughts.

In all these years Sir James Lee almost never gave any expression either
of approbation or disapproval--excepting when Myles exhibited some
carelessness or oversight. Then his words were sharp and harsh enough.
More than once Myles's heart failed him, and bitter discouragement
took possession of him; then nothing but his bull-dog tenacity and
stubbornness brought him out from the despondency of the dark hours.

"Sir," he burst out one day, when his heart was heavy with some failure,
"tell me, I beseech thee, do I get me any of skill at all? Is it in me
ever to make a worthy knight, fit to hold lance and sword with other
men, or am I only soothly a dull heavy block, worth naught of any good?"

"Thou art a fool, sirrah!" answered Sir James, in his grimmest tones.
"Thinkest thou to learn all of knightly prowess in a year and a half?
Wait until thou art ripe, and then I will tell thee if thou art fit to
couch a lance or ride a course with a right knight."

"Thou art an old bear!" muttered Myles to himself, as the old one-eyed
knight turned on his heel and strode away. "Beshrew me! an I show thee
not that I am as worthy to couch a lance as thou one of these fine
days!"

However, during the last of the three years the grinding routine of his
training had not been quite so severe as at first. His exercises took
him more often out into the fields, and it was during this time of his
knightly education that he sometimes rode against some of the castle
knights in friendly battle with sword or lance or wooden mace. In these
encounters he always held his own; and held it more than well, though,
in his boyish simplicity, he was altogether unconscious of his own
skill, address, and strength. Perhaps it was his very honest modesty
that made him so popular and so heartily liked by all.

He had by this time risen to the place of head squire or chief bachelor,
holding the same position that Walter Blunt had occupied when he himself
had first come, a raw country boy, to Devlen. The lesser squires
and pages fairly worshipped him as a hero, albeit imposing upon his
good-nature. All took a pride in his practice in knightly exercises, and
fabulous tales were current among the young fry concerning his strength
and skill.

Yet, although Myles was now at the head of his class, he did not,
as other chief bachelors had done, take a leading position among the
squires in the Earl's household service. Lord Mackworth, for his own
good reasons, relegated him to the position of Lord George's especial
attendant. Nevertheless, the Earl always distinguished him from the
other esquires, giving him a cool nod whenever they met; and Myles, upon
his part--now that he had learned better to appreciate how much his Lord
had done for him--would have shed the last drop of blood in his veins
for the head of the house of Beaumont.

As for the two young ladies, he often saw them, and sometimes, even
in the presence of the Earl, exchanged a few words with them, and Lord
Mackworth neither forbade it nor seemed to notice it.

Towards the Lady Anne he felt the steady friendly regard of a lad for a
girl older than himself; towards the Lady Alice, now budding into ripe
young womanhood, there lay deep in his heart the resolve to be some day
her true knight in earnest as he had been her knight in pretence in that
time of boyhood when he had so perilously climbed into the privy garden.

In body and form he was now a man, and in thought and heart was quickly
ripening to manhood, for, as was said before, men matured quickly in
those days. He was a right comely youth, for the promise of his boyish
body had been fulfilled in a tall, powerful, well-knit frame. His face
was still round and boyish, but on cheek and chin and lip was the curl
of adolescent beard--soft, yellow, and silky. His eyes were as blue
as steel, and quick and sharp in glance as those of a hawk; and as he
walked, his arms swung from his broad, square shoulders, and his body
swayed with pent-up strength ready for action at any moment.

If little Lady Alice, hearing much talk of his doings and of his promise
in these latter times, thought of him now and then it is a matter not
altogether to be wondered at.

Such were the changes that three years had wrought. And from now the
story of his manhood really begins.


Perhaps in all the history of Devlen Castle, even at this, the high tide
of pride and greatness of the house of Beaumont, the most notable time
was in the early autumn of the year 1411, when for five days King Henry
IV was entertained by the Earl of Mackworth. The King was at that time
making a progress through certain of the midland counties, and with him
travelled the Comte de Vermoise. The Count was the secret emissary of
the Dauphin's faction in France, at that time in the very bitterest
intensity of the struggle with the Duke of Burgundy, and had come to
England seeking aid for his master in his quarrel.

It was not the first time that royalty had visited Devlen. Once, in Earl
Robert's day, King Edward II had spent a week at the castle during the
period of the Scottish wars. But at that time it was little else than a
military post, and was used by the King as such. Now the Beaumonts were
in the very flower of their prosperity, and preparations were made
for the coming visit of royalty upon a scale of such magnificence and
splendor as Earl Robert, or perhaps even King Edward himself, had never
dreamed.

For weeks the whole castle had been alive with folk hurrying hither and
thither; and with the daily and almost hourly coming of pack-horses,
laden with bales and boxes, from London. From morning to night one heard
the ceaseless chip-chipping of the masons' hammers, and saw carriers
of stones and mortar ascending and descending the ladders of the
scaffolding that covered the face of the great North Hall. Within, that
part of the building was alive with the scraping of the carpenters'
saws, the clattering of lumber, and the rapping and banging of hammers.

The North Hall had been assigned as the lodging place for the King and
his court, and St. George's Hall (as the older building adjoining it was
called) had been set apart as the lodging of the Comte de Vermoise and
the knights and gentlemen attendant upon him.

The great North Hall had been very much altered and changed for the
accommodation of the King and his people; a beautiful gallery of carved
wood-work had been built within and across the south end of the room for
the use of the ladies who were to look down upon the ceremonies below.
Two additional windows had been cut through the wall and glazed, and
passage-ways had been opened connecting with the royal apartments
beyond. In the bedchamber a bed of carved wood and silver had been
built into the wall, and had been draped with hangings of pale blue and
silver, and a magnificent screen of wrought-iron and carved wood had
been erected around the couch; rich and beautiful tapestries brought
from Italy and Flanders were hung upon the walls; cushions of velvets
and silks stuffed with down covered benches and chairs. The floor of
the hall was spread with mats of rushes stained in various colors, woven
into curious patterns, and in the smaller rooms precious carpets of
arras were laid on the cold stones.

All of the cadets of the House had been assembled; all of the
gentlemen in waiting, retainers and clients. The castle seemed full to
overflowing; even the dormitory of the squires was used as a lodging
place for many of the lesser gentry.

So at last, in the midst of all this bustle of preparation, came the day
of days when the King was to arrive. The day before a courier had come
bringing the news that he was lodging at Donaster Abbey overnight, and
would make progress the next day to Devlen.

That morning, as Myles was marshalling the pages and squires, and, with
the list of names in his hand, was striving to evolve some order out
of the confusion, assigning the various individuals their special
duties--these to attend in the household, those to ride in the
escort--one of the gentlemen of Lord George's household came with an
order for him to come immediately to the young nobleman's apartments.
Myles hastily turned over his duties to Gascoyne and Wilkes, and then
hurried after the messenger. He found Lord George in the antechamber,
three gentlemen squires arming him in a magnificent suit of ribbed
Milan.

He greeted Myles with a nod and a smile as the lad entered. "Sirrah,"
said he, "I have had a talk with Mackworth this morn concerning thee,
and have a mind to do thee an honor in my poor way. How wouldst thou
like to ride to-day as my special squire of escort?"

Myles flushed to the roots of his hair. "Oh, sir!" he cried, eagerly,
"an I be not too ungainly for thy purpose, no honor in all the world
could be such joy to me as that!"

Lord George laughed. "A little matter pleases thee hugely," said he;
"but as to being ungainly, who so sayeth that of thee belieth thee,
Myles; thou art not ungainly, sirrah. But that is not to the point. I
have chosen thee for my equerry to-day; so make thou haste and don thine
armor, and then come hither again, and Hollingwood will fit thee with a
wreathed bascinet I have within, and a juppon embroidered with my arms
and colors."

When Myles had made his bow and left his patron, he flew across the
quadrangle, and burst into the armory upon Gascoyne, whom he found still
lingering there, chatting with one or two of the older bachelors.

"What thinkest thou, Francis?" he cried, wild with excitement. "An honor
hath been done me this day I could never have hoped to enjoy. Out of
all this household, Lord George hath chose me his equerry for the day to
ride to meet the King. Come, hasten to help me to arm! Art thou not glad
of this thing for my sake, Francis?"

"Aye, glad am I indeed!" cried Gascoyne, that generous friend; "rather
almost would I have this befall thee than myself!" And indeed he was
hardly less jubilant than Myles over the honor.

Five minutes later he was busy arming him in the little room at the end
of the dormitory which had been lately set apart for the use of the head
bachelor. "And to think," he said, looking up as he kneeled, strapping
the thigh-plates to his friend's legs, "that he should have chosen thee
before all others of the fine knights and lords and gentlemen of quality
that are here!"

"Yea," said Myles, "it passeth wonder. I know not why he should so
single me out for such an honor. It is strangely marvellous."

"Nay," said Gascoyne, "there is no marvel in it, and I know right well
why he chooseth thee. It is because he sees, as we all see, that thou
art the stoutest and the best-skilled in arms, and most easy of carriage
of any man in all this place."

Myles laughed. "An thou make sport of me," said he, "I'll rap thy head
with this dagger hilt. Thou art a silly fellow, Francis, to talk so. But
tell me, hast thou heard who rides with my Lord?"

"Yea, I heard Wilkes say anon that it was Sir James Lee."

"I am right glad of that," said Myles; "for then he will show me what to
do and how to bear myself. It frights me to think what would hap should
I make some mistake in my awkwardness. Methinks Lord George would never
have me with him more should I do amiss this day."

"Never fear," said Gascoyne; "thou wilt not do amiss."

And now, at last, the Earl, Lord George, and all their escort were
ready; then the orders were given to horse, the bugle sounded, and away
they all rode, with clashing of iron hoofs and ringing and jingling
of armor, out into the dewy freshness of the early morning, the slant
yellow sun of autumn blazing and flaming upon polished helmets and
shields, and twinkling like sparks of fire upon spear points. Myles's
heart thrilled within him for pure joy, and he swelled out his sturdy
young breast with great draughts of the sweet fresh air that came
singing across the sunny hill-tops. Sir James Lee, who acted as the
Earl's equerry for the day, rode at a little distance, and there was an
almost pathetic contrast between the grim, steadfast impassiveness of
the tough old warrior and Myles's passionate exuberance of youth.

At the head of the party rode the Earl and his brother side by side,
each clad cap-a-pie in a suit of Milan armor, the cuirass of each
covered with a velvet juppon embroidered in silver with the arms and
quarterings of the Beaumonts. The Earl wore around his neck an "S S"
collar, with a jewelled St. George hanging from it, and upon his head a
vizored bascinet, ornamented with a wreath covered with black and yellow
velvet and glistening with jewels.

Lord George, as was said before, was clad in a beautiful suit of ribbed
Milan armor. It was rimmed with a thin thread of gold, and, like his
brother, he wore a bascinet wreathed with black and yellow velvet.

Behind the two brothers and their equerries rode the rest in their
proper order--knights, gentlemen, esquires, men-at-arms--to the number,
perhaps, of two hundred and fifty; spears and lances aslant, and
banners, permons, and pencels of black and yellow fluttering in the warm
September air.

From the castle to the town they rode, and then across the bridge, and
thence clattering up through the stony streets, where the folk looked
down upon them from the windows above, or crowded the fronts of the
shops of the tradesmen. Lusty cheers were shouted for the Earl, but the
great Lord rode staring ever straight before him, as unmoved as a stone.
Then out of the town they clattered, and away in a sweeping cloud of
dust across the country-side.

It was not until they had reached the windy top of Willoughby Croft, ten
miles away, that they met the King and his company. As the two parties
approached to within forty or fifty yards of one another they stopped.

As they came to a halt, Myles observed that a gentleman dressed in
a plain blue-gray riding-habit, and sitting upon a beautiful white
gelding, stood a little in advance of the rest of the party, and he knew
that that must be the King. Then Sir James nodded to Myles, and leaping
from his horse, flung the reins to one of the attendants. Myles did
the like; and then, still following Sir James's lead as he served
Lord Mackworth, went forward and held Lord George's stirrup while he
dismounted. The two noblemen quickly removed each his bascinet, and
Myles, holding the bridle-rein of Lord George's horse with his left
hand, took the helmet in his right, resting it upon his hip.

Then the two brothers walked forward bare-headed, the Earl, a little in
advance. Reaching the King he stopped, and then bent his knee--stiffly
in the armored plates--until it touched the ground. Thereupon the King
reached him his hand, and he, rising again, took it, and set it to his
lips.

Then Lord George, advancing, kneeled as his brother had kneeled, and to
him also the King gave his hand.

Myles could hear nothing, but he could see that a few words of greeting
passed between the three, and then the King, turning, beckoned to a
knight who stood just behind him and a little in advance of the others
of the troop. In answer, the knight rode forward; the King spoke a few
words of introduction, and the stranger, ceremoniously drawing off his
right gauntlet, clasped the hand, first of the Earl, and then of Lord
George. Myles knew that he must be the great Comte de Vermoise, of whom
he had heard so much of late.

A few moments of conversation followed, and then the King bowed
slightly. The French nobleman instantly reined back his horse, an order
was given, and then the whole company moved forward, the two brothers
walking upon either side of the King, the Earl lightly touching the
bridle-rein with his bare hand.

Whilst all this was passing, the Earl of Mackworth's company had been
drawn up in a double line along the road-side, leaving the way open to
the other party. As the King reached the head of the troop, another halt
followed while he spoke a few courteous words of greeting to some of the
lesser nobles attendant upon the Earl whom he knew.

In that little time he was within a few paces of Myles, who stood
motionless as a statue, holding the bascinet and the bridle-rein of Lord
George's horse.

What Myles saw was a plain, rather stout man, with a face fat, smooth,
and waxy, with pale-blue eyes, and baggy in the lids; clean shaven,
except for a mustache and tuft covering lips and chin. Somehow he felt
a deep disappointment. He had expected to see something lion-like,
something regal, and, after all, the great King Henry was commonplace,
fat, unwholesome-looking. It came to him with a sort of a shock that,
after all, a King was in nowise different from other men.

Meanwhile the Earl and his brother replaced their bascinets, and
presently the whole party moved forward upon the way to Mackworth.



CHAPTER 23

That same afternoon the squires' quarters were thrown into such a
ferment of excitement as had, perhaps, never before stirred them. About
one o'clock in the afternoon the Earl himself and Lord George came
walking slowly across the Armory Court wrapped in deep conversation, and
entered Sir James Lee's office.

All the usual hubbub of noise that surrounded the neighborhood of the
dormitory and the armory was stilled at their coming, and when the two
noblemen had entered Sir James's office, the lads and young men gathered
in knots discussing with an almost awesome interest what that visit
might portend.

After some time Sir James Lee came to the door at the head of the long
flight of stone steps, and whistling, beckoned one of the smaller pages
to him. He gave a short order that sent the little fellow flying on some
mission. In the course of a few minutes he returned, hurrying across
the stony court with Myles Falworth, who presently entered Sir James's
office. It was then and at this sight that the intense half-suppressed
excitement reached its height of fever-heat. What did it all mean? The
air was filled with a thousand vague, wild rumors--but the very wildest
surmises fell short of the real truth.

Perhaps Myles was somewhat pale when he entered the office; certainly
his nerves were in a tremor, for his heart told him that something very
portentous was about to befall him. The Earl sat at the table, and in
the seat that Sir James Lee usually occupied; Lord George half sat, half
leaned in the window-place. Sir James stood with his back to the
empty fireplace, and his hands clasped behind him. All three were very
serious.

"Give thee good den, Myles Falworth," said the Earl, as Myles bowed
first to him and then to the others; "and I would have thee prepare
thyself for a great happening." Then, continuing directly to the point:
"Thou knowest, sirrah, why we have been training thee so closely these
three years gone; it is that thou shouldst be able to hold thine own
in the world. Nay, not only hold thine own, but to show thyself to be
a knight of prowess shouldst it come to a battle between thee and thy
father's enemy; for there lieth no half-way place for thee, and thou
must be either great or else nothing. Well, sir, the time hath now come
for thee to show thy mettle. I would rather have chosen that thou hadst
labored a twelvemonth longer; but now, as I said, hath come a chance to
prove thyself that may never come again. Sir James tells me that thou
art passably ripe in skill. Thou must now show whether that be so or no.
Hast thou ever heard of the Sieur de la Montaigne?"

"Yea, my Lord. I have heard of him often," answered Myles. "It was he
who won the prize at the great tourney at Rochelle last year."

"I see that thou hast his fame pat to thy tongue's end," said the Earl;
"he is the chevalier of whom I speak, and he is reckoned the best knight
of Dauphiny. That one of which thou spokest was the third great tourney
in which he was adjudged the victor. I am glad that thou holdest his
prowess highly. Knowest thou that he is in the train of the Comte de
Vermoise?"

"Nay," said Myles, flushing; "I did hear news he was in England, but
knew not that he was in this place."

"Yea," said Lord Mackworth; "he is here." He paused for a moment; then
said, suddenly. "Tell me, Myles Falworth, an thou wert a knight and of
rank fit to run a joust with the Sieur de la Montaigne, wouldst thou
dare encounter him in the lists?"

The Earl's question fell upon Myles so suddenly and unexpectedly that
for a moment or so he stood staring at the speaker with mouth agape.
Meanwhile the Earl sat looking calmly back at him, slowly stroking his
beard the while.

It was Sir James Lee's voice that broke the silence. "Thou heardst thy
Lord speak," said he, harshly. "Hast thou no tongue to answer, sirrah?"

"Be silent, Lee," said Lord Mackworth, quietly. "Let the lad have time
to think before he speaketh."

The sound of the words aroused Myles. He advanced to the table, and
rested his hand upon it. "My Lord--my Lord," said he, "I know not what
to say, I--I am amazed and afeard."

"How! how!" cried Sir James Lee, harshly. "Afeard, sayst thou? An thou
art afeard, thou knave, thou needst never look upon my face or speak to
me more! I have done with thee forever an thou art afeard even were the
champion a Sir Alisander."

"Peace, peace, Lee," said the Earl, holding up his hand. "Thou art too
hasty. The lad shall have his will in this matter, and thou and no one
shall constrain him. Methinks, also, thou dost not understand him. Speak
from thy heart, Myles; why art thou afraid?"

"Because," said Myles, "I am so young, sir; I am but a raw boy. How
should I dare be so hardy as to venture to set lance against such an one
as the Sieur de la Montaigne? What would I be but a laughing-stock for
all the world who would see me so foolish as to venture me against one
of such prowess and skill?"

"Nay, Myles," said Lord George, "thou thinkest not well enough of thine
own skill and prowess. Thinkest thou we would undertake to set thee
against him, an we did not think that thou couldst hold thine own fairly
well?"

"Hold mine own?" cried Myles, turning to Lord George. "Sir; thou dost
not mean--thou canst not mean, that I may hope or dream to hold mine own
against the Sieur de la Montaigne."

"Aye," said Lord George, "that was what I did mean."

"Come, Myles," said the Earl; "now tell me: wilt thou fight the Sieur de
la Montaigne?"

"Yea," said Myles, drawing himself to his full height and throwing out
his chest. "Yea," and his cheeks and forehead flushed red; "an thou bid
me do so, I will fight him."

"There spake my brave lad!" cried Lord George heartily.

"I give thee joy, Myles," said the Earl, reaching him his hand, which
Myles took and kissed. "And I give thee double joy. I have talked with
the King concerning thee this morning, and he hath consented to knight
thee--yea, to knight thee with all honors of the Bath--provided thou
wilt match thee against the Sieur de la Montaigne for the honor of
England and Mackworth. Just now the King lieth to sleep for a little
while after his dinner; have thyself in readiness when he cometh forth,
and I will have thee presented."

Then the Earl turned to Sir James Lee, and questioned him as to how the
bachelors were fitted with clothes. Myles listened, only half hearing
the words through the tumbling of his thoughts. He had dreamed in his
day-dreams that some time he might be knighted, but that time always
seemed very, very distant. To be knighted now, in his boyhood, by the
King, with the honors of the Bath, and under the patronage of the
Earl of Mackworth; to joust--to actually joust--with the Sieur de la
Montaigne, one of the most famous chevaliers of France! No wonder he
only half heard the words; half heard the Earl's questions concerning
his clothes and the discussion which followed; half heard Lord George
volunteer to array him in fitting garments from his own wardrobe.

"Thou mayst go now," said the Earl, at last turning to him. "But be thou
at George's apartments by two of the clock to be dressed fittingly for
the occasion."

Then Myles went out stupefied, dazed, bewildered. He looked around,
but he did not see Gascoyne. He said not a word to any of the others in
answer to the eager questions poured upon him by his fellow-squires,
but walked straight away. He hardly knew where he went, but by-and-by
he found himself in a grassy angle below the end of the south stable; a
spot overlooking the outer wall and the river beyond. He looked around;
no one was near, and he flung himself at length, burying his face in
his arms. How long he lay there he did not know, but suddenly some
one touched him upon the shoulder, and he sprang up quickly. It was
Gascoyne.

"What is to do, Myles?" said his friend, anxiously. "What is all this
talk I hear concerning thee up yonder at the armory?"

"Oh, Francis!" cried Myles, with a husky choking voice: "I am to be
knighted--by the King--by the King himself; and I--I am to fight the
Sieur de la Montaigne."

He reached out his hand, and Gascoyne took it. They stood for a while
quite silent, and when at last the stillness was broken, it was Gascoyne
who spoke, in a choking voice.

"Thou art going to be great, Myles," said he. "I always knew that it
must be so with thee, and now the time hath come. Yea, thou wilt be
great, and live at court amongst noble folk, and Kings haply. Presently
thou wilt not be with me any more, and wilt forget me by-and-by."

"Nay, Francis, never will I forget thee!" answered Myles, pressing
his friend's hand. "I will always love thee better than any one in the
world, saving only my father and my mother."

Gascoyne shook his head and looked away, swallowing at the dry lump in
his throat. Suddenly he turned to Myles. "Wilt thou grant me a boon?"

"Yea," answered Myles. "What is it?"

"That thou wilt choose me for thy squire."

"Nay," said Myles; "how canst thou think to serve me as squire? Thou
wilt be a knight thyself some day, Francis, and why dost thou wish now
to be my squire?"

"Because," said Gascoyne, with a short laugh, "I would rather be in thy
company as a squire than in mine own as a knight, even if I might be
banneret."

Myles flung his arm around his friend's neck, and kissed him upon the
cheek. "Thou shalt have thy will," said he; "but whether knight or
squire, thou art ever mine own true friend."

Then they went slowly back together, hand in hand, to the castle world
again.

At two o'clock Myles went to Lord George's apartments, and there his
friend and patron dressed him out in a costume better fitted for the
ceremony of presentation--a fur-trimmed jacket of green brocaded velvet
embroidered with golden thread, a black velvet hood-cap rolled like a
turban and with a jewel in the front, a pair of crimson hose, and a pair
of black velvet shoes trimmed and stitched with gold-thread. Myles had
never worn such splendid clothes in his life before, and he could not
but feel that they became him well.

"Sir," said he, as he looked down at himself, "sure it is not lawful for
me to wear such clothes as these."

In those days there was a law, known as a sumptuary law, which regulated
by statute the clothes that each class of people were privileged to
wear. It was, as Myles said, against the law for him to wear such
garments as those in which he was clad--either velvet, crimson stuff,
fur or silver or gold embroidery--nevertheless such a solemn ceremony as
presentation to the King excused the temporary overstepping of the law,
and so Lord George told him. As he laid his hand upon the lad's shoulder
and held him off at arm's-length, he added, "And I pledge thee my word,
Myles, that thou art as lusty and handsome a lad as ever mine eyes
beheld."

"Thou art very kind to me, sir," said Myles, in answer.

Lord George laughed; and then giving him a shake, let go his shoulder.

It was about three o'clock when little Edmond de Montefort, Lord
Mackworth's favorite page, came with word that the King was then walking
in the Earl's pleasance.

"Come, Myles," said Lord George, and then Myles arose from the
seat where he had been sitting, his heart palpitating and throbbing
tumultuously.

At the wicket-gate of the pleasance two gentlemen-at-arms stood guard in
half-armor; they saluted Lord George, and permitted him to pass with his
protege. As he laid his hand upon the latch of the wicket he paused for
a moment and turned.

"Myles," said he, in a low voice, "thou art a thoughtful and cautious
lad; for thy father's sake be thoughtful and cautious now. Do not
speak his name or betray that thou art his son." Then he opened the
wicket-gate and entered.

Any lad of Myles's age, even one far more used to the world than he,
would perhaps have felt all the oppression that he experienced under the
weight of such a presentation. He hardly knew what he was doing as
Lord George led him to where the King stood, a little apart from
the attendants, with the Earl and the Comte de Vermoise. Even in his
confusion he knew enough to kneel, and somehow his honest, modest
diffidence became the young fellow very well. He was not awkward, for
one so healthful in mind and body as he could not bear himself very ill,
and he felt the assurance that in Lord George he had a kind friend at
his side, and one well used to court ceremonies to lend him countenance.
Then there is something always pleasing in frank, modest manliness such
as was stamped on Myles's handsome, sturdy face. No doubt the King's
heart warmed towards the fledgling warrior kneeling in the pathway
before him. He smiled very kindly as he gave the lad his hand to kiss,
and that ceremony done, held fast to the hard, brown, sinewy fist of the
young man with his soft white hand, and raised him to his feet.

"By the mass!" said he, looking Myles over with smiling eyes, "thou art
a right champion in good sooth. Such as thou art haply was Sir Galahad
when he came to Arthur's court. And so they tell me, thou hast stomach
to brook the Sieur de la Montaigne, that tough old boar of Dauphiny.
Hast thou in good sooth the courage to face him? Knowest thou what a
great thing it is that thou hast set upon thyself--to do battle, even in
sport, with him?"

"Yea, your Majesty," answered Myles, "well I wot it is a task haply
beyond me. But gladly would I take upon me even a greater venture, and
one more dangerous, to do your Majesty's pleasure!"

The King looked pleased. "Now that was right well said, young man," said
he, "and I like it better that it came from such young and honest lips.
Dost thou speak French?"

"Yea, your Majesty," answered Myles. "In some small measure do I so."

"I am glad of that," said the King; "for so I may make thee acquainted
with Sieur de la Montaigne."

He turned as he ended speaking, and beckoned to a heavy, thick-set,
black-browed chevalier who stood with the other gentlemen attendants at
a little distance. He came instantly forward in answer to the summons,
and the King introduced the two to one another. As each took the other
formally by the hand, he measured his opponent hastily, body and limb,
and perhaps each thought that he had never seen a stronger, stouter,
better-knit man than the one upon whom he looked. But nevertheless
the contrast betwixt the two was very great--Myles, young, boyish,
fresh-faced; the other, bronzed, weather beaten, and seamed with a great
white scar that ran across his forehead and cheek; the one a novice, the
other a warrior seasoned in twoscore battles.

A few polite phrases passed between the two, the King listening smiling,
but with an absent and far-away look gradually stealing upon his face.
As they ended speaking, a little pause of silence followed, and then the
King suddenly aroused himself.

"So," said he, "I am glad that ye two are acquainted. And now we will
leave our youthful champion in thy charge, Beaumont--and in thine, Mon
Sieur, as well--and so soon as the proper ceremonies are ended, we will
dub him knight with our own hands. And now, Mackworth, and thou my Lord
Count, let us walk a little; I have bethought me further concerning
these threescore extra men for Dauphiny."

Then Myles withdrew, under the charge of Lord George and the Sieur de
la Montaigne and while the King and the two nobles walked slowly up and
down the gravel path between the tall rose-bushes, Myles stood
talking with the gentlemen attendants, finding himself, with a certain
triumphant exultation, the peer of any and the hero of the hour.

That night was the last that Myles and Gascoyne spent lodging in the
dormitory in their squirehood service. The next day they were assigned
apartments in Lord George's part of the house, and thither they
transported themselves and their belongings, amid the awestruck wonder
and admiration of their fellow-squires.



CHAPTER 24

In Myles Falworth's day one of the greatest ceremonies of courtly life
was that of the bestowal of knighthood by the King, with the honors of
the Bath. By far the greater number of knights were at that time created
by other knights, or by nobles, or by officers of the crown. To be
knighted by the King in person distinguished the recipient for life. It
was this signal honor that the Earl, for his own purposes, wished Myles
to enjoy, and for this end he had laid not a few plans.

The accolade was the term used for the creation of a knight upon the
field of battle. It was a reward of valor or of meritorious service, and
was generally bestowed in a more or less off-hand way; but the ceremony
of the Bath was an occasion of the greatest courtly moment, and it was
thus that Myles Falworth was to be knighted in addition to the honor of
a royal belting.

A quaint old book treating of knighthood and chivalry gives a full and
detailed account of all the circumstances of the ceremony of a creation
of a Knight of the Bath. It tells us that the candidate was first
placed under the care of two squires of honor, "grave and well seen in
courtship and nurture, and also in feats of chivalry," which same were
likewise to be governors in all things relating to the coming honors.

First of all, the barber shaved him, and cut his hair in a certain
peculiar fashion ordained for the occasion, the squires of honor
supervising the operation. This being concluded, the candidate was
solemnly conducted to the chamber where the bath of tepid water was
prepared, "hung within and without with linen, and likewise covered
with rich cloths and embroidered linen." While in the bath two "ancient,
grave, and reverend knights" attended the bachelor, giving him "meet
instructions in the order and feats of chivalry." The candidate was then
examined as to his knowledge and acquirements, and then, all questions
being answered to the satisfaction of his examiners, the elder of the
two dipped a handful of water out from the bath, and poured it upon his
head, at the same time signing his left shoulder with the sign of the
cross.

As soon as this ceremony was concluded, the two squires of honor helped
their charge from the bath, and conducted him to a plain bed without
hangings, where they let him rest until his body was warm and dry.
Then they clad him in a white linen shirt, and over it a plain robe of
russet, "girdled about the loins with a rope, and having a hood like
unto a hermit."

As soon as the candidate had arisen, the two "ancient knights" returned,
and all being in readiness he was escorted to the chapel, the two
walking, one upon either side of him, his squires of honor marching
before, and the whole party preceded by "sundry minstrels making a loud
noise of music."

When they came to the chapel, the two knights who escorted him took
leave of the candidate, each saluting him with a kiss upon the cheek.
No one remained with him but his squires of honor, the priest, and the
chandler.

In the mean time the novitiate's armor, sword, lance, and helmet had
been laid in readiness before the altar. These he watched and guarded
while the others slept, keeping vigil until sunrise, during which time
"he shall," says the ancient authority, "pass the night in orisons,
prayers, and meditation." At daylight he confessed to the priest, heard
matins, and communicated in mass, and then presented a lighted candle
at the altar, with a piece of money stuck in it as close to the flame
as could be done, the candle being offered to the honor of God, and the
money to the honor of that person who was to make him a knight.

So concluded the sacred ceremony, which being ended his squires
conducted the candidate to his chamber, and there made him comfortable,
and left him to repose for a while before the second and final part of
the ordinance.

Such is a shortened account of the preparatory stages of the ceremonies
through which Myles Falworth passed.

Matters had come upon him so suddenly one after the other, and had come
with such bewildering rapidity that all that week was to him like some
strange, wonderful, mysterious vision. He went through it all like one
in a dream. Lord George Beaumont was one of his squires of honor; the
other, by way of a fitting complement to the courage of the chivalrous
lad, was the Sieur de la Montaigne, his opponent soon to be. They were
well versed in everything relating to knightcraft, and Myles followed
all their directions with passive obedience. Then Sir James Lee and the
Comte de Vermoise administered the ceremony of the Bath, the old knight
examining him in the laws of chivalry.

It occurs perhaps once or twice in one's lifetime that one passes
through great happenings--sometimes of joy, sometimes of dreadful
bitterness--in just such a dazed state as Myles passed through this. It
is only afterwards that all comes back to one so sharply and keenly that
the heart thrills almost in agony in living it over again. But perhaps
of all the memory of that time, when it afterwards came back piece by
piece, none was so clear to Myles's back-turned vision as the long
night spent in the chapel, watching his armor, thinking such wonderful
thoughts, and dreaming such wonderful wide-eyed dreams. At such times
Myles saw again the dark mystery of the castle chapel; he saw again the
half-moon gleaming white and silvery through the tall, narrow window,
and throwing a broad form of still whiteness across stone floor, empty
seats, and still, motionless figures of stone effigies. At such times
he stood again in front of the twinkling tapers that lit the altar where
his armor lay piled in a heap, heard again the deep breathing of his
companions of the watch sleeping in some empty stall, wrapped each in
his cloak, and saw the old chandler bestir himself, and rise and come
forward to snuff the candles. At such times he saw again the day growing
clearer and clearer through the tall, glazed windows, saw it change to
a rosy pink, and then to a broad, ruddy glow that threw a halo of light
around Father Thomas's bald head bowed in sleep, and lit up the banners
and trophies hanging motionless against the stony face of the west wall;
heard again the stirring of life without and the sound of his companions
arousing themselves; saw them come forward, and heard them wish him joy
that his long watch was ended.


It was nearly noon when Myles was awakened from a fitful sleep by
Gascoyne bringing in his dinner, but, as might be supposed, he had but
little hunger, and ate sparingly. He had hardly ended his frugal meal
before his two squires of honor came in, followed by a servant carrying
the garments for the coming ceremony. He saluted them gravely, and then
arising, washed his face and hands in a basin which Gascoyne held; then
kneeled in prayer, the others standing silent at a little distance. As
he arose, Lord George came forward.

"The King and the company come presently to the Great Hall, Myles," said
he; "it is needful for thee to make all the haste that thou art able."

Perhaps never had Devlen Castle seen a more brilliant and goodly company
gathered in the great hall than that which came to witness King Henry
create Myles Falworth a knight bachelor.

At the upper end of the hall was a raised dais, upon which stood
a throne covered with crimson satin and embroidered with lions and
flower-deluces; it was the King's seat. He and his personal attendants
had not yet come, but the rest of the company were gathered. The day
being warm and sultry, the balcony was all aflutter with the feather
fans of the ladies of the family and their attendants, who from this
high place looked down upon the hall below. Up the centre of the hall
was laid a carpet of arras, and the passage was protected by wooden
railings. Upon the one side were tiers of seats for the castle
gentlefolks and the guests. Upon the other stood the burghers from the
town, clad in sober dun and russet, and yeomanry in green and brown. The
whole of the great vaulted hall was full of the dull hum of many people
waiting, and a ceaseless restlessness stirred the crowded throng. But
at last a whisper went around that the King was coming. A momentary hush
fell, and through it was heard the noisy clatter of horses' feet coming
nearer and nearer, and then stopping before the door. The sudden blare
of trumpets broke through the hush; another pause, and then in through
the great door-way of the hall came the royal procession.

First of all marched, in the order of their rank, and to the number of
a score or more, certain gentlemen, esquires and knights, chosen mostly
from the King's attendants. Behind these came two pursuivants-at-arms
in tabards, and following them a party of a dozen more bannerets
and barons. Behind these again, a little space intervening, came two
heralds, also in tabards, a group of the greater nobles attendant
upon the King following in the order of their rank. Next came the
King-at-arms and, at a little distance and walking with sober slowness,
the King himself, with the Earl and the Count directly attendant upon
him--the one marching upon the right hand and the other upon the left.
A breathless silence filled the whole space as the royal procession
advanced slowly up the hall. Through the stillness could be heard the
muffled sound of the footsteps on the carpet, the dry rustling of
silk and satin garments, and the clear clink and jingle of chains and
jewelled ornaments, but not the sound of a single voice.

After the moment or two of bustle and confusion of the King taking his
place had passed, another little space of expectant silence fell. At
last there suddenly came the noise of acclamation of those who stood
without the door--cheering and the clapping of hands--sounds heralding
the immediate advent of Myles and his attendants. The next moment the
little party entered the hall.

First of all, Gascoyne, bearing Myles's sword in both hands, the hilt
resting against his breast, the point elevated at an angle of forty-five
degrees. It was sheathed in a crimson scabbard, and the belt of Spanish
leather studded with silver bosses was wound crosswise around it. From
the hilt of the sword dangled the gilt spurs of his coming knighthood.
At a little distance behind his squire followed Myles, the centre of
all observation. He was clad in a novitiate dress, arranged under Lord
George's personal supervision. It had been made somewhat differently
from the fashion usual at such times, and was intended to indicate in a
manner the candidate's extreme youthfulness and virginity in arms. The
outer garment was a tabard robe of white wool, embroidered at the hem
with fine lines of silver, and gathered loosely at the waist with a belt
of lavender leather stitched with thread of silver. Beneath he was clad
in armor (a present from the Earl), new and polished till it shone with
dazzling brightness, the breastplate covered with a juppon of white
satin, embroidered with silver. Behind Myles, and upon either hand, came
his squires of honor, sponsors, and friends--a little company of
some half-dozen in all. As they advanced slowly up the great, dim,
high-vaulted room, the whole multitude broke forth into a humming buzz
of applause. Then a sudden clapping of hands began near the door-way,
ran down through the length of the room, and was taken up by all with
noisy clatter.

"Saw I never youth so comely," whispered one of the Lady Anne's
attendant gentlewomen. "Sure he looketh as Sir Galahad looked when he
came first to King Arthur's court."

Myles knew that he was very pale; he felt rather than saw the restless
crowd of faces upon either side, for his eyes were fixed directly before
him, upon the dais whereon sat the King, with the Earl of Mackworth
standing at his right hand, the Comte de Vermoise upon the left, and the
others ranged around and behind the throne. It was with the same tense
feeling of dreamy unreality that Myles walked slowly up the length of
the hall, measuring his steps by those of Gascoyne. Suddenly he
felt Lord George Beaumont touch him lightly upon the arm, and almost
instinctively he stopped short--he was standing just before the covered
steps of the throne.

He saw Gascoyne mount to the third step, stop short, kneel, and offer
the sword and the spurs he carried to the King, who took the weapon
and laid it across his knees. Then the squire bowed low, and walking
backward withdrew to one side, leaving Myles standing alone facing the
throne. The King unlocked the spur chains from the sword-hilt, and
then, holding the gilt spurs in his hand for a moment, he looked Myles
straight in the eyes and smiled. Then he turned, and gave one of the
spurs to the Earl of Mackworth.

The Earl took it with a low bow, turned, and came slowly down the steps
to where Myles stood. Kneeling upon one knee, and placing Myles's foot
upon the other, Lord Mackworth set the spur in its place and latched the
chain over the instep. He drew the sign of the cross upon Myles's bended
knee, set the foot back upon the ground, rose with slow dignity, and
bowing to the King, drew a little to one side.

As soon as the Earl had fulfilled his office the King gave the second
spur to the Comte de Vermoise, who set it to Myles's other foot with the
same ceremony that the Earl had observed, withdrawing as he had done to
one side.

An instant pause of motionless silence followed, and then the King
slowly arose, and began deliberately to unwind the belt from around the
scabbard of the sword he held. As soon as he stood, the Earl and the
Count advanced, and taking Myles by either hand, led him forward and up
the steps of the dais to the platform above. As they drew a little to
one side, the King stooped and buckled the sword-belt around Myles's
waist, then, rising again, lifted his hand and struck him upon the
shoulder, crying, in a loud voice.

"Be thou a good knight!"

Instantly a loud sound of applause and the clapping of hands filled the
whole hall, in the midst of which the King laid both hands upon Myles's
shoulders and kissed him upon the right cheek. So the ceremony ended;
Myles was no longer Myles Falworth, but Sir Myles Falworth, Knight by
Order of the Bath and by grace of the King!



CHAPTER 25

It was the custom to conclude the ceremonies of the bestowal of
knighthood by a grand feast given in honor of the newly-created knight.
But in Myles's instance the feast was dispensed with. The Earl of
Mackworth had planned that Myles might be created a Knight of the Bath
with all possible pomp and ceremony; that his personality might be
most favorably impressed upon the King; that he might be so honorably
knighted as to make him the peer of any who wore spurs in all England;
and, finally, that he might celebrate his new honors by jousting with
some knight of high fame and approved valor. All these desiderata chance
had fulfilled in the visit of the King to Devlen.

As the Earl had said to Myles, he would rather have waited a little
while longer until the lad was riper in years and experience, but the
opportunity was not to be lost. Young as he was, Myles must take
his chances against the years and grim experience of the Sieur de la
Montaigne. But it was also a part of the Earl's purpose that the King
and Myles should not be brought too intimately together just at that
time. Though every particular of circumstance should be fulfilled in the
ceremony, it would have been ruination to the Earl's plans to have the
knowledge come prematurely to the King that Myles was the son of
the attainted Lord Falworth. The Earl knew that Myles was a shrewd,
coolheaded lad; but the King had already hinted that the name was
familiar to his ears, and a single hasty answer or unguarded speech upon
the young knight's part might awaken him to a full knowledge. Such a
mishap was, of all things, to be avoided just then, for, thanks to the
machinations of that enemy of his father of whom Myles had heard so
much, and was soon to hear more, the King had always retained and still
held a bitter and rancorous enmity against the unfortunate nobleman.

It was no very difficult matter for the Earl to divert the King's
attention from the matter of the feast. His Majesty was very intent
just then upon supplying a quota of troops to the Dauphin, and the chief
object of his visit to Devlen was to open negotiations with the Earl
looking to that end. He was interested--much interested in Myles and in
the coming jousting in which the young warrior was to prove himself, but
he was interested in it by way of a relaxation from the other and more
engrossing matter. So, though he made some passing and half preoccupied
inquiry about the feast he was easily satisfied with the Earl's reasons
for not holding it: which were that he had arranged a consultation for
that morning in regard to the troops for the Dauphin, to which meeting
he had summoned a number of his own more important dependent nobles,
that the King himself needed repose and the hour or so of rest that
his barber-surgeon had ordered him to take after his mid-day meal; that
Father Thomas had laid upon Myles a petty penance--that for the first
three days of his knighthood he should eat his meals without meat and
in his own apartment--and various other reasons equally good and
sufficient. So the King was satisfied, and the feast was dispensed with.

The next morning had been set for the jousting, and all that day the
workmen were busy erecting the lists in the great quadrangle upon which,
as was said before, looked the main buildings of the castle. The windows
of Myles's apartment opened directly upon the bustling scene--the
carpenters hammering and sawing, the upholsterers snipping, cutting,
and tacking. Myles and Gascoyne stood gazing out from the open casement,
with their arms lying across one another's shoulders in the old boyhood
fashion, and Myles felt his heart shrink with a sudden tight pang as
the realization came sharply and vividly upon him that all these
preparations were being made for him, and that the next day he should,
with almost the certainty of death, meet either glory or failure under
the eyes not only of all the greater and lesser castle folk, but of the
King himself and noble strangers critically used to deeds of chivalry
and prowess. Perhaps he had never fully realized the magnitude of the
reality before. In that tight pang at his heart he drew a deep breath,
almost a sigh. Gascoyne turned his head abruptly, and looked at his
friend, but he did not ask the cause of the sigh. No doubt the same
thoughts that were in Myles's mind were in his also.


It was towards the latter part of the afternoon that a message came from
the Earl, bidding Myles attend him in his private closet. After Myles
had bowed and kissed his lordship's hand, the Earl motioned him to
take a seat, telling him that he had some final words to say that might
occupy a considerable time. He talked to the young man for about half
an hour in his quiet, measured voice, only now and then showing a little
agitation by rising and walking up and down the room for a turn or two.
Very many things were disclosed in that talk that had caused Myles
long hours of brooding thought, for the Earl spoke freely, and without
concealment to him concerning his father and the fortunes of the house
of Falworth.

Myles had surmised many things, but it was not until then that he knew
for a certainty who was his father's malignant and powerful enemy--that
it was the great Earl of Alban, the rival and bitter enemy of the Earl
of Mackworth. It was not until then that he knew that the present Earl
of Alban was the Lord Brookhurst, who had killed Sir John Dale in
the anteroom at Falworth Castle that morning so long ago in his early
childhood. It was not until then that he knew all the circumstances of
his father's blindness; that he had been overthrown in the melee at the
great tournament at York, and that that same Lord Brookhurst had ridden
his iron-shod war-horse twice over his enemy's prostrate body before his
squire could draw him from the press, and had then and there given him
the wound from which he afterwards went blind. The Earl swore to Myles
that Lord Brookhurst had done what he did wilfully, and had afterwards
boasted of it. Then, with some hesitation, he told Myles the reason
of Lord Brookhurst's enmity, and that it had arisen on account of Lady
Falworth, whom he had one time sought in marriage, and that he had sworn
vengeance against the man who had won her.

Piece by piece the Earl of Mackworth recounted every circumstance and
detail of the revenge that the blind man's enemy had afterwards
wreaked upon him. He told Myles how, when his father was attainted
of high-treason, and his estates forfeited to the crown, the King had
granted the barony of Easterbridge to the then newly-created Earl of
Alban in spite of all the efforts of Lord Falworth's friends to the
contrary; that when he himself had come out from an audience with the
King, with others of his father's friends, the Earl of Alban had boasted
in the anteroom, in a loud voice, evidently intended for them all to
hear, that now that he had Falworth's fat lands, he would never rest
till he had hunted the blind man out from his hiding, and brought his
head to the block.

"Ever since then," said the Earl of Mackworth "he hath been striving by
every means to discover thy father's place of concealment. Some time,
haply, he may find it, and then--"

Myles had felt for a long time that he was being moulded and shaped, and
that the Earl of Mackworth's was the hand that was making him what he
was growing to be; but he had never realized how great were the things
expected of him should he pass the first great test, and show himself
what his friends hoped to see him. Now he knew that all were looking
upon him to act, sometime, as his father's champion, and when that time
should come, to challenge the Earl of Alban to the ordeal of single
combat, to purge his father's name of treason, to restore him to his
rank, and to set the house of Falworth where it stood before misfortune
fell upon it.

But it was not alone concerning his and his father's affairs that the
Earl of Mackworth talked to Myles. He told him that the Earl of Alban
was the Earl of Mackworth's enemy also; that in his younger days he had
helped Lord Falworth, who was his kinsman, to win his wife, and that
then, Lord Brookhurst had sworn to compass his ruin as he had sworn
to compass the ruin of his friend. He told Myles how, now that Lord
Brookhurst was grown to be Earl of Alban, and great and powerful, he
was forever plotting against him, and showed Myles how, if Lord Falworth
were discovered and arrested for treason, he also would be likely to
suffer for aiding and abetting him. Then it dawned upon Myles that the
Earl looked to him to champion the house of Beaumont as well as that of
Falworth.

"Mayhap," said the Earl, "thou didst think that it was all for the
pleasant sport of the matter that I have taken upon me this toil and
endeavor to have thee knighted with honor that thou mightst fight the
Dauphiny knight. Nay, nay, Myles Falworth, I have not labored so
hard for such a small matter as that. I have had the King, unknown to
himself, so knight thee that thou mayst be the peer of Alban himself,
and now I would have thee to hold thine own with the Sieur de la
Montaigne, to try whether thou be'st Alban's match, and to approve
thyself worthy of the honor of thy knighthood. I am sorry, ne'theless,"
he added, after a moment's pause, "that this could not have been put off
for a while longer, for my plans for bringing thee to battle with that
vile Alban are not yet ripe. But such a chance of the King coming hither
haps not often. And then I am glad of this much--that a good occasion
offers to get thee presently away from England. I would have thee out
of the King's sight so soon as may be after this jousting. He taketh
a liking to thee, and I fear me lest he should inquire more nearly
concerning thee and so all be discovered and spoiled. My brother George
goeth upon the first of next month to France to take service with the
Dauphin, having under his command a company of tenscore men--knights and
archers; thou shalt go with him, and there stay till I send for thee to
return."

With this, the protracted interview concluded, the Earl charging Myles
to say nothing further about the French expedition for the present--even
to his friend--for it was as yet a matter of secrecy, known only to the
King and a few nobles closely concerned in the venture.

Then Myles arose to take his leave. He asked and obtained permission for
Gascoyne to accompany him to France. Then he paused for a moment or two,
for it was strongly upon him to speak of a matter that had been lying
in his mind all day--a matter that he had dreamed of much with open eyes
during the long vigil of the night before.

The Earl looked up inquiringly. "What is it thou wouldst ask?" said he.

Myles's heart was beating quickly within him at the thought of his own
boldness, and as he spoke his cheeks burned like fire. "Sir," said he,
mustering his courage at last, "haply thou hast forgot it, but I have
not; ne'theless, a long time since when I spoke of serving the--the Lady
Alice as her true knight, thou didst wisely laugh at my words, and bade
me wait first till I had earned my spurs. But now, sir, I have gotten
my spurs, and--and do now crave thy gracious leave that I may serve that
lady as her true knight."

A space of dead silence fell, in which Myles's heart beat tumultuously
within him.

"I know not what thou meanest," said the Earl at last, in a somewhat
constrained voice. "How wouldst thou serve her? What wouldst thou have?"

"I would have only a little matter just now," answered Myles. "I would
but crave of her a favor for to wear in the morrow's battle, so that she
may know that I hold her for my own true lady, and that I may have the
courage to fight more boldly, having that favor to defend."

The Earl sat looking at him for a while in brooding silence, stroking
his beard the while. Suddenly his brow cleared. "So be it," said he.
"I grant thee my leave to ask the Lady Alice for a favor, and if she
is pleased to give it to thee, I shall not say thee nay. But I set this
upon thee as a provision: that thou shalt not see her without the Lady
Anne be present. Thus it was, as I remember, thou saw her first, and
with it thou must now be satisfied. Go thou to the Long Gallery, and
thither they will come anon if naught hinder them."

Myles waited in the Long Gallery perhaps some fifteen or twenty minutes.
No one was there but himself. It was a part of the castle connecting the
Earl's and the Countess's apartments, and was used but little. During
that time he stood looking absently out of the open casement into the
stony court-yard beyond, trying to put into words that which he had
to say; wondering, with anxiety, how soon the young ladies would come;
wondering whether they would come at all. At last the door at the
farther end of the gallery opened, and turning sharply at the sound, he
saw the two young ladies enter, Lady Alice leaning upon Lady Anne's arm.
It was the first time that he had seen them since the ceremony of the
morning, and as he advanced to meet them, the Lady Anne came frankly
forward, and gave him her hand, which Myles raised to his lips.

"I give thee joy of thy knighthood, Sir Myles," said she, "and do
believe, in good sooth, that if any one deserveth such an honor, thou
art he."

At first little Lady Alice hung back behind her cousin, saying nothing
until the Lady Anne, turning suddenly, said: "Come, coz, has thou naught
to say to our new-made knight? Canst thou not also wish him joy of his
knighthood?"

Lady Alice hesitated a minute, then gave Myles a timid hand, which he,
with a strange mixture of joy and confusion, took as timidly as it was
offered. He raised the hand, and set it lightly and for an instant
to his lips, as he had done with the Lady Anne's hand, but with very
different emotions.

"I give you joy of your knighthood, sir," said Lady Alice, in a voice so
low that Myles could hardly hear it.

Both flushed red, and as he raised his head again, Myles saw that the
Lady Anne had withdrawn to one side. Then he knew that it was to give
him the opportunity to proffer his request.

A little space of silence followed, the while he strove to key his
courage to the saying of that which lay at his mind. "Lady," said he at
last, and then again--"Lady, I--have a favor for to ask thee."

"What is it thou wouldst have, Sir Myles?" she murmured, in reply.

"Lady," said he, "ever sin I first saw thee I have thought that if I
might choose of all the world, thou only wouldst I choose for--for
my true lady, to serve as a right knight should." Here he stopped,
frightened at his own boldness. Lady Alice stood quite still, with her
face turned away. "Thou--thou art not angered at what I say?" he said.

She shook her head.

"I have longed and longed for the time," said he, "to ask a boon of thee,
and now hath that time come. Lady, to-morrow I go to meet a right good
knight, and one skilled in arms and in jousting, as thou dost know. Yea,
he is famous in arms, and I be nobody. Ne'theless, I fight for the honor
of England and Mackworth--and--and for thy sake. I--Thou art not angered
at what I say?"

Again the Lady Alice shook her head.

"I would that thou--I would that thou would give me some favor for to
wear--thy veil or thy necklace."

He waited anxiously for a little while, but Lady Alice did not answer
immediately.

"I fear me," said Myles, presently, "that I have in sooth offended thee
in asking this thing. I know that it is a parlous bold matter for one so
raw in chivalry and in courtliness as I am, and one so poor in rank, to
ask thee for thy favor. An I ha' offended, I prithee let it be as though
I had not asked it."

Perhaps it was the young man's timidity that brought a sudden courage to
Lady Alice; perhaps it was the graciousness of her gentle breeding that
urged her to relieve Myles's somewhat awkward humility, perhaps it was
something more than either that lent her bravery to speak, even knowing
that the Lady Anne heard all. She turned quickly to him: "Nay, Sir
Myles," she said, "I am foolish, and do wrong thee by my foolishness
and silence, for, truly, I am proud to have thee wear my favor." She
unclasped, as she spoke, the thin gold chain from about her neck. "I
give thee this chain," said she, "and it will bring me joy to have it
honored by thy true knightliness, and, giving it, I do wish thee all
success." Then she bowed her head, and, turning, left him holding the
necklace in his hand.

Her cousin left the window to meet her, bowing her head with a smile
to Myles as she took her cousin's arm again and led her away. He stood
looking after them as they left the room, and when they were gone, he
raised the necklace to his lips with a heart beating tumultuously with a
triumphant joy it had never felt before.



CHAPTER 26

And now, at last, had come the day of days for Myles Falworth; the day
when he was to put to the test all that he had acquired in the three
years of his training, the day that was to disclose what promise of
future greatness there was in his strong young body. And it was a noble
day; one of those of late September, when the air seems sweeter and
fresher than at other times; the sun bright and as yellow as gold, the
wind lusty and strong, before which the great white clouds go sailing
majestically across the bright blueness of the sky above, while their
dusky shadows skim across the brown face of the rusty earth beneath.

As was said before, the lists had been set up in the great quadrangle
of the castle, than which, level and smooth as a floor, no more fitting
place could be chosen. The course was of the usual size--sixty paces
long--and separated along its whole length by a barrier about five feet
high. Upon the west side of the course and about twenty paces distant
from it, a scaffolding had been built facing towards the east so as to
avoid the glare of the afternoon sun. In the centre was a raised dais,
hung round with cloth of blue embroidered with lions rampant. Upon the
dais stood a cushioned throne for the King, and upon the steps below,
ranged in the order of their dignity, were seats for the Earl, his
guests, the family, the ladies, knights, and gentlemen of the castle.
In front, the scaffolding was covered with the gayest tapestries and
brightest-colored hangings that the castle could afford. And above,
parti-colored pennants and streamers, surmounted by the royal ensign of
England, waved and fluttered in the brisk wind.

At either end of the lists stood the pavilions of the knights. That of
Myles was at the southern extremity and was hung, by the Earl's desire,
with cloth of the Beaumont colors (black and yellow), while a wooden
shield bearing three goshawks spread (the crest of the house) was nailed
to the roof, and a long streamer of black and yellow trailed out in the
wind from the staff above. Myles, partly armed, stood at the door-way of
the pavilion, watching the folk gathering at the scaffolding. The ladies
of the house were already seated, and the ushers were bustling hither
and thither, assigning the others their places. A considerable crowd
of common folk and burghers from the town had already gathered at
the barriers opposite, and as he looked at the restless and growing
multitude he felt his heart beat quickly and his flesh grow cold with a
nervous trepidation--just such as the lad of to-day feels when he sees
the auditorium filling with friends and strangers who are to listen
by-and-by to the reading of his prize poem.

Suddenly there came a loud blast of trumpets. A great gate at the
farther extremity of the lists was thrown open, and the King appeared,
riding upon a white horse, preceded by the King-at-arms and the heralds,
attended by the Earl and the Comte de Vermoise, and followed by a crowd
of attendants. Just then Gascoyne, who, with Wilkes, was busied lacing
some of the armor plates with new thongs, called Myles, and he turned
and entered the pavilion.

As the two squires were adjusting these last pieces, strapping them in
place and tying the thongs, Lord George and Sir James Lee entered
the pavilion. Lord George took the young man by the hand, and with a
pleasant smile wished him success in the coming encounter.

Sir James seemed anxious and disturbed. He said nothing, and after
Gascoyne had placed the open bascinet that supports the tilting helm
in its place, he came forward and examined the armor piece by piece,
carefully and critically, testing the various straps and leather points
and thongs to make sure of their strength.

"Sir," said Gascoyne, who stood by watching him anxiously, "I do trust
that I have done all meetly and well."

"I see nothing amiss, sirrah," said the old knight, half grudgingly. "So
far as I may know, he is ready to mount."

Just then a messenger entered, saying that the King was seated, and Lord
George bade Myles make haste to meet the challenger.

"Francis," said Myles, "prithee give me my pouch yonder."

Gascoyne handed him the velvet bag, and he opened it, and took out the
necklace that the Lady Alice had given him the day before.

"Tie me this around my arm," said he. He looked down, keeping his eyes
studiously fixed on Gascoyne's fingers, as they twined the thin golden
chain around the iron plates of his right arm, knowing that Lord
George's eyes were upon him, and blushing fiery red at the knowledge.

Sir James was at that moment examining the great tilting helm, and Lord
George watched him, smiling amusedly. "And hast thou then already chosen
thee a lady?" he said, presently.

"Aye, my Lord," answered Myles, simply.

"Marry, I trust we be so honored that she is one of our castle folk,"
said the Earl's brother.

For a moment Myles did not reply; then he looked up. "My Lord," said he,
"the favor was given to me by the Lady Alice."

Lord George looked grave for the moment; then he laughed. "Marry, thou
art a bold archer to shoot for such high game."

Myles did not answer, and at that moment two grooms led his horse up to
the door of the pavilion. Gascoyne and Wilkes helped him to his saddle,
and then, Gascoyne holding his horse by the bridle-rein, he rode slowly
across the lists to the little open space in front of the scaffolding
and the King's seat just as the Sieur de la Montaigne approached from
the opposite direction.

As soon as the two knights champion had reached each his appointed
station in front of the scaffolding, the Marshal bade the speaker read
the challenge, which, unrolling the parchment, he began to do in a loud,
clear voice, so that all might hear. It was a quaint document, wrapped
up in the tangled heraldic verbiage of the time.

The pith of the matter was that the Sieur Brian Philip Francis de la
Montaigne proclaimed before all men the greater chivalry and skill at
arms of the knights of France and of Dauphiny, and likewise the greater
fairness of the ladies of France and Dauphiny, and would there defend
those sayings with his body without fear or attaint as to the truth of
the same. As soon as the speaker had ended, the Marshal bade him call
the defendant of the other side.

Then Myles spoke his part, with a voice trembling somewhat with the
excitement of the moment, but loudly and clearly enough: "I, Myles
Edward Falworth, knight, so created by the hand and by the grace of
his Majesty King Henry IV of England, do take upon me the gage of this
battle, and will defend with my body the chivalry of the knights of
England and the fairness of the ladies thereof!"

Then, after the speaker ended his proclamation and had retired to his
place, the ceremony of claiming and redeeming the helmet, to which
all young knights were subjected upon first entering the lists, was
performed.

One of the heralds cried in a loud voice, "I, Gilles Hamerton, herald to
the most noble Clarencieux King-at-arms, do claim the helm of Sir Myles
Edward Falworth by this reason, that he hath never yet entered joust or
tourney."

To which Myles answered, "I do acknowledge the right of that claim, and
herewith proffer thee in ransom for the same this purse of one hundred
marks in gold."

As he spoke, Gascoyne stepped forward and delivered the purse, with the
money, to the Herald. It was a more than usually considerable ransom,
and had been made up by the Earl and Lord George that morning.

"Right nobly hast thou redeemed thy helm," said the Herald, "and
hereafter be thou free to enter any jousting whatsoever, and in whatever
place."

So, all being ended, both knights bowed to the King, and then, escorted
each by his squire, returned to his pavilion, saluted by the spectators
with a loud clapping of hands.

Sir James Lee met Myles in front of his tent. Coming up to the side of
the horse, the old man laid his hand upon the saddle, looking up into
the young man's face.

"Thou wilt not fail in this venture and bring shame upon me?" said he.

"Nay, my dear master," said Myles; "I will do my best."

"I doubt it not," said the old man; "and I believe me thou wilt come off
right well. From what he did say this morning, methinks the Sieur de la
Montaigne meaneth only to break three lances with thee, and will content
himself therewith, without seeking to unhorse thee. Ne'theless, be thou
bold and watchful, and if thou find that he endeavor to cast thee, do
thy best to unhorse him. Remember also those things which I have told
thee ten thousand times before: hold thy toes well down and grip the
stirrup hard, more especially at the moment of meeting; bend thy body
forward, and keep thine elbow close to thy side. Bear thy lance point
one foot above thine adversary's helm until within two lengths of
meeting, and strike thou in the very middle of his shield. So, Myles,
thou mayst hold thine own, and come off with glory."

As he ended speaking he drew back, and Gascoyne, mounting upon a stool,
covered his friend's head and bascinet with the great jousting helm,
making fast the leathern points that held it to the iron collar.

As he was tying the last thong a messenger came from the Herald, saying
that the challenger was ready, and then Myles knew the time had come,
and reaching down and giving Sir James a grip of the hand, he drew on
his gauntlet, took the jousting lance that Wilkes handed him, and turned
his horse's head towards his end of the lists.



CHAPTER 27

As Myles took his place at the south end of the lists, he found the
Sieur de la Montaigne already at his station. Through the peep-hole in
the face of the huge helmet, a transverse slit known as the occularium,
he could see, like a strange narrow picture, the farther end of
the lists, the spectators upon either side moving and shifting with
ceaseless restlessness, and in the centre of all, his opponent, sitting
with spear point directed upward, erect, motionless as a statue of iron,
the sunlight gleaming and flashing upon his polished plates of steel,
and the trappings of his horse swaying and fluttering in the rushing of
the fresh breeze.

Upon that motionless figure his sight gradually centred with every
faculty of mind and soul. He knew the next moment the signal would be
given that was to bring him either glory or shame from that iron statue.
He ground his teeth together with stern resolve to do his best in the
coming encounter, and murmured a brief prayer in the hallow darkness of
his huge helm. Then with a shake he settled himself more firmly in his
saddle, slowly raised his spear point until the shaft reached the exact
angle, and there suffered it to rest motionless. There was a moment of
dead, tense, breathless pause, then he rather felt than saw the Marshal
raise his baton. He gathered himself together, and the next moment a
bugle sounded loud and clear. In one blinding rush he drove his spurs
into the sides of his horse, and in instant answer felt the noble steed
spring forward with a bound.

Through all the clashing of his armor reverberating in the hollow depths
of his helmet, he saw the mail-clad figure from the other end of the
lists rushing towards him, looming larger and larger as they came
together. He gripped his saddle with his knees, clutched the stirrup
with the soles of his feet, and bent his body still more forward. In the
instant of meeting, with almost the blindness of instinct, he dropped
the point of his spear against the single red flower-de-luce in the
middle of the on-coming shield. There was a thunderous crash that seemed
to rack every joint, he heard the crackle of splintered wood, he felt
the momentary trembling recoil of the horse beneath him, and in the next
instant had passed by. As he checked the onward rush of his horse at the
far end of the course, he heard faintly in the dim hollow recess of the
helm the loud shout and the clapping of hands of those who looked on,
and found himself gripping with nervous intensity the butt of a broken
spear, his mouth clammy with excitement, and his heart thumping in his
throat.

Then he realized that he had met his opponent, and had borne the meeting
well. As he turned his horse's head towards his own end of the lists, he
saw the other trotting slowly back towards his station, also holding a
broken spear shaft in his hand.

As he passed the iron figure a voice issued from the helmet, "Well done,
Sir Myles, nobly done!" and his heart bounded in answer to the words of
praise. When he had reached his own end of the lists, he flung away his
broken spear, and Gascoyne came forward with another.

"Oh, Myles!" he said, with sob in his voice, "it was nobly done. Never
did I see a better ridden course in all my life. I did not believe that
thou couldst do half so well. Oh, Myles, prithee knock him out of his
saddle an thou lovest me!"

Myles, in his high-keyed nervousness, could not forbear a short
hysterical laugh at his friend's warmth of enthusiasm. He took the fresh
lance in his hand, and then, seeing that his opponent was walking his
horse slowly up and down at his end of the lists, did the same during
the little time of rest before the next encounter.

When, in answer to the command of the Marshal, he took his place a
second time, he found himself calmer and more collected than before, but
every faculty no less intensely fixed than it had been at first. Once
more the Marshal raised his baton, once more the horn sounded, and once
more the two rushed together with the same thunderous crash, the same
splinter of broken spears, the same momentary trembling recoil of
the horse, and the same onward rush past one another. Once more the
spectators applauded and shouted as the two knights turned their horses
and rode back towards their station.

This time as they met midway the Sieur de la Montaigne reined in his
horse. "Sir Myles," said his muffled voice, "I swear to thee, by my
faith, I had not thought to meet in thee such an opponent as thou dost
prove thyself to be. I had thought to find in thee a raw boy, but find
instead a Paladin. Hitherto I have given thee grace as I would
give grace to any mere lad, and thought of nothing but to give thee
opportunity to break thy lance. Now I shall do my endeavor to unhorse
thee as I would an acknowledged peer in arms. Nevertheless, on account
of thy youth, I give thee this warning, so that thou mayst hold thyself
in readiness."

"I give thee gramercy for thy courtesy, my Lord," answered Myles,
speaking in French; "and I will strive to encounter thee as best I may,
and pardon me if I seem forward in so saying, but were I in thy place,
my Lord, I would change me yon breast-piece and over-girth of my saddle;
they are sprung in the stitches."

"Nay," said the Sieur de la Montaigne, laughing, "breast-piece and
over-girth have carried me through more tilts than one, and shall
through this. An thou give me a blow so true as to burst breast-piece
and over-girth, I will own myself fairly conquered by thee." So saying,
he saluted Myles with the butt of the spear he still held, and passed by
to his end of the lists.

Myles, with Gascoyne running beside him, rode across to his pavilion,
and called to Edmund Wilkes to bring him a cup of spiced wine. After
Gascoyne had taken off his helmet, and as he sat wiping the perspiration
from his face Sir James came up and took him by the hand.

"My dear boy," said he, gripping the hand he held, "never could I hope
to be so overjoyed in mine old age as I am this day. Thou dost bring
honor to me, for I tell thee truly thou dost ride like a knight seasoned
in twenty tourneys."

"It doth give me tenfold courage to hear thee so say, dear master,"
answered Myles. "And truly," he added, "I shall need all my courage
this bout, for the Sieur de la Montaigne telleth me that he will ride to
unhorse me this time."

"Did he indeed so say?" said Sir James. "Then belike he meaneth to
strike at thy helm. Thy best chance is to strike also at his. Doth thy
hand tremble?"

"Not now," answered Myles.

"Then keep thy head cool and thine eye true. Set thy trust in God, and
haply thou wilt come out of this bout honorably in spite of the rawness
of thy youth."

Just then Edmund Wilkes presented the cup of wine to Myles, who drank it
off at a draught, and thereupon Gascoyne replaced the helm and tied the
thongs.

The charge that Sir James Lee had given to Myles to strike at his
adversary's helm was a piece of advice he probably would not have given
to so young a knight, excepting as a last resort. A blow perfectly
delivered upon the helm was of all others the most difficult for the
recipient to recover from, but then a blow upon the helm was not one
time in fifty perfectly given. The huge cylindrical tilting helm was so
constructed in front as to slope at an angle in all directions to one
point. That point was the centre of a cross formed by two iron bands
welded to the steel-face plates of the helm where it was weakened by the
opening slit of the occularium, or peephole. In the very centre of
this cross was a little flattened surface where the bands were riveted
together, and it was upon that minute point that the blow must be given
to be perfect, and that stroke Myles determined to attempt.

As he took his station Edmund Wilkes came running across from the
pavilion with a lance that Sir James had chosen, and Myles, returning
the one that Gascoyne had just given him, took it in his hand. It was
of seasoned oak, somewhat thicker than the other, a tough weapon, not
easily to be broken even in such an encounter as he was like to have. He
balanced the weapon, and found that it fitted perfectly to his grasp.
As he raised the point to rest, his opponent took his station at the
farther extremity of the lists, and again there was a little space of
breathless pause. Myles was surprised at his own coolness; every nervous
tremor was gone. Before, he had been conscious of the critical multitude
looking down upon him; now it was a conflict of man to man, and such a
conflict had no terrors for his young heart of iron.

The spectators had somehow come to the knowledge that this was to be
a more serious encounter than the two which had preceded it, and a
breathless silence fell for the moment or two that the knights stood in
place.

Once more he breathed a short prayer, "Holy Mary, guard me!"

Then again, for the third time, the Marshal raised his baton, and the
horn sounded, and for the third time Myles drove his spurs into his
horse's flanks. Again he saw the iron figure of his opponent rushing
nearer, nearer, nearer. He centred, with a straining intensity, every
faculty of soul, mind, and body upon one point--the cross of the
occularium, the mark he was to strike. He braced himself for the
tremendous shock which he knew must meet him, and then in a flash
dropped lance point straight and true. The next instant there was a
deafening stunning crash--a crash like the stroke of a thunder-bolt.
There was a dazzling blaze of blinding light, and a myriad sparks danced
and flickered and sparkled before his eyes. He felt his horse stagger
under him with the recoil, and hardly knowing what he did, he drove
his spurs deep into its sides with a shout. At the same moment there
resounded in his ears a crashing rattle and clatter, he knew not of
what, and then, as his horse recovered and sprang forward, and as the
stunning bewilderment passed, he found that his helmet had been
struck off. He heard a great shout arise from all, and thought, with a
sickening, bitter disappointment, that it was because he had lost. At
the farther end of the course he turned his horse, and then his heart
gave a leap and a bound as though it would burst, the blood leaped to
his cheeks tingling, and his bosom thrilled with an almost agonizing
pang of triumph, of wonder, of amazement.

There, in a tangle of his horse's harness and of embroidered trappings,
the Sieur de la Montaigne lay stretched upon the ground, with his saddle
near by, and his riderless horse was trotting aimlessly about at the
farther end of the lists.

Myles saw the two squires of the fallen knight run across to where their
master lay, he saw the ladies waving their kerchiefs and veils, and the
castle people swinging their hats and shouting in an ecstasy of delight.
Then he rode slowly back to where the squires were now aiding the fallen
knight to arise. The senior squire drew his dagger, cut the leather
points, and drew off the helm, disclosing the knight's face--a face
white as death, and convulsed with rage, mortification, and bitter
humiliation.

"I was not rightly unhorsed!" he cried, hoarsely and with livid lips,
to the Marshal and his attendants, who had ridden up. "I unhelmed him
fairly enough, but my over-girth and breast-strap burst, and my saddle
slipped. I was not unhorsed, I say, and I lay claim that I unhelmed
him."

"Sir," said the Marshal calmly, and speaking in French, "surely thou
knowest that the loss of helmet does not decide an encounter. I need not
remind thee, my Lord, that it was so awarded by John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, when in the jousting match between Reynand de Roye and John
de Holland, the Sieur Reynand left every point of his helm loosened, so
that the helm was beaten off at each stroke. If he then was justified in
doing so of his own choice, and wilfully suffering to be unhelmed, how
then can this knight be accused of evil who suffered it by chance?"

"Nevertheless," said the Sieur de la Montaigne, in the same hoarse,
breathless voice, "I do affirm, and will make my affirmation good
with my body, that I fell only by the breaking of my girth. Who says
otherwise lies!"

"It is the truth he speaketh," said Myles. "I myself saw the stitches
were some little what burst, and warned him thereof before we ran this
course.

"Sir," said the Marshal to the Sieur de la Montaigne, "how can you now
complain of that thing which your own enemy advised you of and warned
you against? Was it not right knightly for him so to do?"

The Sieur de la Montaigne stood quite still for a little while, leaning
on the shoulder of his chief squire, looking moodily upon the ground;
then, without making answer, he turned, and walked slowly away to his
pavilion, still leaning on his squire's shoulder, whilst the other
attendant followed behind, bearing his shield and helmet.

Gascoyne had picked up Myles's fallen helmet as the Sieur de la
Montaigne moved away, and Lord George and Sir James Lee came walking
across the lists to where Myles still sat. Then, the one taking his
horse by the bridle-rein, and the other walking beside the saddle, they
led him before the raised dais where the King sat.

Even the Comte de Vermoise, mortified and amazed as he must have been
at the overthrow of his best knight, joined in the praise and
congratulation that poured upon the young conqueror. Myles, his heart
swelling with a passion of triumphant delight, looked up and met the
gaze of Lady Alice fixed intently upon him. A red spot of excitement
still burned in either cheek, and it flamed to a rosier red as he bowed
his head to her before turning away.

Gascoyne had just removed Myles's breastplate and gorget, when Sir James
Lee burst into the pavilion. All his grim coldness was gone, and he
flung his arms around the young man's neck, hugging him heartily, and
kissing him upon either cheek.

Ere he let him go, "Mine own dear boy," he said, holding him off at
arm's-length, and winking his one keen eye rapidly, as though to wink
away a dampness of which he was ashamed--"mine own dear boy, I do tell
thee truly this is as sweet to me as though thou wert mine own son;
sweeter to me than when I first broke mine own lance in triumph, and
felt myself to be a right knight."

"Sir," answered Myles, "what thou sayest doth rejoice my very heart.
Ne'theless, it is but just to say that both his breast-piece and
over-girth were burst in the stitches before he ran his course, for so I
saw with mine own eyes."

"Burst in the stitches!" snorted Sir James. "Thinkest thou he did not
know in what condition was his horse's gearing? I tell thee he went down
because thou didst strike fair and true, and he did not so strike thee.
Had he been Guy of Warwick he had gone down all the same under such a
stroke and in such case."



CHAPTER 28

It was not until more than three weeks after the King had left Devlen
Castle that Lord George and his company of knights and archers were
ready for the expedition to France. Two weeks of that time Myles spent
at Crosbey-Dale with his father and mother. It was the first time that
he had seen them since, four years ago, he had quitted the low, narrow,
white-walled farmhouse for the castle of the great Earl of Mackworth. He
had never appreciated before how low and narrow and poor the farm-house
was. Now, with his eyes trained to the bigness of Devlen Castle,
he looked around him with wonder and pity at his father's humble
surroundings. He realized as he never else could have realized how great
was the fall in fortune that had cast the house of Falworth down from
its rightful station to such a level as that upon which it now rested.
And at the same time that he thus recognized how poor was their lot, how
dependent upon the charity of others, he also recognized how generous
was the friendship of Prior Edward, who perilled his own safety so
greatly in affording the family of the attainted Lord an asylum in its
bitter hour of need and peril.

Myles paid many visits to the gentle old priest during those two weeks'
visit, and had many long and serious talks with him. One warm bright
afternoon, as he and the old man walked together in the priory garden,
after a game or two of draughts, the young knight talked more freely and
openly of his plans, his hopes, his ambitions, than perhaps he had
ever done. He told the old man all that the Earl had disclosed to him
concerning the fallen fortunes of his father's house, and of how all
who knew those circumstances looked to him to set the family in its old
place once more. Prior Edward added many things to those which Myles
already knew--things of which the Earl either did not know, or did not
choose to speak. He told the young man, among other matters, the reason
of the bitter and lasting enmity that the King felt for the blind
nobleman: that Lord Falworth had been one of King Richard's council in
times past; that it was not a little owing to him that King Henry, when
Earl of Derby, had been banished from England, and that though he
was then living in the retirement of private life, he bitterly and
steadfastly opposed King Richard's abdication. He told Myles that at the
time when Sir John Dale found shelter at Falworth Castle, vengeance was
ready to fall upon his father at any moment, and it needed only such a
pretext as that of sheltering so prominent a conspirator as Sir John to
complete his ruin.

Myles, as he listened intently, could not but confess in his own mind
that the King had many rational, perhaps just, grounds for grievance
against such an ardent opponent as the blind Lord had shown himself to
be. "But, sir," said he, after a little space of silence, when Prior
Edward had ended, "to hold enmity and to breed treason are very
different matters. Haply my father was Bolingbroke's enemy, but, sure,
thou dost not believe he is justly and rightfully tainted with treason?"

"Nay," answered the priest, "how canst thou ask me such a thing? Did I
believe thy father a traitor, thinkest thou I would thus tell his son
thereof? Nay, Myles, I do know thy father well, and have known him for
many years, and this of him, that few men are so honorable in heart and
soul as he. But I have told thee all these things to show that the King
is not without some reason to be thy father's unfriend. Neither, haply,
is the Earl of Alban without cause of enmity against him. So thou, upon
thy part, shouldst not feel bitter rancor against the King for what hath
happed to thy house, nor even against William Brookhurst--I mean the
Earl of Alban--for, I tell thee, the worst of our enemies and the worst
of men believe themselves always to have right and justice upon their
side, even when they most wish evil to others."

So spoke the gentle old priest, who looked from his peaceful haven with
dreamy eyes upon the sweat and tussle of the world's battle. Had he
instead been in the thick of the fight, it might have been harder for
him to believe that his enemies ever had right upon their side.

"But tell me this," said Myles, presently, "dost thou, then, think that
I do evil in seeking to do a battle of life or death with this wicked
Earl of Alban, who hath so ruined my father in body and fortune?"

"Nay," said Prior Edward, thoughtfully, "I say not that thou doest evil.
War and bloodshed seem hard and cruel matters to me; but God hath given
that they be in the world, and may He forbid that such a poor worm as I
should say that they be all wrong and evil. Meseems even an evil thing
is sometimes passing good when rightfully used."

Myles did not fully understand what the old man meant, but this much he
gathered, that his spiritual father did not think ill of his fighting
the Earl of Alban for his temporal father's sake.

So Myles went to France in Lord George's company, a soldier of fortune,
as his Captain was. He was there for only six months, but those six
months wrought a great change in his life. In the fierce factional
battles that raged around the walls of Paris; in the evil life which
he saw at the Burgundian court in Paris itself after the truce--a court
brilliant and wicked, witty and cruel--the wonderful liquor of youth had
evaporated rapidly, and his character had crystallized as rapidly into
the hardness of manhood. The warfare, the blood, the evil pleasures
which he had seen had been a fiery, crucible test to his soul, and I
love my hero that he should have come forth from it so well. He was no
longer the innocent Sir Galahad who had walked in pure white up the
Long Hall to be knighted by the King, but his soul was of that grim,
sterling, rugged sort that looked out calmly from his gray eyes upon the
wickedness and debauchery around him, and loved it not.

Then one day a courier came, bringing a packet. It was a letter from the
Earl, bidding Myles return straightway to England and to Mackworth House
upon the Strand, nigh to London, without delay, and Myles knew that his
time had come.

It was a bright day in April when he and Gascoyne rode clattering out
through Temple Bar, leaving behind them quaint old London town, its
blank stone wall, its crooked, dirty streets, its high-gabled wooden
houses, over which rose the sharp spire of St. Paul's, towering high
into the golden air. Before them stretched the straight, broad highway
of the Strand, on one side the great houses and palaces of princely
priests and powerful nobles; on the other the Covent Garden, (or the
Convent Garden, as it was then called), and the rolling country, where
great stone windmills swung their slow-moving arms in the damp, soft
April breeze, and away in the distance the Scottish Palace, the White
Hall, and Westminster.

It was the first time that Myles had seen famous London town. In that
dim and distant time of his boyhood, six months before, he would
have been wild with delight and enthusiasm. Now he jogged along with
Gascoyne, gazing about him with calm interest at open shops and booths
and tall, gabled houses; at the busy throng of merchants and craftsmen,
jostling and elbowing one another; at townsfolk--men and dames--picking
their way along the muddy kennel of a sidewalk. He had seen so much of
the world that he had lost somewhat of interest in new things. So he
did not care to tarry, but rode, with a mind heavy with graver matters,
through the streets and out through the Temple Bar direct for Mackworth
House, near the Savoy Palace.

It was with a great deal of interest that Myles and his patron regarded
one another when they met for the first time after that half-year which
the young soldier had spent in France. To Myles it seemed somehow very
strange that his Lordship's familiar face and figure should look so
exactly the same. To Lord Mackworth, perhaps, it seemed even more
strange that six short months should have wrought so great a change in
the young man. The rugged exposure in camp and field during the hard
winter that had passed had roughened the smooth bloom of his boyish
complexion and bronzed his fair skin almost as much as a midsummer's sun
could have done. His beard and mustache had grown again, (now heavier
and more mannish from having been shaved), and the white seam of a scar
over the right temple gave, if not a stern, at least a determined look
to the strong, square-jawed young face. So the two stood for a while
regarding one another. Myles was the first to break the silence.

"My Lord," said he, "thou didst send for me to come back to England;
behold, here am I."

"When didst thou land, Sir Myles?" said the Earl.

"I and my squire landed at Dover upon Tuesday last," answered the young
man.

The Earl of Mackworth stroked his beard softly. "Thou art marvellous
changed," said he. "I would not have thought it possible."

Myles smiled somewhat grimly. "I have seen such things, my Lord, in
France and in Paris," said he, quietly, "as, mayhap, may make a lad a
man before his time."

"From which I gather," said the Earl, "that many adventures have
befallen thee. Methought thou wouldst find troublesome times in the
Dauphin's camp, else I would not have sent thee to France."

A little space of silence followed, during which the Earl sat musingly,
half absently, regarding the tall, erect, powerful young figure standing
before him, awaiting his pleasure in motionless, patient, almost dogged
silence. The strong, sinewy hands were clasped and rested upon the long
heavy sword, around the scabbard of which the belt was loosely wrapped,
and the plates of mail caught and reflected in flashing, broken pieces,
the bright sunlight from the window behind.

"Sir Myles," said the Earl, suddenly, breaking the silence at last,
"dost thou know why I sent for thee hither?"

"Aye," said Myles, calmly, "how can I else? Thou wouldst not have called
me from Paris but for one thing. Methinks thou hast sent for me to fight
the Earl of Alban, and lo! I am here."

"Thou speakest very boldly," said the Earl. "I do hope that thy deeds be
as bold as thy words."

"That," said Myles, "thou must ask other men. Methinks no one may justly
call me coward."

"By my troth!" said the Earl, smiling, "looking upon thee--limbs and
girth, bone and sinew--I would not like to be the he that would dare
accuse thee of such a thing. As for thy surmise, I may tell thee plain
that thou art right, and that it was to fight the Earl of Alban I sent
for thee hither. The time is now nearly ripe, and I will straightway
send for thy father to come to London. Meantime it would not be safe
either for thee or for me to keep thee in my service. I have spoken to
his Highness the Prince of Wales, who, with other of the Princes, is
upon our side in this quarrel. He hath promised to take thee into his
service until the fitting time comes to bring thee and thine enemy
together, and to-morrow I shall take thee to Scotland Yard, where his
Highness is now lodging."

As the Earl ended his speech, Myles bowed, but did not speak. The Earl
waited for a little while, as though to give him the opportunity to
answer.

"Well, sirrah," said he at last, with a shade of impatience, "hast thou
naught to say? Meseems thou takest all this with marvellous coolness."

"Have I then my Lord's permission to speak my mind?"

"Aye," said the Earl, "say thy say."

"Sir," said Myles, "I have thought and pondered this matter much while
abroad, and would now ask thee a plain question in all honest an I ha'
thy leave."

The Earl nodded his head.

"Sir, am I not right in believing that thou hast certain weighty
purposes and aims of thine own to gain an I win this battle against the
Earl of Alban?"

"Has my brother George been telling thee aught to such a purpose?" said
the Earl, after a moment or two of silence.

Myles did not answer.

"No matter," added Lord Mackworth. "I will not ask thee who told thee
such a thing. As for thy question--well, sin thou ask it frankly, I will
be frank with thee. Yea, I have certain ends to gain in having the Earl
of Alban overthrown."

Myles bowed. "Sir," said he, "haply thine ends are as much beyond aught
that I can comprehend as though I were a little child; only this I know,
that they must be very great. Thou knowest well that in any case I would
fight me this battle for my father's sake and for the honor of my house;
nevertheless, in return for all that it will so greatly advantage thee,
wilt thou not grant me a boon in return should I overcome mine enemy?"

"What is thy boon, Sir Myles?"

"That thou wilt grant me thy favor to seek the Lady Alice de Mowbray for
my wife."

The Earl of Mackworth started up from his seat. "Sir Myles Falworth"--he
began, violently, and then stopped short, drawing his bushy eyebrows
together into a frown stern, if not sinister.

Myles withstood his look calmly and impassively, and presently the Earl
turned on his heel, and strode to the open window. A long time passed in
silence while he stood there, gazing out of the window into the garden
beyond with his back to the young man.

Suddenly he swung around again. "Sir Myles," said he, "the family of
Falworth is as good as any in Derbyshire. Just now it is poor and fallen
in estate, but if it is again placed in credit and honor, thou, who art
the son of the house, shalt have thy suit weighed with as much respect
and consideration as though thou wert my peer in all things, Such is my
answer. Art thou satisfied?"

"I could ask no more," answered Myles.



CHAPTER 29

That night Myles lodged at Mackworth House. The next morning, as soon
as he had broken his fast, which he did in the privacy of his own
apartments, the Earl bade him and Gascoyne to make ready for the barge,
which was then waiting at the river stairs to take them to Scotland
Yard.

The Earl himself accompanied them, and as the heavy snub-nosed boat,
rowed by the six oarsmen in Mackworth livery, slid slowly and heavily
up against the stream, the Earl, leaning back in his cushioned seat,
pointed out the various inns of the great priests or nobles; palatial
town residences standing mostly a little distance back from the water
behind terraced high-walled gardens and lawns. Yon was the Bishop of
Exeter's Close; yon was the Bishop of Bath's; that was York House; and
that Chester Inn. So passing by gardens and lawns and palaces, they came
at last to Scotland Yard stairs, a broad flight of marble steps that led
upward to a stone platform above, upon which opened the gate-way of the
garden beyond.

The Scotland Yard of Myles Falworth's day was one of the more
pretentious and commodious of the palaces of the Strand. It took its
name from having been from ancient times the London inn which the
tributary Kings of Scotland occupied when on their periodical visits of
homage to England. Now, during this time of Scotland's independence, the
Prince of Wales had taken up his lodging in the old palace, and made it
noisy with the mad, boisterous mirth of his court.

As the watermen drew the barge close to the landing-place of the stairs,
the Earl stepped ashore, and followed by Myles and Gascoyne, ascended
to the broad gate-way of the river wall of the garden. Three men-at-arms
who lounged upon a bench under the shade of the little pent roof of a
guard-house beside the wall, arose and saluted as the well-known figure
of the Earl mounted the steps. The Earl nodded a cool answer, and
passing unchallenged through the gate, led the way up a pleached walk,
beyond which, as Myles could see, there stretched a little grassy lawn
and a stone-paved terrace. As the Earl and the two young men approached
the end of the walk, they were met by the sound of voices and laughter,
the clinking of glasses and the rattle of dishes. Turning a corner,
they came suddenly upon a party of young gentlemen, who sat at a late
breakfast under the shade of a wide-spreading lime-tree. They had
evidently just left the tilt-yard, for two of the guests--sturdy,
thick-set young knights--yet wore a part of their tilting armor.

Behind the merry scene stood the gray, hoary old palace, a steep flight
of stone steps, and a long, open, stone-arched gallery, which evidently
led to the kitchen beyond, for along it hurried serving-men, running up
and down the tall flight of steps, and bearing trays and dishes and cups
and flagons. It was a merry sight and a pleasant one. The day was warm
and balmy, and the yellow sunlight fell in waving uncertain patches of
light, dappling the table-cloth, and twinkling and sparkling upon the
dishes, cups, and flagons.

At the head of the table sat a young man some three or four years
older than Myles, dressed in a full suit of rich blue brocaded velvet,
embroidered with gold-thread and trimmed with black fur. His face, which
was turned towards them as they mounted from the lawn to the little
stone-flagged terrace, was frank and open; the cheeks smooth and fair;
the eyes dark and blue. He was tall and rather slight, and wore his
thick yellow hair hanging to his shoulders, where it was cut square
across, after the manner of the times. Myles did not need to be told
that it was the Prince of Wales.

"Ho, Gaffer Fox!" he cried, as soon as he caught sight of the Earl of
Mackworth, "what wind blows thee hither among us wild mallard drakes?
I warrant it is not for love of us, but only to fill thine own larder
after the manner of Sir Fox among the drakes. Whom hast thou with thee?
Some gosling thou art about to pluck?"

A sudden hush fell upon the company, and all faces were turned towards
the visitors.

The Earl bowed with a soft smile. "Your Highness," said he, smoothly,
"is pleased to be pleasant. Sir, I bring you the young knight of whom I
spoke to you some time since--Sir Myles Falworth. You may be pleased to
bring to mind that you so condescended as to promise to take him into
your train until the fitting time arrived for that certain matter of
which we spoke."

"Sir Myles," said the Prince of Wales, with a frank, pleasant smile, "I
have heard great reports of thy skill and prowess in France, both from
Mackworth and from others. It will pleasure me greatly to have thee in
my household; more especially," he added, "as it will get thee, callow
as thou art, out of my Lord Fox's clutches. Our faction cannot do
without the Earl of Mackworth's cunning wits, Sir Myles; ne'theless I
would not like to put all my fate and fortune into his hands without
bond. I hope that thou dost not rest thy fortunes entirely upon his aid
and countenance."

All who were present felt the discomfort of the Prince's speech, It was
evident that one of his mad, wild humors was upon him. In another case
the hare-brained young courtiers around might have taken their cue
from him, but the Earl of Mackworth was no subject for their gibes
and witticisms. A constrained silence fell, in which the Earl alone
maintained a perfect ease of manner.

Myles bowed to hide his own embarrassment. "Your Highness," said he,
evasively, "I rest my fortune, first of all, upon God, His strength and
justice."

"Thou wilt find safer dependence there than upon the Lord of Mackworth,"
said the Prince, dryly. "But come," he added, with a sudden change of
voice and manner, "these be jests that border too closely upon bitter
earnest for a merry breakfast. It is ill to idle with edged tools. Wilt
thou not stay and break thy fast with us, my Lord?"

"Pardon me, your Highness," said the Earl, bowing, and smiling the same
smooth smile his lips had worn from the first--such a smile as Myles
had never thought to have seen upon his haughty face; "I crave your good
leave to decline. I must return home presently, for even now, haply,
your uncle, his Grace of Winchester, is awaiting my coming upon the
business you wot of. Haply your Highness will find more joyance in a
lusty young knight like Sir Myles than in an old fox like myself. So I
leave him with you, in your good care."

Such was Myles's introduction to the wild young madcap Prince of Wales,
afterwards the famous Henry V, the conqueror of France.

For a month or more thereafter he was a member of the princely
household, and, after a little while, a trusted and honored member.
Perhaps it was the calm sturdy strength, the courage of the young
knight, that first appealed to the Prince's royal heart; perhaps
afterwards it was the more sterling qualities that underlaid that
courage that drew him to the young man; certain it was that in two weeks
Myles was the acknowledged favorite. He made no protestation of virtue;
he always accompanied the Prince in those madcap ventures to London,
where he beheld all manner of wild revelry; he never held himself aloof
from his gay comrades, but he looked upon all their mad sports with the
same calm gaze that had carried him without taint through the courts of
Burgundy and the Dauphin. The gay, roistering young lords and gentlemen
dubbed him Saint Myles, and jested with him about hair-cloth shirts
and flagellations, but witticism and jest alike failed to move Myles's
patient virtue; he went his own gait in the habits of his life, and in
so going knew as little as the others of the mad court that the Prince's
growing liking for him was, perhaps, more than all else, on account of
that very temperance.

Then, by-and-by, the Prince began to confide in him as he did in none of
the others. There was no great love betwixt the King and his son; it has
happened very often that the Kings of England have felt bitter jealousy
towards the heirs-apparent as they have grown in power, and such was the
case with the great King Henry IV. The Prince often spoke to Myles of
the clashing and jarring between himself and his father, and the thought
began to come to Myles's mind by degrees that maybe the King's jealousy
accounted not a little for the Prince's reckless intemperance.

Once, for instance, as the Prince leaned upon, his shoulder waiting,
whilst the attendants made ready the barge that was to carry them down
the river to the city, he said, abruptly: "Myles, what thinkest thou of
us all? Doth not thy honesty hold us in contempt?"

"Nay, Highness," said Myles. "How could I hold contempt?"

"Marry," said the Prince, "I myself hold contempt, and am not as honest
a man as thou. But, prithee, have patience with me, Myles. Some day,
perhaps, I too will live a clean life. Now, an I live seriously, the
King will be more jealous of me than ever, and that is not a little.
Maybe I live thus so that he may not know what I really am in soothly
earnest."

The Prince also often talked to Myles concerning his own affairs; of
the battle he was to fight for his father's honor, of how the Earl of
Mackworth had plotted and planned to bring him face to face with the
Earl of Alban. He spoke to Myles more than once of the many great
changes of state and party that hung upon the downfall of the enemy
of the house of Falworth, and showed him how no hand but his own could
strike that enemy down; if he fell, it must be through the son of
Falworth. Sometimes it seemed to Myles as though he and his blind father
were the centre of a great web of plot and intrigue, stretching far and
wide, that included not only the greatest houses of England, but royalty
and the political balance of the country as well, and even before the
greatness of it all he did not flinch.

Then, at last, came the beginning of the time for action. It was in the
early part of May, and Myles had been a member of the Prince's household
for a little over a month. One morning he was ordered to attend the
Prince in his privy cabinet, and, obeying the summons, he found the
Prince, his younger brother, the Duke of Bedford, and his uncle, the
Bishop of Winchester, seated at a table, where they had just been
refreshing themselves with a flagon of wine and a plate of wafers.

"My poor Myles," said the Prince, smiling, as the young knight bowed to
the three, and then stood erect, as though on duty. "It shames my heart,
brother--and thou, uncle--it shames my heart to be one privy to this
thing which we are set upon to do. Here be we, the greatest Lords of
England, making a cat's-paw of this lad--for he is only yet a boy--and
of his blind father, for to achieve our ends against Alban's faction. It
seemeth not over-honorable to my mind."

"Pardon me, your Highness," said Myles, blushing to the roots of his
hair; "but, an I may be so bold as to speak, I reck nothing of what your
aims may be; I only look to restoring my father's honor and the honor of
our house."

"Truly," said the Prince, smiling, "that is the only matter that maketh
me willing to lay my hands to this business. Dost thou know why I have
sent for thee? It is because this day thou must challenge the Duke of
Alban before the King. The Earl of Mackworth has laid all his plans and
the time is now ripe. Knowest that thy father is at Mackworth House?"

"Nay," said Myles; "I knew it not."

"He hath been there for nearly two days," said the Prince. "Just now the
Earl hath sent for us to come first to Mackworth House. Then to go
to the palace, for he hath gained audience with the King, and hath so
arranged it that the Earl of Alban is to be there as well. We all go
straightway; so get thyself ready as soon as may be."

Perhaps Myles's heart began beating more quickly within him at the
nearness of that great happening which he had looked forward to for so
long. If it did, he made no sign of his emotion, but only asked, "How
must I clothe myself, your Highness?"

"Wear thy light armor," said the Prince, "but no helmet, a juppon
bearing the arms and colors that the Earl gave thee when thou wert
knighted, and carry thy right-hand gauntlet under thy belt for thy
challenge. Now make haste, for time passes."



CHAPTER 30

Adjoining the ancient palace of Westminster, where King Henry IV was
then holding his court, was a no less ancient stone building known as
the Painted Room. Upon the walls were depicted a series of battle scenes
in long bands reaching around this room, one above another. Some of
these pictures had been painted as far back as the days of Henry III,
others had been added since his time. They chronicled the various wars
of the King of England, and it was from them that the little hall took
its name of the Painted Room.

This ancient wing, or offshoot, of the main buildings was more retired
from the hurly-burly of outer life than other parts of the palace, and
thither the sick King was very fond of retiring from the business of
State, which ever rested more and more heavily upon his shoulders,
sometimes to squander in quietness a spare hour or two; sometimes to
idle over a favorite book; sometimes to play a game of chess with a
favorite courtier. The cold painted walls had been hung with tapestry,
and its floor had been spread with arras carpet. These and the cushioned
couches and chairs that stood around gave its gloomy antiquity an air of
comfort--an air even of luxury.

It was to this favorite retreat of the King's that Myles was brought
that morning with his father to face the great Earl of Alban.

In the anteroom the little party of Princes and nobles who escorted
the father and son had held a brief consultation. Then the others had
entered, leaving Myles and his blind father in charge of Lord Lumley and
two knights of the court, Sir Reginald Hallowell and Sir Piers Averell.

Myles, as he stood patiently waiting, with his father's arm resting in
his, could hear the muffled sound of voices from beyond the arras. Among
others, he recognized the well-remembered tones of the King. He fancied
that he heard his own name mentioned more than once, and then the sound
of talking ceased. The next moment the arras was drawn aside, and the
Earl entered the antechamber again.

"All is ready, cousin," said he to Lord Falworth, in a suppressed voice.
"Essex hath done as he promised, and Alban is within there now." Then,
turning to Myles, speaking in the same low voice, and betraying more
agitation than Myles had thought it possible for him to show, "Sir
Myles," said he, "remember all that hath been told thee. Thou knowest
what thou hast to say and do." Then, without further word, he took Lord
Falworth by the hand, and led the way into the room, Myles following
close behind.

The King half sat, half inclined, upon a cushioned seat close to which
stood the two Princes. There were some dozen others present, mostly
priests and noblemen of high quality who clustered in a group at a
little distance. Myles knew most of them at a glance having seen them
come and go at Scotland Yard. But among them all, he singled out only
one--the Earl of Alban. He had not seen that face since he was a little
child eight years old, but now that he beheld it again, it fitted
instantly and vividly into the remembrance of the time of that terrible
scene at Falworth Castle, when he had beheld the then Lord Brookhurst
standing above the dead body of Sir John Dale, with the bloody mace
clinched in his hand. There were the same heavy black brows, sinister
and gloomy, the same hooked nose, the same swarthy cheeks. He even
remembered the deep dent in the forehead, where the brows met in
perpetual frown. So it was that upon that face his looks centred and
rested.

The Earl of Alban had just been speaking to some Lord who stood beside
him, and a half-smile still hung about the corners of his lips. At
first, as he looked up at the entrance of the newcomers, there was no
other expression; then suddenly came a flash of recognition, a look of
wide-eyed amazement; then the blood left the cheeks and the lips, and
the face grew very pale. No doubt he saw at a flash that some great
danger overhung him in this sudden coming of his old enemy, for he was
as keen and as astute a politician as he was a famous warrior. At least
he knew that the eyes of most of those present were fixed keenly and
searchingly upon him. After the first start of recognition, his left
hand, hanging at his side, gradually closed around the scabbard of his
sword, clutching it in a vice-like grip.

Meantime the Earl of Mackworth had led the blind Lord to the King, where
both kneeled.

"Why, how now, my Lord?" said the King. "Methought it was our young
Paladin whom we knighted at Devlen that was to be presented, and here
thou bringest this old man. A blind man, ha! What is the meaning of
this?"

"Majesty," said the Earl, "I have taken this chance to bring to thy
merciful consideration one who hath most wofully and unjustly suffered
from thine anger. Yonder stands the young knight of whom we spake; this
is his father, Gilbert Reginald, whilom Lord Falworth, who craves mercy
and justice at thy hands."

"Falworth," said the King, placing his hand to his head. "The name is
not strange to mine ears, but I cannot place it. My head hath troubled
me sorely to-day, and I cannot remember."

At this point the Earl of Alban came quietly and deliberately forward.
"Sire," said he, "pardon my boldness in so venturing to address you, but
haply I may bring the name more clearly to your mind. He is, as my Lord
of Mackworth said, the whilom Baron Falworth, the outlawed, attainted
traitor; so declared for the harboring of Sir John Dale, who was one of
those who sought your Majesty's life at Windsor eleven years ago.
Sire, he is mine enemy as well, and is brought hither by my proclaimed
enemies. Should aught occur to my harm, I rest my case in your gracious
hands."

The dusty red flamed into the King's pale, sickly face in answer, and he
rose hastily from his seat.

"Aye," said he, "I remember me now--I remember me the man and the name!
Who hath dared bring him here before us?" All the dull heaviness of
sickness was gone for the moment, and King Henry was the King Henry of
ten years ago as he rolled his eyes balefully from one to another of the
courtiers who stood silently around.

The Earl of Mackworth shot a covert glance at the Bishop of Winchester,
who came forward in answer.

"Your Majesty," said he, "here am I, your brother, who beseech you as
your brother not to judge over-hastily in this matter. It is true
that this man has been adjudged a traitor, but he has been so adjudged
without a hearing. I beseech thee to listen patiently to whatsoever he
may have to say."

The King fixed the Bishop with a look of the bitterest, deepest anger,
holding his nether lip tightly under his teeth--a trick he had when
strongly moved with anger--and the Bishop's eyes fell under the look.
Meantime the Earl of Alban stood calm and silent. No doubt he saw that
the King's anger was likely to befriend him more than any words that he
himself could say, and he perilled his case with no more speech which
could only prove superfluous.

At last the King turned a face red and swollen with anger to the blind
Lord, who still kneeled before him.

"What hast thou to say?" he said, in a deep and sullen voice.

"Gracious and merciful Lord," said the blind nobleman, "I come to thee,
the fountain-head of justice, craving justice. Sire, I do now and here
deny my treason, which denial I could not before make, being blind and
helpless, and mine enemies strong and malignant. But now, sire, Heaven
hath sent me help, and therefore I do acclaim before thee that my
accuser, William Bushy Brookhurst, Earl of Alban, is a foul and an
attainted liar in all that he hath accused me of. To uphold which
allegation, and to defend me, who am blinded by his unknightliness, I do
offer a champion to prove all that I say with his body in combat."

The Earl of Mackworth darted a quick look at Myles, who came forward the
moment his father had ended, and kneeled beside him. The King offered no
interruption to his speech, but he bent a look heavy with anger upon the
young man.

"My gracious Lord and King," said Myles, "I, the son of the accused, do
offer myself as his champion in this cause, beseeching thee of thy grace
leave to prove the truth of the same, being a belted knight by thy grace
and of thy creation and the peer of any who weareth spurs." Thereupon,
rising, he drew his iron gauntlet from his girdle, and flung it clashing
down upon the floor, and with his heart swelling within him with anger
and indignation and pity of his blind father, he cried, in a loud
voice, "I do accuse thee, William of Alban, that thou liest vilely as
aforesaid, and here cast down my gage, daring thee to take it up."

The Earl of Alban made as though he would accept the challenge, but the
King stopped him hastily.

"Stop!" he cried, harshly. "Touch not the gage! Let it lie--let it lie,
I tell thee, my Lord! Now then," said he, turning to the others, "tell
me what meaneth all this coil? Who brought this man hither?"

He looked from one to another of those who stood silently around, but no
one answered.

"I see," said he, "ye all have had to do with it. It is as my Lord of
Alban sayeth; ye are his enemies, and ye are my enemies as well. In this
I do smell a vile plot. I cannot undo what I have done, and since I have
made this young man a knight with mine own hands, I cannot deny that
he is fit to challenge my Lord of Alban. Ne'theless, the High Court of
Chivalry shall adjudge this case. Meantime," said he, turning to the
Earl Marshal, who was present, "I give thee this attainted Lord in
charge. Convey him presently to the Tower, and let him abide our
pleasure there. Also, thou mayst take up yon gage, and keep it till it
is redeemed according to our pleasure."

He stood thoughtfully for a moment, and then raising his eyes, looked
fixedly at the Earl of Mackworth. "I know," he said, "that I be a right
sick man, and there be some who are already plotting to overthrow those
who have held up my hand with their own strength for all these years."
Then speaking more directly: "My Lord Earl of Mackworth, I see your hand
in this before all others. It was thou who so played upon me as to get
me to knight this young man, and thus make him worthy to challenge my
Lord of Alban. It was thy doings that brought him here to-day, backed
by mine own sons and my brother and by these noblemen." Then turning
suddenly to the Earl of Alban: "Come, my Lord," said he; "I am aweary
with all this coil. Lend me thine arm to leave this place." So it
was that he left the room, leaning upon the Earl of Alban's arm, and
followed by the two or three of the Alban faction who were present.

"Your Royal Highness," said the Earl Marshal, "I must e'en do the King's
bidding, and take this gentleman into arrest."

"Do thy duty," said the Prince. "We knew it must come to this. Meanwhile
he is to be a prisoner of honor, and see that he be well lodged and
cared for. Thou wilt find my barge at the stairs to convey him down the
river, and I myself will come this afternoon to visit him."



CHAPTER 31

It was not until the end of July that the High Court of Chivalry
rendered its judgment. There were many unusual points in the case, some
of which bore heavily against Lord Falworth, some of which were in
his favor. He was very ably defended by the lawyers whom the Earl
of Mackworth had engaged upon his side; nevertheless, under ordinary
circumstances, the judgment, no doubt, would have been quickly rendered
against him. As it was, however, the circumstances were not ordinary,
and it was rendered in his favor. The Court besought the King to grant
the ordeal by battle, to accept Lord Falworth's champion, and to appoint
the time and place for the meeting.

The decision must have been a most bitter, galling one for the sick
King. He was naturally of a generous, forgiving nature, but Lord
Falworth in his time of power had been an unrelenting and fearless
opponent, and his Majesty who, like most generous men, could on
occasions be very cruel and intolerant, had never forgiven him. He had
steadily thrown the might of his influence with the Court against the
Falworths' case, but that influence was no longer all-powerful for good
or ill. He was failing in health, and it could only be a matter of a few
years, probably of only a few months, before his successor sat upon the
throne.

Upon the other hand, the Prince of Wales's faction had been steadily,
and of late rapidly, increasing in power, and in the Earl of Mackworth,
its virtual head, it possessed one of the most capable politicians and
astute intriguers in Europe. So, as the outcome of all the plotting and
counter-plotting, scheming and counter-scheming, the case was decided in
Lord Falworth's favor. The knowledge of the ultimate result was known
to the Prince of Wales's circle almost a week before it was finally
decided. Indeed, the Earl of Mackworth had made pretty sure of that
result before he had summoned Myles from France, but upon the King it
fell like the shock of a sudden blow. All that day he kept himself in
moody seclusion, nursing his silent, bitter anger, and making only
one outbreak, in which he swore by the Holy Rood that should Myles be
worsted in the encounter, he would not take the battle into his own
hands, but would suffer him to be slain, and furthermore, that should
the Earl show signs of failing at any time, he would do all in his power
to save him. One of the courtiers who had been present, and who was
secretly inclined to the Prince of Wales's faction, had repeated this
speech at Scotland Yard, and the Prince had said, "That meaneth, Myles,
that thou must either win or die."

"And so I would have it to be, my Lord," Myles had answered.

It was not until nearly a fortnight after the decision of the Court of
Chivalry had been rendered that the King announced the time and place
of battle--the time to be the 3d of September, the place to be
Smithfield--a spot much used for such encounters.

During the three weeks or so that intervened between this announcement
and the time of combat, Myles went nearly every day to visit the lists
in course of erection. Often the Prince went with him; always two or
three of his friends of the Scotland Yard court accompanied him.

The lists were laid out in the usual form. The true or principal list in
which the combatants were to engage was sixty yards long and forty yards
wide; this rectangular space being surrounded by a fence about six feet
high, painted vermilion. Between the fence and the stand where the King
and the spectators sat, and surrounding the central space, was the
outer or false list, also surrounded by a fence. In the false list the
Constable and the Marshal and their followers and attendants were to be
stationed at the time of battle to preserve the general peace during the
contest between the principals.

One day as Myles, his princely patron, and his friends entered the
barriers, leaving their horses at the outer gate, they met the Earl of
Alban and his followers, who were just quitting the lists, which they
also were in the habit of visiting nearly every day. As the two parties
passed one another, the Earl spoke to a gentleman walking beside him and
in a voice loud enough to be clearly overheard by the others: "Yonder
is the young sprig of Falworth," said he. "His father, my Lords, is
not content with forfeiting his own life for his treason, but must,
forsooth, throw away his son's also. I have faced and overthrown many a
better knight than that boy."

Myles heard the speech, and knew that it was intended for him to hear
it; but he paid no attention to it, walking composedly at the Prince's
side. The Prince had also overheard it, and after a little space of
silence asked, "Dost thou not feel anxiety for thy coming battle,
Myles?"

"Yea, my Lord," said Myles; "sometimes I do feel anxiety, but not such
as my Lord of Alban would have me feel in uttering the speech that he
spake anon. It is anxiety for my father's sake and my mother's sake that
I feel, for truly there are great matters for them pending upon this
fight. Ne'theless, I do know that God will not desert me in my cause,
for verily my father is no traitor."

"But the Earl of Alban," said the Prince, gravely, "is reputed one of
the best-skilled knights in all England; moreover, he is merciless and
without generosity, so that an he gain aught advantage over thee, he
will surely slay thee."

"I am not afraid, my Lord," said Myles, still calmly and composedly.

"Nor am I afraid for thee, Myles," said the Prince, heartily, putting
his arm, as he spoke, around the young man's shoulder; "for truly, wert
thou a knight of forty years, instead of one of twenty, thou couldst not
bear thyself with more courage."

As the time for the duel approached, the days seemed to drag themselves
along upon leaden feet; nevertheless, the days came and went, as all
days do, bringing with them, at last, the fateful 3d of September.

Early in the morning, while the sun was still level and red, the Prince
himself, unattended, came to Myles's apartment, in the outer room of
which Gascoyne was bustling busily about arranging the armor piece by
piece; renewing straps and thongs, but not whistling over his work as he
usually did. The Prince nodded to him, and then passed silently through
to the inner chamber. Myles was upon his knees, and Father Ambrose,
the Prince's chaplain, was beside him. The Prince stood silently at the
door, until Myles, having told his last bead, rose and turned towards
him.

"My dear Lord," said the young knight, "I give you gramercy for the
great honor you do me in coming so early for to visit me."

"Nay, Myles, give me no thanks," said the Prince, frankly reaching him
his hand, which Myles took and set to his lips. "I lay bethinking me of
thee this morning, while yet in bed, and so, as I could not sleep any
more, I was moved to come hither to see thee."

Quite a number of the Prince's faction were at the breakfast at Scotland
Yard that morning; among others, the Earl of Mackworth. All were more or
less oppressed with anxiety, for nearly all of them had staked much upon
the coming battle. If Alban conquered, he would be more powerful to harm
them and to revenge himself upon them than ever, and Myles was a very
young champion upon whom to depend. Myles himself, perhaps, showed as
little anxiety as any; he certainly ate more heartily of his breakfast
that morning than many of the others.

After the meal was ended, the Prince rose. "The boat is ready at the
stairs," said he; "if thou wouldst go to the Tower to visit thy father,
Myles, before hearing mass, I and Cholmondeley and Vere and Poins will
go with thee, if ye, Lords and gentlemen, will grant me your pardon
for leaving you. Are there any others that thou wouldst have accompany
thee?"

"I would have Sir James Lee and my squire, Master Gascoyne, if thou art
so pleased to give them leave to go," answered Myles.

"So be it," said the Prince. "We will stop at Mackworth stairs for the
knight."

The barge landed at the west stairs of the Tower wharf, and the whole
party were received with more than usual civilities by the Governor, who
conducted them at once to the Tower where Lord Falworth was lodged. Lady
Falworth met them at the head of the stairs; her eyes were very red and
her face pale, and as Myles raised her hand and set a long kiss upon it,
her lips trembled, and she turned her face quickly away, pressing
her handkerchief for one moment to her eyes. Poor lady! What agony of
anxiety and dread did she not suffer for her boy's sake that day! Myles
had not hidden both from her and his father that he must either win or
die.

As Myles turned from his mother, Prior Edward came out from the inner
chamber, and was greeted warmly by him. The old priest had arrived in
London only the day before, having come down from Crosbey Priory to be
with his friend's family during this their time of terrible anxiety.

After a little while of general talk, the Prince and his attendants
retired, leaving the family together, only Sir James Lee and Gascoyne
remaining behind.

Many matters that had been discussed before were now finally settled,
the chief of which was the disposition of Lady Falworth in case the
battle should go against them. Then Myles took his leave, kissing his
mother, who began crying, and comforting her with brave assurances.
Prior Edward accompanied him as far as the head of the Tower stairs,
where Myles kneeled upon the stone steps, while the good priest blessed
him and signed the cross upon his forehead. The Prince was waiting in
the walled garden adjoining, and as they rowed back again up the river
to Scotland Yard, all were thoughtful and serious, even Poins' and
Vere's merry tongues being stilled from their usual quips and jesting.

It was about the quarter of the hour before eleven o'clock when Myles,
with Gascoyne, set forth for the lists. The Prince of Wales, together
with most of his court, had already gone on to Smithfield, leaving
behind him six young knights of his household to act as escort to the
young champion. Then at last the order to horse was given; the great
gate swung open, and out they rode, clattering and jingling, the
sunlight gleaming and flaming and flashing upon their polished armor.
They drew rein to the right, and so rode in a little cloud of dust along
the Strand Street towards London town, with the breeze blowing merrily,
and the sunlight shining as sweetly and blithesomely as though they were
riding to a wedding rather than to a grim and dreadful ordeal that meant
either victory or death.



CHAPTER 32

In the days of King Edward III a code of laws relating to trial by
battle had been compiled for one of his sons, Thomas of Woodstock. In
this work each and every detail, to the most minute, had been arranged
and fixed, and from that time judicial combats had been regulated in
accordance with its mandates.

It was in obedience to this code that Myles Falworth appeared at the
east gate of the lists (the east gate being assigned by law to the
challenger), clad in full armor of proof, attended by Gascoyne, and
accompanied by two of the young knights who had acted as his escort from
Scotland Yard.

At the barriers he was met by the attorney Willingwood, the chief lawyer
who had conducted the Falworth case before the High Court of Chivalry,
and who was to attend him during the administration of the oaths before
the King.

As Myles presented himself at the gate he was met by the Constable, the
Marshal, and their immediate attendants. The Constable, laying his hand
upon the bridle-rein, said, in a loud voice: "Stand, Sir Knight, and
tell me why thou art come thus armed to the gates of the lists. What is
thy name? Wherefore art thou come?"

Myles answered, "I am Myles Falworth, a Knight of the Bath by grace of
his Majesty King Henry IV and by his creation, and do come hither to
defend my challenge upon the body of William Bushy Brookhurst, Earl of
Alban, proclaiming him an unknightly knight and a false and perjured
liar, in that he hath accused Gilbert Reginald, Lord Falworth, of
treason against our beloved Lord, his Majesty the King, and may God
defend the right!"

As he ended speaking, the Constable advanced close to his side, and
formally raising the umbril of the helmet, looked him in the face.
Thereupon, having approved his identity, he ordered the gates to be
opened, and bade Myles enter the lists with his squire and his friends.

At the south side of the lists a raised scaffolding had been built for
the King and those who looked on. It was not unlike that which had
been erected at Devlen Castle when Myles had first jousted as belted
knight--here were the same raised seat for the King, the tapestries, the
hangings, the fluttering pennons, and the royal standard floating above;
only here were no fair-faced ladies looking down upon him, but instead,
stern-browed Lords and knights in armor and squires, and here were no
merry laughing and buzz of talk and flutter of fans and kerchiefs, but
all was very quiet and serious.

Myles riding upon his horse, with Gascoyne holding the bridle-rein,
and his attorney walking beside him with his hand upon the stirrups,
followed the Constable across the lists to an open space in front of the
seat where the King sat. Then, having reached his appointed station, he
stopped, and the Constable, advancing to the foot of the stair-way that
led to the dais above, announced in a loud voice that the challenger had
entered the lists.

"Then called the defendant straightway," said the King, "for noon
draweth nigh."

The day was very warm, and the sun, bright and unclouded, shone fiercely
down upon the open lists. Perhaps few men nowadays could bear the
scorching heat of iron plates such as Myles wore, from which the body
was only protected by a leathern jacket and hose. But men's bodies in
those days were tougher and more seasoned to hardships of weather than
they are in these our times. Myles thought no more of the burning
iron plates that incased him than a modern soldier thinks of his dress
uniform in warm weather. Nevertheless, he raised the umbril of his
helmet to cool his face as he waited the coming of his opponent. He
turned his eyes upward to the row of seats on the scaffolding above,
and even in the restless, bewildering multitude of strange faces turned
towards him recognized those that he knew: the Prince of Wales, his
companions of the Scotland Yard household, the Duke of Clarence,
the Bishop of Winchester, and some of the noblemen of the Earl of
Mackworth's party, who had been buzzing about the Prince for the past
month or so. But his glance swept over all these, rather perceiving
than seeing them, and then rested upon a square box-like compartment not
unlike a prisoner's dock in the courtroom of our day, for in the box sat
his father, with the Earl of Mackworth upon one side and Sir James Lee
upon the other. The blind man's face was very pale, but still wore its
usual expression of calm serenity--the calm serenity of a blind face.
The Earl was also very pale, and he kept his eyes fixed steadfastly upon
Myles with a keen and searching look, as though to pierce to the very
bottom of the young man's heart, and discover if indeed not one little
fragment of dryrot of fear or uncertainty tainted the solid courage of
his knighthood.

Then he heard the criers calling the defendant at the four corners of
the list: "Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! William Bushy Brookhurst, Earl of Alban,
come to this combat, in which you be enterprised this day to discharge
your sureties before the King, the Constable, and the Marshal, and to
encounter in your defence Myles Falworth, knight, the accepted champion
upon behalf of Gilbert Reginald Falworth, the challenger! Oyez! Oyez!
Oyez! Let the defendant come!"

So they continued calling, until, by the sudden turning of all faces,
Myles knew that his enemy was at hand.

Then presently he saw the Earl and his attendants enter the outer gate
at the west end of the barrier; he saw the Constable and Marshal meet
him; he saw the formal words of greeting pass; he saw the Constable
raise the umbril of the helmet. Then the gate opened, and the Earl of
Alban entered, clad cap-a-pie in a full suit of magnificent Milan armor
without juppon or adornment of any kind. As he approached across the
lists, Myles closed the umbril of his helmet, and then sat quite still
and motionless, for the time was come.

So he sat, erect and motionless as a statue of iron, half hearing the
reading of the long intricately-worded bills, absorbed in many thoughts
of past and present things. At last the reading ended, and then he
calmly and composedly obeyed, under the direction of his attorney,
the several forms and ceremonies that followed; answered the various
official questions, took the various oaths. Then Gascoyne, leading the
horse by the bridle-rein, conducted him back to his station at the east
end of the lists.

As the faithful friend and squire made one last and searching
examination of arms and armor, the Marshal and the clerk came to the
young champion and administered the final oath by which he swore that he
carried no concealed weapons.

The weapons allowed by the High Court were then measured and attested.
They consisted of the long sword, the short sword, the dagger, the mace,
and a weapon known as the hand-gisarm, or glave-lot--a heavy swordlike
blade eight palms long, a palm in breadth, and riveted to a stout handle
of wood three feet long.

The usual lance had not been included in the list of arms, the
hand-gisarm being substituted in its place. It was a fearful and
murderous weapon, though cumbersome, Unhandy, and ill adapted for quick
or dexterous stroke; nevertheless, the Earl of Alban had petitioned
the King to have it included in the list, and in answer to the King's
expressed desire the Court had adopted it in the stead of the lance,
yielding thus much to the royal wishes. Nor was it a small concession.
The hand-gisarm had been a weapon very much in vogue in King Richard's
day, and was now nearly if not entirely out of fashion with the younger
generation of warriors. The Earl of Alban was, of course, well used to
the blade; with Myles it was strange and new, either for attack or in
defence.

With the administration of the final oath and the examination of the
weapons, the preliminary ceremonies came to an end, and presently Myles
heard the criers calling to clear the lists. As those around him moved
to withdraw, the young knight drew off his mailed gauntlet, and gave
Gascoyne's hand one last final clasp, strong, earnest, and intense with
the close friendship of young manhood, and poor Gascoyne looked up at
him with a face ghastly white.

Then all were gone; the gates of the principal list and that of the
false list were closed clashing, and Myles was alone, face to face, with
his mortal enemy.



CHAPTER 33

There was a little while of restless, rustling silence, during which the
Constable took his place in the seat appointed for him directly in
front of and below the King's throne. A moment or two when even the
restlessness and the rustling were quieted, and then the King leaned
forward and spoke to the Constable, who immediately called out, in a
loud, clear voice.

"Let them go!" Then again, "Let them go!" Then, for the third and last
time, "Let them go and do their endeavor, in God's name!"

At this third command the combatants, each of whom had till that moment
been sitting as motionless as a statue of iron, tightened rein, and rode
slowly and deliberately forward without haste, yet without hesitation,
until they met in the very middle of the lists.

In the battle which followed, Myles fought with the long sword, the Earl
with the hand-gisarm for which he had asked. The moment they met, the
combat was opened, and for a time nothing was heard but the thunderous
clashing and clamor of blows, now and then beating intermittently, now
and then pausing. Occasionally, as the combatants spurred together,
checked, wheeled, and recovered, they would be hidden for a moment in
a misty veil of dust, which, again drifting down the wind, perhaps
revealed them drawn a little apart, resting their panting horses. Then,
again, they would spur together, striking as they passed, wheeling and
striking again.

Upon the scaffolding all was still, only now and then for the buzz of
muffled exclamations or applause of those who looked on. Mostly the
applause was from Myles's friends, for from the very first he showed and
steadily maintained his advantage over the older man. "Hah! well struck!
well recovered!" "Look ye! the sword bit that time!" "Nay, look, saw ye
him pass the point of the gisarm?" Then, "Falworth! Falworth!" as some
more than usually skilful stroke or parry occurred.

Meantime Myles's father sat straining his sightless eyeballs, as though
to pierce his body's darkness with one ray of light that would show him
how his boy held his own in the fight, and Lord Mackworth, leaning with
his lips close to the blind man's ear, told him point by point how the
battle stood.

"Fear not, Gilbert," said he at each pause in the fight. "He holdeth his
own right well." Then, after a while: "God is with us, Gilbert. Alban
is twice wounded and his horse faileth. One little while longer and the
victory is ours!"

A longer and more continuous interval of combat followed this
last assurance, during which Myles drove the assault fiercely and
unrelentingly as though to overbear his enemy by the very power
and violence of the blows he delivered. The Earl defended himself
desperately, but was borne back, back, back, farther and farther. Every
nerve of those who looked on was stretched to breathless tensity, when,
almost as his enemy was against the barriers, Myles paused and rested.

"Out upon it!" exclaimed the Earl of Mackworth, almost shrilly in his
excitement, as the sudden lull followed the crashing of blows. "Why doth
the boy spare him? That is thrice he hath given him grace to recover;
an he had pushed the battle that time he had driven him back against the
barriers."

It was as the Earl had said; Myles had three times given his enemy grace
when victory was almost in his very grasp. He had three times spared
him, in spite of all he and those dear to him must suffer should his
cruel and merciless enemy gain the victory. It was a false and foolish
generosity, partly the fault of his impulsive youth--more largely of
his romantic training in the artificial code of French chivalry. He felt
that the battle was his, and so he gave his enemy these three chances to
recover, as some chevalier or knight-errant of romance might have
done, instead of pushing the combat to a mercifully speedy end--and his
foolish generosity cost him dear.

In the momentary pause that had thus stirred the Earl of Mackworth to
a sudden outbreak, the Earl of Alban sat upon his panting, sweating
war-horse, facing his powerful young enemy at about twelve paces
distant. He sat as still as a rock, holding his gisarm poised in front
of him. He had, as the Earl of Mackworth had said, been wounded twice,
and each time with the point of the sword, so much more dangerous than a
direct cut with the weapon. One wound was beneath his armor, and no one
but he knew how serious it might be; the other was under the overlapping
of the epauhere, and from it a finger's-breadth of blood ran straight
down his side and over the housings of his horse. From without, the
still motionless iron figure appeared calm and expressionless; within,
who knows what consuming blasts of hate, rage, and despair swept his
heart as with a fiery whirlwind.

As Myles looked at the motionless, bleeding figure, his breast swelled
with pity. "My Lord," said he, "thou art sore wounded and the fight is
against thee; wilt thou not yield thee?"

No one but that other heard the speech, and no one but Myles heard the
answer that came back, hollow, cavernous, "Never, thou dog! Never!"

Then in an instant, as quick as a flash, his enemy spurred straight upon
Myles, and as he spurred he struck a last desperate, swinging blow, in
which he threw in one final effort all the strength of hate, of fury,
and of despair. Myles whirled his horse backward, warding the blow with
his shield as he did so. The blade glanced from the smooth face of the
shield, and, whether by mistake or not, fell straight and true, and with
almost undiminished force, upon the neck of Myles's war-horse, and just
behind the ears. The animal staggered forward, and then fell upon its
knees, and at the same instant the other, as though by the impetus of
the rush, dashed full upon it with all the momentum lent by the weight
of iron it carried. The shock was irresistible, and the stunned and
wounded horse was flung upon the ground, rolling over and over. As his
horse fell, Myles wrenched one of his feet out of the stirrup; the other
caught for an instant, and he was flung headlong with stunning violence,
his armor crashing as he fell. In the cloud of dust that arose no
one could see just what happened, but that what was done was done
deliberately no one doubted. The earl, at once checking and spurring
his foaming charger, drove the iron-shod war-horse directly over Myles's
prostrate body. Then, checking him fiercely with the curb, reined him
back, the hoofs clashing and crashing, over the figure beneath. So
he had ridden over the father at York, and so he rode over the son at
Smithfield.

Myles, as he lay prostrate and half stunned by his fall, had seen his
enemy thus driving his rearing horse down upon him, but was not able to
defend himself. A fallen knight in full armor was utterly powerless to
rise without assistance; Myles lay helpless in the clutch of the very
iron that was his defence. He closed his eyes involuntarily, and then
horse and rider were upon him. There was a deafening, sparkling crash,
a glimmering faintness, then another crash as the horse was reined
furiously back again, and then a humming stillness.

In a moment, upon the scaffolding all was a tumult of uproar and
confusion, shouting and gesticulation; only the King sat calm, sullen,
impassive. The Earl wheeled his horse and sat for a moment or two as
though to make quite sure that he knew the King's mind. The blow that
had been given was foul, unknightly, but the King gave no sign either of
acquiescence or rebuke; he had willed that Myles was to die.

Then the Earl turned again, and rode deliberately up to his prostrate
enemy.

When Myles opened his eyes after that moment of stunning silence, it was
to see the other looming above him on his war-horse, swinging his gisarm
for one last mortal blow--pitiless, merciless.

The sight of that looming peril brought back Myles's wandering senses
like a flash of lightning. He flung up his shield, and met the blow even
as it descended, turning it aside. It only protracted the end.

Once more the Earl of Alban raised the gisarm, swinging it twice around
his head before he struck. This time, though the shield glanced it, the
blow fell upon the shoulder-piece, biting through the steel plate and
leathern jack beneath even to the bone. Then Myles covered his head with
his shield as a last protecting chance for life.

For the third time the Earl swung the blade flashing, and then it fell,
straight and true, upon the defenceless body, just below the left arm,
biting deep through the armor plates. For an instant the blade stuck
fast, and that instant was Myles's salvation. Under the agony of the
blow he gave a muffled cry, and almost instinctively grasped the shaft
of the weapon with both hands. Had the Earl let go his end of the
weapon, he would have won the battle at his leisure and most easily; as
it was, he struggled violently to wrench the gisarm away from Myles. In
that short, fierce struggle Myles was dragged to his knees, and then,
still holding the weapon with one hand, he clutched the trappings of the
Earl's horse with the other. The next moment he was upon his feet. The
other struggled to thrust him away, but Myles, letting go the gisarm,
which he held with his left hand, clutched him tightly by the sword-belt
in the intense, vise-like grip of despair. In vain the Earl strove to
beat him loose with the shaft of the gisarm, in vain he spurred and
reared his horse to shake him off; Myles held him tight, in spite of all
his struggles.

He felt neither the streaming blood nor the throbbing agony of his
wounds; every faculty of soul, mind, body, every power of life, was
centered in one intense, burning effort. He neither felt, thought, nor
reasoned, but clutching, with the blindness of instinct, the heavy,
spiked, iron-headed mace that hung at the Earl's saddle-bow, he gave it
one tremendous wrench that snapped the plaited leathern thongs that held
it as though they were skeins of thread. Then, grinding his teeth as
with a spasm, he struck as he had never struck before--once, twice,
thrice full upon the front of the helmet. Crash! crash! And then, even
as the Earl toppled sidelong, crash! And the iron plates split and
crackled under the third blow. Myles had one flashing glimpse of an
awful face, and then the saddle was empty.

Then, as he held tight to the horse, panting, dizzy, sick to death, he
felt the hot blood gushing from his side, filling his body armor, and
staining the ground upon which he stood. Still he held tightly to the
saddle-bow of the fallen man's horse until, through his glimmering
sight, he saw the Marshal, the Lieutenant, and the attendants gather
around him. He heard the Marshal ask him, in a voice that sounded faint
and distant, if he was dangerously wounded. He did not answer, and one
of the attendants, leaping from his horse, opened the umbril of his
helmet, disclosing the dull, hollow eyes, the ashy, colorless lips, and
the waxy forehead, upon which stood great beads of sweat.

"Water! water!" he cried, hoarsely; "give me to drink!" Then, quitting
his hold upon the horse, he started blindly across the lists towards the
gate of the barrier. A shadow that chilled his heart seemed to fall upon
him. "It is death," he muttered; then he stopped, then swayed for an
instant, and then toppled headlong, crashing as he fell.



CONCLUSION

But Myles was not dead. Those who had seen his face when the umbril of
the helmet was raised, and then saw him fall as he tottered across the
lists, had at first thought so. But his faintness was more from loss
of blood and the sudden unstringing of nerve and sense from the intense
furious strain of the last few moments of battle than from the vital
nature of the wound. Indeed, after Myles had been carried out of the
lists and laid upon the ground in the shade between the barriers,
Master Thomas, the Prince's barber-surgeon, having examined the wounds,
declared that he might be even carried on a covered litter to Scotland
Yard without serious danger. The Prince was extremely desirous of having
him under his care, and so the venture was tried. Myles was carried to
Scotland Yard, and perhaps was none the worse therefore. The Prince, the
Earl of Mackworth, and two or three others stood silently watching as
the worthy shaver and leecher, assisted by his apprentice and Gascoyne,
washed and bathed the great gaping wound in the side, and bound it with
linen bandages. Myles lay with closed eyelids, still, pallid, weak as
a little child. Presently he opened his eyes and turned them, dull and
languid, to the Prince.

"What hath happed my father, my Lord?" said he, in a faint, whispering
voice.

"Thou hath saved his life and honor, Myles," the Prince answered. "He
is here now, and thy mother hath been sent for, and cometh anon with the
priest who was with them this morn."

Myles dropped his eyelids again; his lips moved, but he made no sound,
and then two bright tears trickled across his white cheek.

"He maketh a woman of me," the Prince muttered through his teeth, and
then, swinging on his heel, he stood for a long time looking out of the
window into the garden beneath.

"May I see my father?" said Myles, presently, without opening his eyes.

The Prince turned around and looked inquiringly at the surgeon.

The good man shook his head. "Not to-day," said he; "haply to-morrow he
may see him and his mother. The bleeding is but new stanched, and such
matters as seeing his father and mother may make the heart to swell, and
so maybe the wound burst afresh and he die. An he would hope to live, he
must rest quiet until to-morrow day."

But though Myles's wound was not mortal, it was very serious. The fever
which followed lingered longer than common--perhaps because of the hot
weather--and the days stretched to weeks, and the weeks to months, and
still he lay there, nursed by his mother and Gascoyne and Prior Edward,
and now and again by Sir James Lee.

One day, a little before the good priest returned to Saint Mary's
Priory, as he sat by Myles's bedside, his hands folded, and his sight
turned inward, the young man suddenly said, "Tell me, holy father, is it
always wrong for man to slay man?"

The good priest sat silent for so long a time that Myles began to think
he had not heard the question. But by-and-by he answered, almost with a
sigh, "It is a hard question, my son, but I must in truth say, meseems
it is not always wrong."

"Sir," said Myles, "I have been in battle when men were slain, but never
did I think thereon as I have upon this matter. Did I sin in so slaying
my father's enemy?"

"Nay," said Prior Edward, quietly, "thou didst not sin. It was for
others thou didst fight, my son, and for others it is pardonable to do
battle. Had it been thine own quarrel, it might haply have been more
hard to have answered thee."

Who can gainsay, even in these days of light, the truth of this that the
good priest said to the sick lad so far away in the past?


One day the Earl of Mackworth came to visit Myles. At that time the
young knight was mending, and was sitting propped up with pillows, and
was wrapped in Sir James Lee's cloak, for the day was chilly. After a
little time of talk, a pause of silence fell.

"My Lord," said Myles, suddenly, "dost thou remember one part of a
matter we spoke of when I first came from France?"

The Earl made no pretence of ignorance. "I remember," said he, quietly,
looking straight into the young man's thin white face.

"And have I yet won the right to ask for the Lady Alice de Mowbray to
wife?" said Myles, the red rising faintly to his cheeks.

"Thou hast won it," said the Earl, with a smile.

Myles's eyes shone and his lips trembled with the pang of sudden joy
and triumph, for he was still very weak. "My Lord," said he, presently
"belike thou camest here to see me for this very matter?"

The Earl smiled again without answering, and Myles knew that he had
guessed aright. He reached out one of his weak, pallid hands from
beneath the cloak. The Earl of Mackworth took it with a firm pressure,
then instantly quitting it again, rose, as if ashamed of his emotion,
stamped his feet, as though in pretence of being chilled, and then
crossed the room to where the fire crackled brightly in the great stone
fireplace.


Little else remains to be told; only a few loose strands to tie, and the
story is complete.

Though Lord Falworth was saved from death at the block, though his honor
was cleansed from stain, he was yet as poor and needy as ever. The
King, in spite of all the pressure brought to bear upon him, refused to
restore the estates of Falworth and Easterbridge--the latter of which
had again reverted to the crown upon the death of the Earl of Alban
without issue--upon the grounds that they had been forfeited not because
of the attaint of treason, but because of Lord Falworth having refused
to respond to the citation of the courts. So the business dragged along
for month after month, until in January the King died suddenly in the
Jerusalem Chamber at Westminster. Then matters went smoothly enough, and
Falworth and Mackworth swam upon the flood-tide of fortune.


So Myles was married, for how else should the story end? And one day
he brought his beautiful young wife home to Falworth Castle, which his
father had given him for his own, and at the gateway of which he was met
by Sir James Lee and by the newly-knighted Sir Francis Gascoyne.

One day, soon after this home-coming, as he stood with her at an open
window into which came blowing the pleasant May-time breeze, he suddenly
said, "What didst thou think of me when I first fell almost into thy
lap, like an apple from heaven?"

"I thought thou wert a great, good-hearted boy, as I think thou art
now," said she, twisting his strong, sinewy fingers in and out.

"If thou thoughtst me so then, what a very fool I must have looked to
thee when I so clumsily besought thee for thy favor for my jousting at
Devlen. Did I not so?"

"Thou didst look to me the most noble, handsome young knight that did
ever live; thou didst look to me Sir Galahad, as they did call thee,
withouten taint or stain."

Myles did not even smile in answer, but looked at his wife with such a
look that she blushed a rosy red. Then, laughing, she slipped from his
hold, and before he could catch her again was gone.

I am glad that he was to be rich and happy and honored and beloved after
all his hard and noble fighting.







I. The Dragon's House.

Up from the gray rocks, rising sheer and bold and bare, stood the walls
and towers of Castle Drachenhausen. A great gate-way, with a heavy
iron-pointed portcullis hanging suspended in the dim arch above, yawned
blackly upon the bascule or falling drawbridge that spanned a chasm
between the blank stone walls and the roadway that winding down the
steep rocky slope to the little valley just beneath. There in the lap of
the hills around stood the wretched straw-thatched huts of the peasants
belonging to the castle--miserable serfs who, half timid, half fierce,
tilled their poor patches of ground, wrenching from the hard soil barely
enough to keep body and soul together. Among those vile hovels played
the little children like foxes about their dens, their wild, fierce eyes
peering out from under a mat of tangled yellow hair.

Beyond these squalid huts lay the rushing, foaming river, spanned by a
high, rude, stone bridge where the road from the castle crossed it, and
beyond the river stretched the great, black forest, within whose gloomy
depths the savage wild beasts made their lair, and where in winter time
the howling wolves coursed their flying prey across the moonlit snow and
under the net-work of the black shadows from the naked boughs above.

The watchman in the cold, windy bartizan or watch-tower that clung to
the gray walls above the castle gateway, looked from his narrow window,
where the wind piped and hummed, across the tree-tops that rolled in
endless billows of green, over hill and over valley to the blue and
distant slope of the Keiserberg, where, on the mountain side, glimmered
far away the walls of Castle Trutz-Drachen.

Within the massive stone walls through which the gaping gateway led,
three great cheerless brick buildings, so forbidding that even the
yellow sunlight could not light them into brightness, looked down, with
row upon row of windows, upon three sides of the bleak, stone courtyard.
Back of and above them clustered a jumble of other buildings, tower and
turret, one high-peaked roof overtopping another.

The great house in the centre was the Baron's Hall, the part to the left
was called the Roderhausen; between the two stood a huge square pile,
rising dizzily up into the clear air high above the rest--the great
Melchior Tower.

At the top clustered a jumble of buildings hanging high aloft in the
windy space a crooked wooden belfry, a tall, narrow watch-tower, and a
rude wooden house that clung partly to the roof of the great tower and
partly to the walls.

From the chimney of this crazy hut a thin thread of smoke would now and
then rise into the air, for there were folk living far up in that empty,
airy desert, and oftentimes wild, uncouth little children were seen
playing on the edge of the dizzy height, or sitting with their bare
legs hanging down over the sheer depths, as they gazed below at what was
going on in the court-yard. There they sat, just as little children in
the town might sit upon their father's door-step; and as the sparrows
might fly around the feet of the little town children, so the circling
flocks of rooks and daws flew around the feet of these air-born
creatures.

It was Schwartz Carl and his wife and little ones who lived far up there
in the Melchior Tower, for it overlooked the top of the hill behind the
castle and so down into the valley upon the further side. There, day
after day, Schwartz Carl kept watch upon the gray road that ran like a
ribbon through the valley, from the rich town of Gruenstaldt to the rich
town of Staffenburgen, where passed merchant caravans from the one to
the other--for the lord of Drachenhausen was a robber baron.

Dong! Dong! The great alarm bell would suddenly ring out from the belfry
high up upon the Melchior Tower. Dong! Dong! Till the rooks and daws
whirled clamoring and screaming. Dong! Dong! Till the fierce wolf-hounds
in the rocky kennels behind the castle stables howled dismally in
answer. Dong! Dong!--Dong! Dong!

Then would follow a great noise and uproar and hurry in the castle
court-yard below; men shouting and calling to one another, the ringing
of armor, and the clatter of horses' hoofs upon the hard stone. With the
creaking and groaning of the windlass the iron-pointed portcullis would
be slowly raised, and with a clank and rattle and clash of iron chains
the drawbridge would fall crashing. Then over it would thunder horse and
man, clattering away down the winding, stony pathway, until the great
forest would swallow them, and they would be gone.

Then for a while peace would fall upon the castle courtyard, the cock
would crow, the cook would scold a lazy maid, and Gretchen, leaning out
of a window, would sing a snatch of a song, just as though it were a
peaceful farm-house, instead of a den of robbers.

Maybe it would be evening before the men would return once more. Perhaps
one would have a bloody cloth bound about his head, perhaps one would
carry his arm in a sling; perhaps one--maybe more than one--would be
left behind, never to return again, and soon forgotten by all excepting
some poor woman who would weep silently in the loneliness of her daily
work.

Nearly always the adventurers would bring back with them pack-horses
laden with bales of goods. Sometimes, besides these, they would return
with a poor soul, his hands tied behind his back and his feet beneath
the horse's body, his fur cloak and his flat cap wofully awry. A while
he would disappear in some gloomy cell of the dungeon-keep, until an
envoy would come from the town with a fat purse, when his ransom would
be paid, the dungeon would disgorge him, and he would be allowed to go
upon his way again.

One man always rode beside Baron Conrad in his expeditions and
adventures a short, deep-chested, broad-shouldered man, with sinewy arms
so long that when he stood his hands hung nearly to his knees.

His coarse, close-clipped hair came so low upon his brow that only a
strip of forehead showed between it and his bushy, black eyebrows. One
eye was blind; the other twinkled and gleamed like a spark under the
penthouse of his brows. Many folk said that the one-eyed Hans had drunk
beer with the Hill-man, who had given him the strength of ten, for he
could bend an iron spit like a hazel twig, and could lift a barrel of
wine from the floor to his head as easily as though it were a basket of
eggs.

As for the one-eyed Hans he never said that he had not drunk beer with
the Hill-man, for he liked the credit that such reports gave him with
the other folk. And so, like a half savage mastiff, faithful to death
to his master, but to him alone, he went his sullen way and lived his
sullen life within the castle walls, half respected, half feared by the
other inmates, for it was dangerous trifling with the one-eyed Hans.




II. How the Baron went Forth to Shear.

Baron Conrad and Baroness Matilda sat together at their morning meal
below their raised seats stretched the long, heavy wooden table, loaded
with coarse food--black bread, boiled cabbage, bacon, eggs, a great
chine from a wild boar, sausages, such as we eat nowadays, and flagons
and jars of beer and wine, Along the board sat ranged in the order of
the household the followers and retainers. Four or five slatternly women
and girls served the others as they fed noisily at the table, moving
here and there behind the men with wooden or pewter dishes of food, now
and then laughing at the jests that passed or joining in the talk. A
huge fire blazed and crackled and roared in the great open fireplace,
before which were stretched two fierce, shaggy, wolfish-looking hounds.
Outside, the rain beat upon the roof or ran trickling from the eaves,
and every now and then a chill draught of wind would breathe through the
open windows of the great black dining-hall and set the fire roaring.

Along the dull-gray wall of stone hung pieces of armor, and swords and
lances, and great branching antlers of the stag. Overhead arched the
rude, heavy, oaken beams, blackened with age and smoke, and underfoot
was a chill pavement of stone.

Upon Baron Conrad's shoulder leaned the pale, slender, yellow-haired
Baroness, the only one in all the world with whom the fierce lord of
Drachenhausen softened to gentleness, the only one upon whom his savage
brows looked kindly, and to whom his harsh voice softened with love.

The Baroness was talking to her husband in a low voice, as he looked
down into her pale face, with its gentle blue eyes.

"And wilt thou not, then," said she, "do that one thing for me?"

"Nay," he growled, in his deep voice, "I cannot promise thee never more
to attack the towns-people in the valley over yonder. How else could I
live an' I did not take from the fat town hogs to fill our own larder?"

"Nay," said the Baroness, "thou couldst live as some others do, for all
do not rob the burgher folk as thou dost. Alas! mishap will come upon
thee some day, and if thou shouldst be slain, what then would come of
me?"

"Prut," said the Baron, "thy foolish fears" But he laid his rough, hairy
hand softly upon the Baroness' head and stroked her yellow hair.

"For my sake, Conrad," whispered the Baroness.

A pause followed. The Baron sat looking thoughtfully down into the
Baroness' face. A moment more, and he might have promised what she
besought; a moment more, and he might have been saved all the bitter
trouble that was to follow. But it was not to be.

Suddenly a harsh sound broke the quietness of all into a confusion of
noises. Dong! Dong!--it was the great alarm-bell from Melchior's Tower.

The Baron started at the sound. He sat for a moment or two with his hand
clinched upon the arm of his seat as though about to rise, then he sunk
back into his chair again.

All the others had risen tumultuously from the table, and now stood
looking at him, awaiting his orders.

"For my sake, Conrad," said the Baroness again.

Dong! Dong! rang the alarm-bell. The Baron sat with his eyes bent upon
the floor, scowling blackly.

The Baroness took his hand in both of hers. "For my sake," she pleaded,
and the tears filled her blue eyes as she looked up at him, "do not go
this time."

From the courtyard without came the sound of horses' hoofs clashing
against the stone pavement, and those in the hall stood watching and
wondering at this strange delay of the Lord Baron. Just then the door
opened and one came pushing past the rest; it was the one-eyed Hans.
He came straight to where the Baron sat, and, leaning over, whispered
something into his master's ear.

"For my sake," implored the Baroness again; but the scale was turned.
The Baron pushed back his chair heavily and rose to his feet. "Forward!"
he roared, in a voice of thunder, and a great shout went up in answer as
he strode clanking down the hall and out of the open door.

The Baroness covered her face with her hands and wept.

"Never mind, little bird," said old Ursela, the nurse, soothingly; "he
will come back to thee again as he has come back to thee before."

But the poor young Baroness continued weeping with her face buried in
her hands, because he had not done that thing she had asked.

A white young face framed in yellow hair looked out into the courtyard
from a window above; but if Baron Conrad of Drachenhausen saw it from
beneath the bars of his shining helmet, he made no sign.

"Forward," he cried again.

Down thundered the drawbridge, and away they rode with clashing hoofs
and ringing armor through the gray shroud of drilling rain.

The day had passed and the evening had come, and the Baroness and her
women sat beside a roaring fire. All were chattering and talking and
laughing but two--the fair young Baroness and old Ursela; the one sat
listening, listening, listening, the other sat with her chin resting in
the palm of her hand, silently watching her young mistress. The night
was falling gray and chill, when suddenly the clear notes of a bugle
rang from without the castle walls. The young Baroness started, and the
rosy light flashed up into her pale cheeks.

"Yes, good," said old Ursela; "the red fox has come back to his den
again, and I warrant he brings a fat town goose in his mouth; now we'll
have fine clothes to wear, and thou another gold chain to hang about thy
pretty neck."

The young Baroness laughed merrily at the old woman's speech. "This
time," said she, "I will choose a string of pearls like that one my aunt
used to wear, and which I had about my neck when Conrad first saw me."

Minute after minute passed; the Baroness sat nervously playing with a
bracelet of golden beads about her wrist. "How long he stays," said she.

"Yes," said Ursela; "but it is not cousin wish that holds him by the
coat."

As she spoke, a door banged in the passageway without, and the ring of
iron footsteps sounded upon the stone floor. Clank! Clank! Clank!

The Baroness rose to her feet, her face all alight. The door opened;
then the flush of joy faded away and the face grew white, white, white.
One hand clutched the back of the bench whereon she had been sitting,
the other hand pressed tightly against her side.

It was Hans the one-eyed who stood in the doorway, and black trouble sat
on his brow; all were looking at him waiting.

"Conrad," whispered the Baroness, at last. "Where is Conrad? Where is
your master?" and even her lips were white as she spoke.

The one-eyed Hans said nothing.

Just then came the noise of men s voices in the corridor and the shuffle
and scuffle of feet carrying a heavy load. Nearer and nearer they came,
and one-eyed Hans stood aside. Six men came struggling through the
doorway, carrying a litter, and on the litter lay the great Baron
Conrad. The flaming torch thrust into the iron bracket against the wall
flashed up with the draught of air from the open door, and the light
fell upon the white face and the closed eyes, and showed upon his body
armor a great red stain that was not the stain of rust.

Suddenly Ursela cried out in a sharp, shrill voice, "Catch her, she
falls!"

It was the Baroness.

Then the old crone turned fiercely upon the one-eyed Hans. "Thou fool!"
she cried, "why didst thou bring him here? Thou hast killed thy lady!"

"I did not know," said the one-eyed Hans, stupidly.




III. How the Baron came Home Shorn.

But Baron Conrad was not dead. For days he lay upon his hard bed, now
muttering incoherent words beneath his red beard, now raving fiercely
with the fever of his wound. But one day he woke again to the things
about him.

He turned his head first to the one side and then to the other; there
sat Schwartz Carl and the one-eyed Hans. Two or three other retainers
stood by a great window that looked out into the courtyard beneath,
jesting and laughing together in low tones, and one lay upon the heavy
oaken bench that stood along by the wall snoring in his sleep.

"Where is your lady?" said the Baron, presently; "and why is she not
with me at this time?"

The man that lay upon the bench started up at the sound of his voice,
and those at the window came hurrying to his bedside. But Schwartz Carl
and the one-eyed Hans looked at one another, and neither of them spoke.
The Baron saw the look and in it read a certain meaning that brought
him to his elbow, though only to sink back upon his pillow again with a
groan.

"Why do you not answer me?" said he at last, in a hollow voice; then
to the one-eyed Hans, "Hast no tongue, fool, that thou standest gaping
there like a fish? Answer me, where is thy mistress?"

"I--I do not know," stammered poor Hans.

For a while the Baron lay silently looking from one face to the other,
then he spoke again. "How long have I been lying here?" said he.

"A sennight, my lord," said Master Rudolph, the steward, who had come
into the room and who now stood among the others at the bedside.

"A sennight," repeated the Baron, in a low voice, and then to Master
Rudolph, "And has the Baroness been often beside me in that time?"
Master Rudolph hesitated. "Answer me," said the Baron, harshly.

"Not--not often," said Master Rudolph, hesitatingly.

The Baron lay silent for a long time. At last he passed his hands over
his face and held them there for a minute, then of a sudden, before
anyone knew what he was about to do, he rose upon his elbow and then sat
upright upon the bed. The green wound broke out afresh and a dark red
spot grew and spread upon the linen wrappings; his face was drawn and
haggard with the pain of his moving, and his eyes wild and bloodshot.
Great drops of sweat gathered and stood upon his forehead as he sat
there swaying slightly from side to side.

"My shoes," said he, hoarsely.

Master Rudolph stepped forward. "But, my Lord Baron," he began and then
stopped short, for the Baron shot him such a look that his tongue stood
still in his head.

Hans saw that look out of his one eye. Down he dropped upon his knees
and, fumbling under the bed, brought forth a pair of soft leathern
shoes, which he slipped upon the Baron's feet and then laced the thongs
above the instep.

"Your shoulder," said the Baron. He rose slowly to his feet, gripping
Hans in the stress of his agony until the fellow winced again. For a
moment he stood as though gathering strength, then doggedly started
forth upon that quest which he had set upon himself.

At the door he stopped for a moment as though overcome by his weakness,
and there Master Nicholas, his cousin, met him; for the steward had sent
one of the retainers to tell the old man what the Baron was about to do.

"Thou must go back again, Conrad," said Master Nicholas; "thou art not
fit to be abroad."

The Baron answered him never a word, but he glared at him from out of
his bloodshot eyes and ground his teeth together. Then he started forth
again upon his way.

Down the long hall he went, slowly and laboriously, the others following
silently behind him, then up the steep winding stairs, step by step,
now and then stopping to lean against the wall. So he reached a long
and gloomy passageway lit only by the light of a little window at the
further end.

He stopped at the door of one of the rooms that opened into this
passage-way, stood for a moment, then he pushed it open.

No one was within but old Ursela, who sat crooning over a fire with a
bundle upon her knees. She did not see the Baron or know that he was
there.

"Where is your lady?" said he, in a hollow voice.

Then the old nurse looked up with a start. "Jesu bless us," cried she,
and crossed herself.

"Where is your lady?" said the Baron again, in the same hoarse voice;
and then, not waiting for an answer, "Is she dead?"

The old woman looked at him for a minute blinking her watery eyes, and
then suddenly broke into a shrill, long-drawn wail. The Baron needed to
hear no more.

As though in answer to the old woman's cry, a thin piping complaint came
from the bundle in her lap.

At the sound the red blood flashed up into the Baron's face. "What
is that you have there?" said he, pointing to the bundle upon the old
woman's knees.

She drew back the coverings and there lay a poor, weak, little baby,
that once again raised its faint reedy pipe.

"It is your son," said Ursela, "that the dear Baroness left behind her
when the holy angels took her to Paradise. She blessed him and called
him Otto before she left us."




IV. The White Cross on the Hill.

Here the glassy waters of the River Rhine, holding upon its bosom a
mimic picture of the blue sky and white clouds floating above, runs
smoothly around a jutting point of land, St. Michaelsburg, rising from
the reedy banks of the stream, sweeps up with a smooth swell until
it cuts sharp and clear against the sky. Stubby vineyards covered its
earthy breast, and field and garden and orchard crowned its brow, where
lay the Monastery of St. Michaelsburg--"The White Cross on the Hill."
There within the white walls, where the warm yellow sunlight slept, all
was peaceful quietness, broken only now and then by the crowing of
the cock or the clamorous cackle of a hen, the lowing of kine or the
bleating of goats, a solitary voice in prayer, the faint accord of
distant singing, or the resonant toll of the monastery bell from the
high-peaked belfry that overlooked the hill and valley and the smooth,
far-winding stream. No other sounds broke the stillness, for in this
peaceful haven was never heard the clash of armor, the ring of iron-shod
hoofs, or the hoarse call to arms.

All men were not wicked and cruel and fierce in that dark, far-away age;
all were not robbers and terror-spreading tyrants, even in that time
when men's hands were against their neighbors, and war and rapine dwelt
in place of peace and justice.

Abbot Otto, of St. Michaelsburg, was a gentle, patient, pale-faced old
man; his white hands were soft and smooth, and no one would have thought
that they could have known the harsh touch of sword-hilt and lance. And
yet, in the days of the Emperor Frederick--the grandson of the great
Red-beard--no one stood higher in the prowess of arms than he. But all
at once--for why, no man could tell--a change came over him, and in the
flower of his youth and fame and growing power he gave up everything
in life and entered the quiet sanctuary of that white monastery on the
hill-side, so far away from the tumult and the conflict of the world in
which he had lived.

Some said that it was because the lady he had loved had loved his
brother, and that when they were married Otto of Wolbergen had left the
church with a broken heart.

But such stories are old songs that have been sung before.

Clatter! clatter! Jingle! jingle! It was a full-armed knight that came
riding up the steep hill road that wound from left to right and right to
left amid the vineyards on the slopes of St. Michaelsburg. Polished helm
and corselet blazed in the noon sunlight, for no knight in those days
dared to ride the roads except in full armor. In front of him the
solitary knight carried a bundle wrapped in the folds of his coarse gray
cloak.

It was a sorely sick man that rode up the heights of St. Michaelsburg.
His head hung upon his breast through the faintness of weariness and
pain; for it was the Baron Conrad.

He had left his bed of sickness that morning, had saddled his horse in
the gray dawn with his own hands, and had ridden away into the misty
twilight of the forest without the knowledge of anyone excepting the
porter, who, winking and blinking in the bewilderment of his broken
slumber, had opened the gates to the sick man, hardly knowing what he
was doing, until he beheld his master far away, clattering down the
steep bridle-path.

Eight leagues had he ridden that day with neither a stop nor a stay; but
now at last the end of his journey had come, and he drew rein under the
shade of the great wooden gateway of St. Michaelsburg.

He reached up to the knotted rope and gave it a pull, and from within
sounded the answering ring of the porter's bell. By and by a little
wicket opened in the great wooden portals, and the gentle, wrinkled face
of old Brother Benedict, the porter, peeped out at the strange iron-clad
visitor and the great black war-horse, streaked and wet with the sweat
of the journey, flecked and dappled with flakes of foam. A few words
passed between them, and then the little window was closed again; and
within, the shuffling pat of the sandalled feet sounded fainter and
fainter, as Brother Benedict bore the message from Baron Conrad to Abbot
Otto, and the mail-clad figure was left alone, sitting there as silent
as a statue.

By and by the footsteps sounded again; there came a noise of clattering
chains and the rattle of the key in the lock, and the rasping of the
bolts dragged back. Then the gate swung slowly open, and Baron Conrad
rode into the shelter of the White Cross, and as the hoofs of his
war-horse clashed upon the stones of the courtyard within, the wooden
gate swung slowly to behind him.

Abbot Otto stood by the table when Baron Conrad entered the high-vaulted
room from the farther end. The light from the oriel window behind the
old man shed broken rays of light upon him, and seemed to frame his thin
gray hairs with a golden glory. His white, delicate hand rested upon the
table beside him, and upon some sheets of parchment covered with rows of
ancient Greek writing which he had been engaged in deciphering.

Clank! clank! clank! Baron Conrad strode across the stone floor, and
then stopped short in front of the good old man.

"What dost thou seek here, my son?" said the Abbot.

"I seek sanctuary for my son and thy brother's grandson," said the Baron
Conrad, and he flung back the folds of his cloak and showed the face of
the sleeping babe.

For a while the Abbot said nothing, but stood gazing dreamily at
the baby. After a while he looked up. "And the child's mother," said
he--"what hath she to say at this?"

"She hath naught to say," said Baron Conrad, hoarsely, and then stopped
short in his speech. "She is dead," said he, at last, in a husky voice,
"and is with God's angels in paradise."

The Abbot looked intently in the Baron's face. "So!" said he, under his
breath, and then for the first time noticed how white and drawn was the
Baron's face. "Art sick thyself?" he asked.

"Ay," said the Baron, "I have come from death's door. But that is no
matter. Wilt thou take this little babe into sanctuary? My house is a
vile, rough place, and not fit for such as he, and his mother with the
blessed saints in heaven." And once more Conrad of Drachenhausen's face
began twitching with the pain of his thoughts.

"Yes," said the old man, gently, "he shall live here," and he stretched
out his hands and took the babe. "Would," said he, "that all the little
children in these dark times might be thus brought to the house of God,
and there learn mercy and peace, instead of rapine and war."

For a while he stood looking down in silence at the baby in his arms,
but with his mind far away upon other things. At last he roused himself
with a start. "And thou," said he to the Baron Conrad--"hath not thy
heart been chastened and softened by this? Surely thou wilt not go back
to thy old life of rapine and extortion?"

"Nay," said Baron Conrad, gruffly, "I will rob the city swine no longer,
for that was the last thing that my dear one asked of me."

The old Abbot's face lit up with a smile. "I am right glad that thy
heart was softened, and that thou art willing at last to cease from war
and violence."

"Nay," cried the Baron, roughly, "I said nothing of ceasing from war. By
heaven, no! I will have revenge!" And he clashed his iron foot upon the
floor and clinched his fists and ground his teeth together. "Listen,"
said he, "and I will tell thee how my troubles happened. A fortnight ago
I rode out upon an expedition against a caravan of fat burghers in the
valley of Gruenhoffen. They outnumbered us many to one, but city swine
such as they are not of the stuff to stand against our kind for a long
time. Nevertheless, while the men-at-arms who guarded the caravan were
staying us with pike and cross-bow from behind a tree which they had
felled in front of a high bridge the others had driven the pack-horses
off, so that by the time we had forced the bridge they were a league
or more away. We pushed after them as hard as we were able, but when we
came up with them we found that they had been joined by Baron Frederick
of Trutz-Drachen, to whom for three years and more the burghers of
Gruenstadt have been paying a tribute for his protection against others.
Then again they made a stand, and this time the Baron Frederick himself
was with them. But though the dogs fought well, we were forcing them
back, and might have got the better of them, had not my horse stumbled
upon a sloping stone, and so fell and rolled over upon me. While I lay
there with my horse upon me, Baron Frederick ran me down with his lance,
and gave me that foul wound that came so near to slaying me--and did
slay my dear wife. Nevertheless, my men were able to bring me out from
that press and away, and we had bitten the Trutz-Drachen dogs so deep
that they were too sore to follow us, and so let us go our way in peace.
But when those fools of mine brought me to my castle they bore me lying
upon a litter to my wife's chamber. There she beheld me, and, thinking
me dead, swooned a death-swoon, so that she only lived long enough to
bless her new-born babe and name it Otto, for you, her father's brother.
But, by heavens! I will have revenge, root and branch, upon that vile
tribe, the Roderburgs of Trutz-Drachen. Their great-grandsire built that
castle in scorn of Baron Casper in the old days; their grandsire slew my
father's grandsire; Baron Nicholas slew two of our kindred; and now this
Baron Frederick gives me that foul wound and kills my dear wife through
my body." Here the Baron stopped short; then of a sudden, shaking his
fist above his head, he cried out in his hoarse voice: "I swear by all
the saints in heaven, either the red cock shall crow over the roof of
Trutz-Drachen or else it shall crow over my house! The black dog shall
sit on Baron Frederick's shoulders or else he shall sit on mine!" Again
he stopped, and fixing his blazing eyes upon the old man, "Hearest thou
that, priest?" said he, and broke into a great boisterous laugh.

Abbot Otto sighed heavily, but he tried no further to persuade the other
into different thoughts.

"Thou art wounded," said he, at last, in a gentle voice; "at least stay
here with us until thou art healed."

"Nay," said the Baron, roughly, "I will tarry no longer than to hear
thee promise to care for my child."

"I promise," said the Abbot; "but lay aside thy armor, and rest."

"Nay," said the Baron, "I go back again to-day."

At this the Abbot cried out in amazement: "Sure thou, wounded man, would
not take that long journey without a due stay for resting! Think! Night
will be upon thee before thou canst reach home again, and the forests
are beset with wolves."

The Baron laughed. "Those are not the wolves I fear," said he. "Urge me
no further, I must return to-night; yet if thou hast a mind to do me a
kindness thou canst give me some food to eat and a flask of your golden
Michaelsburg; beyond these, I ask no further favor of any man, be he
priest or layman."

"What comfort I can give thee thou shalt have," said the Abbot, in his
patient voice, and so left the room to give the needful orders, bearing
the babe with him.




V. How Otto Dwelt at St. Michaelsburg.

So the poor, little, motherless waif lived among the old monks at the
White Cross on the hill, thriving and growing apace until he had reached
eleven or twelve years of age; a slender, fair-haired little fellow,
with a strange, quiet serious manner.

"Poor little child!" Old Brother Benedict would sometimes say to the
others, "poor little child! The troubles in which he was born must have
broken his wits like a glass cup. What think ye he said to me to-day?
'Dear Brother Benedict,' said he, 'dost thou shave the hair off of the
top of thy head so that the dear God may see thy thoughts the better?'
Think of that now!" and the good old man shook with silent laughter.

When such talk came to the good Father Abbot's ears, he smiled quietly
to himself. "It may be," said he, "that the wisdom of little children
flies higher than our heavy wits can follow."

At least Otto was not slow with his studies, and Brother Emmanuel,
who taught him his lessons, said more than once that, if his wits were
cracked in other ways, they were sound enough in Latin.

Otto, in a quaint, simple way which belonged to him, was gentle
and obedient to all. But there was one among the Brethren of St.
Michaelsburg whom he loved far above all the rest--Brother John, a poor
half-witted fellow, of some twenty-five or thirty years of age. When
a very little child, he had fallen from his nurse's arms and hurt his
head, and as he grew up into boyhood, and showed that his wits had been
addled by his fall, his family knew not what else to do with him, and
so sent him off to the Monastery of St. Michaelsburg, where he lived
his simple, witless life upon a sort of sufferance, as though he were a
tame, harmless animal.

While Otto was still a little baby, he had been given into Brother
John's care. Thereafter, and until Otto had grown old enough to care for
himself, poor Brother John never left his little charge, night or day.
Oftentimes the good Father Abbot, coming into the garden, where he loved
to walk alone in his meditations, would find the poor, simple Brother
sitting under the shade of the pear-tree, close to the bee-hives,
rocking the little baby in his arms, singing strange, crazy songs to
it, and gazing far away into the blue, empty sky with his curious, pale
eyes.

Although, as Otto grew up into boyhood, his lessons and his tasks
separated him from Brother John, the bond between them seemed to grow
stronger rather than weaker. During the hours that Otto had for his own
they were scarcely ever apart. Down in the vineyard, where the monks
were gathering the grapes for the vintage, in the garden, or in the
fields, the two were always seen together, either wandering hand in
hand, or seated in some shady nook or corner.

But most of all they loved to lie up in the airy wooden belfry; the
great gaping bell hanging darkly above them, the mouldering cross-beams
glimmering far up under the dim shadows of the roof, where dwelt a great
brown owl that, unfrightened at their familiar presence, stared down at
them with his round, solemn eyes. Below them stretched the white walls
of the garden, beyond them the vineyard, and beyond that again the far
shining river, that seemed to Otto's mind to lead into wonder-land.
There the two would lie upon the belfry floor by the hour, talking
together of the strangest things.

"I saw the dear Angel Gabriel again yester morn," said Brother John.

"So!" says Otto, seriously; "and where was that?"

"It was out in the garden, in the old apple-tree," said Brother John. "I
was walking there, and my wits were running around in the grass like a
mouse. What heard I but a wonderful sound of singing, and it was like
the hum of a great bee, only sweeter than honey. So I looked up into the
tree, and there I saw two sparks. I thought at first that they were
two stars that had fallen out of heaven; but what think you they were,
little child?"

"I do not know," said Otto, breathlessly.

"They were angel's eyes," said Brother John; and he smiled in the
strangest way, as he gazed up into the blue sky. "So I looked at the two
sparks and felt happy, as one does in spring time when the cold weather
is gone, and the warm sun shines, and the cuckoo sings again. Then,
by-and-by, I saw the face to which the eyes belonged. First, it shone
white and thin like the moon in the daylight; but it grew brighter and
brighter, until it hurt one's eyes to look at it, as though it had been
the blessed sun itself. Angel Gabriel's hand was as white as silver, and
in it he held a green bough with blossoms, like those that grow on the
thorn bush. As for his robe, it was all of one piece, and finer than the
Father Abbot's linen, and shone beside like the sunlight on pure snow.
So I knew from all these things that it was the blessed Angel Gabriel."

"What do they say about this tree, Brother John?" said he to me.

"They say it is dying, my Lord Angel," said I, "and that the gardener
will bring a sharp axe and cut it down."

"'And what dost thou say about it, Brother John?' said he."

"'I also say yes, and that it is dying,' said I."

"At that he smiled until his face shone so bright that I had to shut my
eyes."

"'Now I begin to believe, Brother John, that thou art as foolish as men
say,' said he. 'Look, till I show thee.' And thereat I opened mine eyes
again."

"Then Angel Gabriel touched the dead branches with the flowery twig that
he held in his hand, and there was the dead wood all covered with green
leaves, and fair blossoms and beautiful apples as yellow as gold. Each
smelling more sweetly than a garden of flowers, and better to the taste
than white bread and honey.

"'They are souls of the apples,' said the good Angel,' and they can
never wither and die.'

"'Then I'll tell the gardener that he shall not cut the tree down,' said
I."

"'No, no,' said the dear Gabriel, 'that will never do, for if the tree
is not cut down here on the earth, it can never be planted in paradise.'"

Here Brother John stopped short in his story, and began singing one of
his crazy songs, as he gazed with his pale eyes far away into nothing at
all.

"But tell me, Brother John," said little Otto, in a hushed voice, "what
else did the good Angel say to thee?"

Brother John stopped short in his song and began looking from right to
left, and up and down, as though to gather his wits.

"So!" said he, "there was something else that he told me. Tschk! If I
could but think now. Yes, good! This is it--'Nothing that has lived,'
said he, 'shall ever die, and nothing that has died shall ever live.'"

Otto drew a deep breath. "I would that I might see the beautiful Angel
Gabriel sometime," said he; but Brother John was singing again and did
not seem to hear what he said.

Next to Brother John, the nearest one to the little child was the good
Abbot Otto, for though he had never seen wonderful things with the eyes
of his soul, such as Brother John's had beheld, and so could not tell of
them, he was yet able to give little Otto another pleasure that no one
else could give.

He was a great lover of books, the old Abbot, and had under lock and key
wonderful and beautiful volumes, bound in hog-skin and metal, and with
covers inlaid with carved ivory, or studded with precious stones. But
within these covers, beautiful as they were, lay the real wonder of the
books, like the soul in the body; for there, beside the black letters
and initials, gay with red and blue and gold, were beautiful pictures
painted upon the creamy parchment. Saints and Angels, the Blessed Virgin
with the golden oriole about her head, good St. Joseph, the three Kings;
the simple Shepherds kneeling in the fields, while Angels with glories
about their brow called to the poor Peasants from the blue sky above.
But, most beautiful of all was the picture of the Christ Child lying in
the manger, with the mild-eyed Kine gazing at him.

Sometimes the old Abbot would unlock the iron-bound chest where these
treasures lay hidden, and carefully and lovingly brushing the few grains
of dust from them, would lay them upon the table beside the oriel window
in front of his little namesake, allowing the little boy freedom to turn
the leaves as he chose.

Always it was one picture that little Otto sought; the Christ Child in
the manger, with the Virgin, St. Joseph, the Shepherds, and the Kine.
And as he would hang breathlessly gazing and gazing upon it, the old
Abbot would sit watching him with a faint, half-sad smile flickering
around his thin lips and his pale, narrow face.

It was a pleasant, peaceful life, but by-and-by the end came. Otto was
now nearly twelve years old.

One bright, clear day, near the hour of noon, little Otto heard the
porter's bell sounding below in the court-yard--dong! dong! Brother
Emmanuel had been appointed as the boy's instructor, and just then Otto
was conning his lessons in the good monk's cell. Nevertheless, at the
sound of the bell he pricked up his ears and listened, for a visitor was
a strange matter in that out-of-the-way place, and he wondered who it
could be. So, while his wits wandered his lessons lagged.

"Postera Phoeba lustrabat lampade terras," continued Brother Emmanuel,
inexorably running his horny finger-nail beneath the line, "humentemque
Aurora polo dimoverat umbram--" the lesson dragged along.

Just then a sandaled footstep sounded without, in the stone corridor,
and a light tap fell upon Brother Emmanuel's door. It was Brother
Ignatius, and the Abbot wished little Otto to come to the refectory.

As they crossed the court-yard Otto stared to see a group of mail-clad
men-at-arms, some sitting upon their horses, some standing by the
saddle-bow. "Yonder is the young baron," he heard one of them say in a
gruff voice, and thereupon all turned and stared at him.

A stranger was in the refectory, standing beside the good old Abbot,
while food and wine were being brought and set upon the table for his
refreshment; a great, tall, broad-shouldered man, beside whom the Abbot
looked thinner and slighter than ever.

The stranger was clad all in polished and gleaming armor, of plate and
chain, over which was drawn a loose robe of gray woollen stuff, reaching
to the knees and bound about the waist by a broad leathern sword-belt.
Upon his arm he carried a great helmet which he had just removed from
his head. His face was weather-beaten and rugged, and on lip and chin
was a wiry, bristling beard; once red, now frosted with white.

Brother Ignatius had bidden Otto to enter, and had then closed the door
behind him; and now, as the lad walked slowly up the long room, he gazed
with round, wondering blue eyes at the stranger.

"Dost know who I am, Otto? said the mail-clad knight, in a deep,
growling voice.

"Methinks you are my father, sir," said Otto.

"Aye, thou art right," said Baron Conrad, "and I am glad to see that
these milk-churning monks have not allowed thee to forget me, and who
thou art thyself."

"An' it please you," said Otto, "no one churneth milk here but
Brother Fritz; we be makers of wine and not makers of butter, at St.
Michaelsburg."

Baron Conrad broke into a great, loud laugh, but Abbot Otto's sad and
thoughtful face lit up with no shadow of an answering smile.

"Conrad," said he, turning to the other, "again let me urge thee; do
not take the child hence, his life can never be your life, for he is not
fitted for it. I had thought," said he, after a moment's pause, "I had
thought that thou hadst meant to consecrate him--this motherless one--to
the care of the Universal Mother Church."

"So!" said the Baron, "thou hadst thought that, hadst thou? Thou hadst
thought that I had intended to deliver over this boy, the last of the
Vuelphs, to the arms of the Church? What then was to become of our name
and the glory of our race if it was to end with him in a monastery? No,
Drachenhausen is the home of the Vuelphs, and there the last of the race
shall live as his sires have lived before him, holding to his rights by
the power and the might of his right hand."

The Abbot turned and looked at the boy, who was gaping in simple
wide-eyed wonderment from one to the other as they spoke.

"And dost thou think, Conrad," said the old man, in his gentle, patient
voice, "that that poor child can maintain his rights by the strength of
his right hand?"

The Baron's look followed the Abbot's, and he said nothing.

In the few seconds of silence that followed, little Otto, in his simple
mind, was wondering what all this talk portended. Why had his father
come hither to St. Michaelsburg, lighting up the dim silence of the
monastery with the flash and ring of his polished armor? Why had he
talked about churning butter but now, when all the world knew that the
monks of St. Michaelsburg made wine.

It was Baron Conrad's deep voice that broke the little pause of silence.

"If you have made a milkmaid of the boy," he burst out at last, "I thank
the dear heaven that there is yet time to undo your work and to make a
man of him."

The Abbot sighed. "The child is yours, Conrad," said he, "the will of
the blessed saints be done. Mayhap if he goes to dwell at Drachenhausen
he may make you the better instead of you making him the worse."

Then light came to the darkness of little Otto's wonderment; he saw what
all this talk meant and why his father had come hither. He was to leave
the happy, sunny silence of the dear White Cross, and to go out into
that great world that he had so often looked down upon from the high
windy belfry on the steep hillside.




VI. How Otto Lived in the Dragon's House.

The gates of the Monastery stood wide open, the world lay beyond, and
all was ready for departure. Baron Conrad and his men-at-arms sat foot
in stirrup, the milk-white horse that had been brought for Otto stood
waiting for him beside his father's great charger.

"Farewell, Otto," said the good old Abbot, as he stooped and kissed the
boy's cheek.

"Farewell," answered Otto, in his simple, quiet way, and it brought
a pang to the old man's heart that the child should seem to grieve so
little at the leave-taking.

"Farewell, Otto," said the brethren that stood about, "farewell,
farewell."

Then poor brother John came forward and took the boy's hand, and looked
up into his face as he sat upon his horse. "We will meet again," said
he, with his strange, vacant smile, "but maybe it will be in Paradise,
and there perhaps they will let us lie in the father's belfry, and look
down upon the angels in the court-yard below."

"Aye," answered Otto, with an answering smile.

"Forward," cried the Baron, in a deep voice, and with a clash of hoofs
and jingle of armor they were gone, and the great wooden gates were shut
to behind them.

Down the steep winding pathway they rode, and out into the great wide
world beyond, upon which Otto and brother John had gazed so often from
the wooden belfry of the White Cross on the hill.

"Hast been taught to ride a horse by the priests up yonder on
Michaelsburg?" asked the Baron, when they had reached the level road.

"Nay," said Otto; "we had no horse to ride, but only to bring in the
harvest or the grapes from the further vineyards to the vintage."

"Prut," said the Baron, "methought the abbot would have had enough of
the blood of old days in his veins to have taught thee what is fitting
for a knight to know; art not afeared?"

"Nay," said Otto, with a smile, "I am not afeared."

"There at least thou showest thyself a Vuelph," said the grim Baron. But
perhaps Otto's thought of fear and Baron Conrad's thought of fear were
two very different matters.

The afternoon had passed by the time they had reached the end of their
journey. Up the steep, stony path they rode to the drawbridge and
the great gaping gateway of Drachenhausen, where wall and tower and
battlement looked darker and more forbidding than ever in the gray
twilight of the coming night. Little Otto looked up with great,
wondering, awe-struck eyes at this grim new home of his.

The next moment they clattered over the drawbridge that spanned the
narrow black gulph between the roadway and the wall, and the next were
past the echoing arch of the great gateway and in the gray gloaming of
the paved court-yard within.

Otto looked around upon the many faces gathered there to catch the
first sight of the little baron; hard, rugged faces, seamed and
weather-beaten; very different from those of the gentle brethren among
whom he had lived, and it seemed strange to him that there was none
there whom he should know.

As he climbed the steep, stony steps to the door of the Baron's house,
old Ursela came running down to meet him. She flung her withered arms
around him and hugged him close to her. "My little child," she cried,
and then fell to sobbing as though her heart would break.

"Here is someone knoweth me," thought the little boy.

His new home was all very strange and wonderful to Otto; the armors, the
trophies, the flags, the long galleries with their ranges of rooms,
the great hall below with its vaulted roof and its great fireplace of
grotesquely carved stone, and all the strange people with their lives
and thoughts so different from what he had been used to know.

And it was a wonderful thing to explore all the strange places in the
dark old castle; places where it seemed to Otto no one could have ever
been before.

Once he wandered down a long, dark passageway below the hall, pushed
open a narrow, iron-bound oaken door, and found himself all at once in
a strange new land; the gray light, coming in through a range of tall,
narrow windows, fell upon a row of silent, motionless figures carven in
stone, knights and ladies in strange armor and dress; each lying upon
his or her stony couch with clasped hands, and gazing with fixed,
motionless, stony eyeballs up into the gloomy, vaulted arch above them.
There lay, in a cold, silent row, all of the Vuelphs who had died since
the ancient castle had been built.

It was the chapel into which Otto had made his way, now long since
fallen out of use excepting as a burial place of the race.

At another time he clambered up into the loft under the high peaked
roof, where lay numberless forgotten things covered with the dim dust
of years. There a flock of pigeons had made their roost, and flapped
noisily out into the sunlight when he pushed open the door from below.
Here he hunted among the mouldering things of the past until, oh, joy
of joys! in an ancient oaken chest he found a great lot of worm-eaten
books, that had belonged to some old chaplain of the castle in days gone
by. They were not precious and beautiful volumes, such as the Father
Abbot had showed him, but all the same they had their quaint painted
pictures of the blessed saints and angels.

Again, at another time, going into the court-yard, Otto had found
the door of Melchior's tower standing invitingly open, for old Hilda,
Schwartz Carl's wife, had come down below upon some business or other.

Then upon the shaky wooden steps Otto ran without waiting for a second
thought, for he had often gazed at those curious buildings hanging so
far up in the air, and had wondered what they were like. Round and round
and up and up Otto climbed, until his head spun. At last he reached
a landing-stage, and gazing over the edge and down, beheld the stone
pavement far, far below, lit by a faint glimmer of light that entered
through the arched doorway. Otto clutched tight hold of the wooden rail,
he had no thought that he had climbed so far.

Upon the other side of the landing was a window that pierced the thick
stone walls of the tower; out of the window he looked, and then drew
suddenly back again with a gasp, for it was through the outer wall he
peered, and down, down below in the dizzy depths he saw the hard
gray rocks, where the black swine, looking no larger than ants in the
distance, fed upon the refuse thrown out over the walls of the castle.
There lay the moving tree-tops like a billowy green sea, and the coarse
thatched roofs of the peasant cottages, round which crawled the little
children like tiny human specks.

Then Otto turned and crept down the stairs, frightened at the height to
which he had climbed.

At the doorway he met Mother Hilda. "Bless us," she cried, starting back
and crossing herself, and then, seeing who it was, ducked him a courtesy
with as pleasant a smile as her forbidding face, with its little
deep-set eyes, was able to put upon itself.

Old Ursela seemed nearer to the boy than anyone else about the castle,
excepting it was his father, and it was a newfound delight to Otto to
sit beside her and listen to her quaint stories, so different from the
monkish tales that he had heard and read at the monastery.

But one day it was a tale of a different sort that she told him, and one
that opened his eyes to what he had never dreamed of before.

The mellow sunlight fell through the window upon old Ursela, as she sat
in the warmth with her distaff in her hands while Otto lay close to her
feet upon a bear skin, silently thinking over the strange story of a
brave knight and a fiery dragon that she had just told him. Suddenly
Ursela broke the silence.

"Little one," said she, "thou art wondrously like thy own dear mother;
didst ever hear how she died?"

"Nay," said Otto, "but tell me, Ursela, how it was."

"Tis strange," said the old woman, "that no one should have told thee
in all this time." And then, in her own fashion she related to him the
story of how his father had set forth upon that expedition in spite of
all that Otto's mother had said, beseeching him to abide at home; how he
had been foully wounded, and how the poor lady had died from her fright
and grief.

Otto listened with eyes that grew wider and wider, though not all with
wonder; he no longer lay upon the bear skin, but sat up with his hands
clasped. For a moment or two after the old woman had ended her story, he
sat staring silently at her. Then he cried out, in a sharp voice, "And
is this truth that you tell me, Ursela? and did my father seek to rob
the towns people of their goods?"

Old Ursela laughed. "Aye," said she, "that he did and many times. Ah!
me, those day's are all gone now." And she fetched a deep sigh. "Then we
lived in plenty and had both silks and linens and velvets besides in the
store closets and were able to buy good wines and live in plenty upon
the best. Now we dress in frieze and live upon what we can get and
sometimes that is little enough, with nothing better than sour beer to
drink. But there is one comfort in it all, and that is that our good
Baron paid back the score he owed the Trutz-Drachen people not only for
that, but for all that they had done from the very first."

Thereupon she went on to tell Otto how Baron Conrad had fulfilled the
pledge of revenge that he had made Abbot Otto, how he had watched day
after day until one time he had caught the Trutz-Drachen folk,
with Baron Frederick at their head, in a narrow defile back of the
Kaiserburg; of the fierce fight that was there fought; of how the
Roderburgs at last fled, leaving Baron Frederick behind them wounded; of
how he had kneeled before the Baron Conrad, asking for mercy, and of
how Baron Conrad had answered, "Aye, thou shalt have such mercy as thou
deservest," and had therewith raised his great two-handed sword and laid
his kneeling enemy dead at one blow.

Poor little Otto had never dreamed that such cruelty and wickedness
could be. He listened to the old woman's story with gaping horror, and
when the last came and she told him, with a smack of her lips, how his
father had killed his enemy with his own hand, he gave a gasping cry and
sprang to his feet. Just then the door at the other end of the chamber
was noisily opened, and Baron Conrad himself strode into the room.
Otto turned his head, and seeing who it was, gave another cry, loud and
quavering, and ran to his father and caught him by the hand.

"Oh, father!" he cried, "oh, father! Is it true that thou hast killed a
man with thy own hand?"

"Aye," said the Baron, grimly, "it is true enough, and I think me I have
killed many more than one. But what of that, Otto? Thou must get out of
those foolish notions that the old monks have taught thee. Here in the
world it is different from what it is at St. Michaelsburg; here a man
must either slay or be slain."

But poor little Otto, with his face hidden in his father's robe, cried
as though his heart would break. "Oh, father!" he said, again and again,
"it cannot be--it cannot be that thou who art so kind to me should have
killed a man with thine own hands." Then: "I wish that I were back
in the monastery again; I am afraid out here in the great wide world;
perhaps somebody may kill me, for I am only a weak little boy and could
not save my own life if they chose to take it from me."

Baron Conrad looked down upon Otto all this while, drawing his bushy
eyebrows together. Once he reached out his hand as though to stroke the
boy's hair, but drew it back again.

Turning angrily upon the old woman, "Ursela," said he, "thou must tell
the child no more such stories as these; he knowest not at all of such
things as yet. Keep thy tongue busy with the old woman's tales that he
loves to hear thee tell, and leave it with me to teach him what becometh
a true knight and a Vuelph."

That night the father and son sat together beside the roaring fire in
the great ball. "Tell me, Otto," said the Baron, "dost thou hate me for
having done what Ursela told thee today that I did?"

Otto looked for a while into his father's face. "I know not," said he at
last, in his quaint, quiet voice, "but methinks that I do not hate thee
for it."

The Baron drew his bushy brows together until his eyes twinkled out of
the depths beneath them, then of a sudden he broke into a great loud
laugh, smiting his horny palm with a smack upon his thigh.




VII. The Red Cock Crows on Drachenhausen.

There was a new emperor in Germany who had come from a far away Swiss
castle; Count Rudolph of Hapsburg, a good, honest man with a good,
honest, homely face, but bringing with him a stern sense of justice and
of right, and a determination to put down the lawlessness of the savage
German barons among whom he had come as Emperor.

One day two strangers came galloping up the winding path to the gates
of the Dragon's house. A horn sounded thin and clear, a parley was held
across the chasm in the road between the two strangers and the porter
who appeared at the little wicket. Then a messenger was sent running to
the Baron, who presently came striding across the open court-yard to the
gateway to parley with the strangers.

The two bore with them a folded parchment with a great red seal
hanging from it like a clot of blood; it was a message from the Emperor
demanding that the Baron should come to the Imperial Court to answer
certain charges that had been brought against him, and to give his bond
to maintain the peace of the empire.

One by one those barons who had been carrying on their private wars, or
had been despoiling the burgher folk in their traffic from town to
town, and against whom complaint had been lodged, were summoned to the
Imperial Court, where they were compelled to promise peace and to swear
allegiance to the new order of things. All those who came willingly were
allowed to return home again after giving security for maintaining the
peace; all those who came not willingly were either brought in chains
or rooted out of their strongholds with fire and sword, and their roofs
burned over their heads.

Now it was Baron Conrad's turn to be summoned to the Imperial Court,
for complaint had been lodged against him by his old enemy of
Trutz-Drachen--Baron Henry--the nephew of the old Baron Frederick
who had been slain while kneeling in the dust of the road back of the
Kaiserburg.

No one at Drachenhausen could read but Master Rudolph, the steward,
who was sand blind, and little Otto. So the boy read the summons to his
father, while the grim Baron sat silent with his chin resting upon his
clenched fist and his eyebrows drawn together into a thoughtful frown as
he gazed into the pale face of his son, who sat by the rude oaken table
with the great parchment spread out before him.

Should he answer the summons, or scorn it as he would have done under
the old emperors? Baron Conrad knew not which to do; pride said one
thing and policy another. The Emperor was a man with an iron hand, and
Baron Conrad knew what had happened to those who had refused to obey the
imperial commands. So at last he decided that he would go to the court,
taking with him a suitable escort to support his dignity.

It was with nearly a hundred armed men clattering behind him that Baron
Conrad rode away to court to answer the imperial summons. The castle was
stripped of its fighting men, and only eight remained behind to guard
the great stone fortress and the little simple-witted boy.

It was a sad mistake.

Three days had passed since the Baron had left the castle, and now the
third night had come. The moon was hanging midway in the sky, white and
full, for it was barely past midnight.

The high precipitous banks of the rocky road threw a dense black shadow
into the gully below, and in that crooked inky line that scarred the
white face of the moonlit rocks a band of some thirty men were creeping
slowly and stealthily nearer and nearer to Castle Drachenhausen. At the
head of them was a tall, slender knight clad in light chain armor, his
head covered only by a steel cap or bascinet.

Along the shadow they crept, with only now and then a faint clink or
jingle of armor to break the stillness, for most of those who followed
the armed knight were clad in leathern jerkins; only one or two wearing
even so much as a steel breast-plate by way of armor.

So at last they reached the chasm that yawned beneath the roadway, and
there they stopped, for they had reached the spot toward which they had
been journeying. It was Baron Henry of Trutz-Drachen who had thus come
in the silence of the night time to the Dragon's house, and his visit
boded no good to those within.

The Baron and two or three of his men talked together in low tones, now
and then looking up at the sheer wall that towered above them.

"Yonder is the place, Lord Baron," said one of those who stood with him.
"I have scanned every foot of the wall at night for a week past. An we
get not in by that way, we get not in at all. A keen eye, a true aim,
and a bold man are all that we need, and the business is done." Here
again all looked upward at the gray wall above them, rising up in the
silent night air.

High aloft hung the wooden bartizan or watch-tower, clinging to the face
of the outer wall and looming black against the pale sky above. Three
great beams pierced the wall, and upon them the wooden tower rested. The
middle beam jutted out beyond the rest to the distance of five or six
feet, and the end of it was carved into the rude semblance of a dragon's
head.

"So, good," said the Baron at last; "then let us see if thy plan holds,
and if Hans Schmidt's aim is true enough to earn the three marks that I
have promised him. Where is the bag?"

One of those who stood near handed the Baron a leathern pouch, the Baron
opened it and drew out a ball of fine thread, another of twine, a coil
of stout rope, and a great bundle that looked, until it was unrolled,
like a coarse fish-net. It was a rope ladder. While these were being
made ready, Hans Schmidt, a thick-set, low-browed, broad-shouldered
archer, strung his stout bow, and carefully choosing three arrows
from those in his quiver, he stuck them point downward in the earth.
Unwinding the ball of thread, he laid it loosely in large loops upon the
ground so that it might run easily without hitching, then he tied the
end of the thread tightly around one of his arrows. He fitted the arrow
to the bow and drew the feather to his ear. Twang! rang the bowstring,
and the feathered messenger flew whistling upon its errand to the
watch-tower. The very first shaft did the work.

"Good," said Hans Schmidt, the archer, in his heavy voice, "the three
marks are mine, Lord Baron."

The arrow had fallen over and across the jutting beam between the carved
dragon's head and the bartizan, carrying with it the thread, which now
hung from above, glimmering white in the moonlight like a cobweb.

The rest was an easy task enough. First the twine was drawn up to and
over the beam by the thread, then the rope was drawn up by the twine,
and last of all the rope ladder by the rope. There it hung like a thin,
slender black line against the silent gray walls.

"And now," said the Baron, "who will go first and win fifty marks for
his own, and climb the rope ladder to the tower yonder?" Those around
hesitated. "Is there none brave enough to venture?" said the Baron,
after a pause of silence.

A stout, young fellow, of about eighteen years of age, stepped forward
and flung his flat leathern cap upon the ground. "I will go, my Lord
Baron," said he.

"Good," said the Baron, "the fifty marks are thine. And now listen, if
thou findest no one in the watch-tower, whistle thus; if the watchman
be at his post, see that thou makest all safe before thou givest the
signal. When all is ready the others will follow thee. And now go and
good luck go with thee."

The young fellow spat upon his hands and, seizing the ropes, began
slowly and carefully to mount the flimsy, shaking ladder. Those below
held it as tight as they were able, but nevertheless he swung backward
and forward and round and round as he climbed steadily upward. Once he
stopped upon the way, and those below saw him clutch the ladder close
to him as though dizzied by the height and the motion but he soon began
again, up, up, up like some great black spider. Presently he came out
from the black shadow below and into the white moonlight, and then his
shadow followed him step by step up the gray wall upon his way. At last
he reached the jutting beam, and there again he stopped for a moment
clutching tightly to it. The next he was upon the beam, dragging himself
toward the window of the bartizan just above. Slowly raising himself
upon his narrow foothold he peeped cautiously within. Those watching
him from be low saw him slip his hand softly to his side, and then place
something between his teeth. It was his dagger. Reaching up, he clutched
the window sill above him and, with a silent spring, seated himself
upon it. The next moment he disappeared within. A few seconds of silence
followed, then of sudden a sharp gurgling cry broke the stillness. There
was another pause of silence, then a faint shrill whistle sounded from
above.

"Who will go next?" said the Baron. It was Hans Schmidt who stepped
forward. Another followed the arch up the ladder, and another, and
another. Last of all went the Baron Henry himself, and nothing was left
but the rope ladder hanging from above, and swaying back and forth in
the wind.

That night Schwartz Carl had been bousing it over a pot of yellow wine
in the pantry with his old crony, Master Rudolph, the steward; and the
two, chatting and gossiping together, had passed the time away until
long after the rest of the castle had been wrapped in sleep. Then,
perhaps a little unsteady upon his feet, Schwartz Carl betook himself
homeward to the Melchior tower.

He stood for a while in the shadow of the doorway, gazing up into the
pale sky above him at the great, bright, round moon, that hung like a
bubble above the sharp peaks of the roofs standing black as ink against
the sky. But all of a sudden he started up from the post against which
he had been leaning, and with head bent to one side, stood listening
breathlessly, for he too had heard that smothered cry from the
watch-tower. So he stood intently, motionlessly, listening, listening;
but all was silent except for the monotonous dripping of water in one of
the nooks of the court-yard, and the distant murmur of the river borne
upon the breath of the night air. "Mayhap I was mistaken," muttered
Schwartz Carl to himself.

But the next moment the silence was broken again by a faint, shrill
whistle; what did it mean?

Back of the heavy oaken door of the tower was Schwartz Carl's cross-bow,
the portable windlass with which the bowstring was drawn back, and a
pouch of bolts. Schwartz Carl reached back into the darkness, fumbling
in the gloom until his fingers met the weapon. Setting his foot in the
iron stirrup at the end of the stock, he wound the stout bow-string
into the notch of the trigger, and carefully fitted the heavy,
murderous-looking bolt into the groove.

Minute after minute passed, and Schwartz Carl, holding his arbelast in
his hand, stood silently waiting and watching in the sharp-cut, black
shadow of the doorway, motionless as a stone statue. Minute after minute
passed. Suddenly there was a movement in the shadow of the arch of the
great gateway across the court-yard, and the next moment a leathern-clad
figure crept noiselessly out upon the moonlit pavement, and stood there
listening, his head bent to one side. Schwartz Carl knew very well
that it was no one belonging to the castle, and, from the nature of his
action, that he was upon no good errand.

He did not stop to challenge the suspicious stranger. The taking of
another's life was thought too small a matter for much thought or care
in those days. Schwartz Carl would have shot a man for a much smaller
reason than the suspicious actions of this fellow. The leather-clad
figure stood a fine target in the moonlight for a cross-bow bolt.
Schwartz Carl slowly raised the weapon to his shoulder and took a long
and steady aim. Just then the stranger put his fingers to his lips and
gave a low, shrill whistle. It was the last whistle that he was to give
upon this earth. There was a sharp, jarring twang of the bow-string, the
hiss of the flying bolt, and the dull thud as it struck its mark. The
man gave a shrill, quavering cry, and went staggering back, and then
fell all of a heap against the wall behind him. As though in answer to
the cry, half a dozen men rushed tumultuously out from the shadow of
the gateway whence the stranger had just come, and then stood in the
court-yard, looking uncertainly this way and that, not knowing from what
quarter the stroke had come that had laid their comrade low.

But Schwartz Carl did not give them time to discover that; there was no
chance to string his cumbersome weapon again; down he flung it upon the
ground. "To arms!" he roared in a voice of thunder, and then clapped to
the door of Melchior's tower and shot the great iron bolts with a clang
and rattle.

The next instant the Trutz-Drachen men were thundering at the door, but
Schwartz Carl was already far up the winding steps.

But now the others came pouring out from the gateway. "To the house,"
roared Baron Henry.

Then suddenly a clashing, clanging uproar crashed out upon the night.
Dong! Dong! It was the great alarm bell from Melchior's tower--Schwartz
Carl was at his post.

Little Baron Otto lay sleeping upon the great rough bed in his room,
dreaming of the White Cross on the hill and of brother John. By and by
he heard the convent bell ringing, and knew that there must be visitors
at the gate, for loud voices sounded through his dream. Presently he
knew that he was coming awake, but though the sunny monastery garden
grew dimmer and dimmer to his sleeping sight, the clanging of the bell
and the sound of shouts grew louder and louder. Then he opened his eyes.
Flaming red lights from torches, carried hither and thither by people
in the court-yard outside, flashed and ran along the wall of his
room. Hoarse shouts and cries filled the air, and suddenly the shrill,
piercing shriek of a woman rang from wall to wall; and through the
noises the great bell from far above upon Melchior's tower clashed and
clanged its harsh, resonant alarm.

Otto sprang from his bed and looked out of the window and down upon
the court-yard below. "Dear God! what dreadful thing hath happened?" he
cried and clasped his hands together.

A cloud of smoke was pouring out from the windows of the building across
the court-yard, whence a dull ruddy glow flashed and flickered. Strange
men were running here and there with flaming torches, and the now
continuous shrieking of women pierced the air.

Just beneath the window lay the figure of a man half naked and face
downward upon the stones. Then suddenly Otto cried out in fear and
horror, for, as he looked with dazed and bewildered eyes down into the
lurid court-yard beneath, a savage man, in a shining breast-plate and
steel cap, came dragging the dark, silent figure of a woman across the
stones; but whether she was dead or in a swoon, Otto could not tell.

And every moment the pulsing of that dull red glare from the windows of
the building across the court-yard shone more brightly, and the glare
from other flaming buildings, which Otto could not see from his window,
turned the black, starry night into a lurid day.

Just then the door of the room was burst open, and in rushed poor old
Ursela, crazy with her terror. She flung herself down upon the floor and
caught Otto around the knees. "Save me!" she cried, "save me!" as though
the poor, pale child could be of any help to her at such a time. In the
passageway without shone the light of torches, and the sound of loud
footsteps came nearer and nearer.

And still through all the din sounded continually the clash and clang
and clamor of the great alarm bell.

The red light flashed into the room, and in the doorway stood a tall,
thin figure clad from head to foot in glittering chain armor. From
behind this fierce knight, with his dark, narrow, cruel face, its
deep-set eyes glistening in the light of the torches, crowded six or
eight savage, low-browed, brutal men, who stared into the room and
at the white-faced boy as he stood by the window with the old woman
clinging to his knees and praying to him for help.

"We have cracked the nut and here is the kernel," said one of them who
stood behind the rest, and thereupon a roar of brutal laughter went up.
But the cruel face of the armed knight never relaxed into a smile;
he strode into the room and laid his iron hand heavily upon the boy's
shoulder. "Art thou the young Baron Otto?" said he, in a harsh voice.

"Aye," said the lad; "but do not kill me."

The knight did not answer him. "Fetch the cord hither," said he, "and
drag the old witch away."

It took two of them to loosen poor old Ursela's crazy clutch from about
her young master. Then amid roars of laughter they dragged her away,
screaming and scratching and striking with her fists.

They drew back Otto's arms behind his back and wrapped them round and
round with a bowstring. Then they pushed and hustled and thrust him
forth from the room and along the passageway, now bright with the flames
that roared and crackled without. Down the steep stairway they drove
him, where thrice he stumbled and fell amid roars of laughter. At last
they were out into the open air of the court-yard. Here was a terrible
sight, but Otto saw nothing of it; his blue eyes were gazing far away,
and his lips moved softly with the prayer that the good monks of St.
Michaelsburg had taught him, for he thought that they meant to slay him.

All around the court-yard the flames roared and snapped and crackled.
Four or five figures lay scattered here and there, silent in all the
glare and uproar. The heat was so intense that they were soon forced
back into the shelter of the great gateway, where the women captives,
under the guard of three or four of the Trutz-Drachen men, were crowded
together in dumb, bewildered terror. Only one man was to be seen among
the captives, poor, old, half blind Master Rudolph, the steward,
who crouched tremblingly among the women. They had set the blaze to
Melchior's tower, and now, below, it was a seething furnace. Above, the
smoke rolled in black clouds from the windows, but still the alarm bell
sounded through all the blaze and smoke. Higher and higher the flames
rose; a trickle of fire ran along the frame buildings hanging aloft in
the air. A clear flame burst out at the peak of the roof, but still the
bell rang forth its clamorous clangor. Presently those who watched below
saw the cluster of buildings bend and sink and sway; there was a crash
and roar, a cloud of sparks flew up as though to the very heavens
themselves, and the bell of Melchior's tower was stilled forever. A
great shout arose from the watching, upturned faces.

"Forward!" cried Baron Henry, and out from the gateway they swept and
across the drawbridge, leaving Drachenhausen behind them a flaming
furnace blazing against the gray of the early dawning.




VIII. In the House of the Dragon Scorner.

Tall, narrow, gloomy room; no furniture but a rude bench a bare stone
floor, cold stone walls and a gloomy ceiling of arched stone over head;
a long, narrow slit of a window high above in the wall, through the iron
bars of which Otto could see a small patch of blue sky and now and then
a darting swallow, for an instant seen, the next instant gone. Such
was the little baron's prison in Trutz-Drachen. Fastened to a bolt
and hanging against the walls, hung a pair of heavy chains with gaping
fetters at the ends. They were thick with rust, and the red stain of
the rust streaked the wall below where they hung like a smear of blood.
Little Otto shuddered as he looked at them; can those be meant for me,
he thought.

Nothing was to be seen but that one patch of blue sky far up in the
wall. No sound from without was to be heard in that gloomy cell of
stone, for the window pierced the outer wall, and the earth and its
noises lay far below.

Suddenly a door crashed without, and the footsteps of men were heard
coming along the corridor. They stopped in front of Otto's cell; he
heard the jingle of keys, and then a loud rattle of one thrust into
the lock of the heavy oaken door. The rusty bolt was shot back with a
screech, the door opened, and there stood Baron Henry, no longer in his
armor, but clad in a long black robe that reached nearly to his feet,
a broad leather belt was girdled about his waist, and from it dangled a
short, heavy hunting sword.

Another man was with the Baron, a heavy-faced fellow clad in a leathern
jerkin over which was drawn a short coat of linked mail.

The two stood for a moment looking into the room, and Otto, his pale
face glimmering in the gloom, sat upon the edge of the heavy wooden
bench or bed, looking back at them out of his great blue eyes. Then the
two entered and closed the door behind them.

"Dost thou know why thou art here?" said the Baron, in his deep, harsh
voice.

"Nay," said Otto, "I know not."

"So?" said the Baron. "Then I will tell thee. Three years ago the good
Baron Frederick, my uncle, kneeled in the dust and besought mercy at thy
father's hands; the mercy he received was the coward blow that slew him.
Thou knowest the story?"

"Aye," said Otto, tremblingly, "I know it."

"Then dost thou not know why I am here?" said the Baron.

"Nay, dear Lord Baron, I know not," said poor little Otto, and began to
weep.

The Baron stood for a moment or two looking gloomily upon him, as the
little boy sat there with the tears running down his white face.

"I will tell thee," said he, at last; "I swore an oath that the red cock
should crow on Drachenhausen, and I have given it to the dames. I swore
an oath that no Vuelph that ever left my hands should be able to strike
such a blow as thy father gave to Baron Frederick, and now I will fulfil
that too. Catch the boy, Casper, and hold him."

As the man in the mail shirt stepped toward little Otto, the boy leaped
up from where he sat and caught the Baron about the knees. "Oh! dear
Lord Baron," he cried, "do not harm me; I am only a little child, I have
never done harm to thee; do not harm me."

"Take him away," said the Baron, harshly.

The fellow stooped, and loosening Otto's hold, in spite of his struggles
and cries, carried him to the bench, against which he held him, whilst
the Baron stood above him.

Baron Henry and the other came forth from the cell, carefully closing
the wooden door behind them. At the end of the corridor the Baron
turned, "Let the leech be sent to the boy," said he. And then he turned
and walked away.

Otto lay upon the hard couch in his cell, covered with a shaggy bear
skin. His face was paler and thinner than ever, and dark rings encircled
his blue eyes. He was looking toward the door, for there was a noise of
someone fumbling with the lock without.

Since that dreadful day when Baron Henry had come to his cell, only two
souls had visited Otto. One was the fellow who had come with the Baron
that time; his name, Otto found, was Casper. He brought the boy his rude
meals of bread and meat and water. The other visitor was the leech or
doctor, a thin, weasand little man, with a kindly, wrinkled face and a
gossiping tongue, who, besides binding wounds, bleeding, and leeching,
and administering his simple remedies to those who were taken sick in
the castle, acted as the Baron's barber.

The Baron had left the key in the lock of the door, so that these two
might enter when they chose, but Otto knew that it was neither the one
nor the other whom he now heard at the door, working uncertainly with
the key, striving to turn it in the rusty, cumbersome lock. At last the
bolts grated back, there was a pause, and then the door opened a little
way, and Otto thought that he could see someone peeping in from without.
By and by the door opened further, there was another pause, and then
a slender, elfish-looking little girl, with straight black hair and
shining black eyes, crept noiselessly into the room.

She stood close by the door with her finger in her mouth, staring at
the boy where he lay upon his couch, and Otto upon his part lay, full of
wonder, gazing back upon the little elfin creature.

She, seeing that he made no sign or motion, stepped a little nearer, and
then, after a moment's pause, a little nearer still, until, at last, she
stood within a few feet of where he lay.

"Art thou the Baron Otto?" said she.

"Yes," answered Otto.

"Prut!" said she, "and is that so! Why, I thought that thou wert a great
tall fellow at least, and here thou art a little boy no older than Carl
Max, the gooseherd." Then, after a little pause--"My name is Pauline,
and my father is the Baron. I heard him tell my mother all about thee,
and so I wanted to come here and see thee myself: Art thou sick?"

"Yes," said Otto, "I am sick."

"And did my father hurt thee?"

"Aye," said Otto, and his eyes filled with tears, until one sparkling
drop trickled slowly down his white face.

Little Pauline stood looking seriously at him for a while. "I am sorry
for thee, Otto," said she, at last. And then, at her childish pity, he
began crying in earnest.

This was only the first visit of many from the little maid, for after
that she often came to Otto's prison, who began to look for her coming
from day to day as the one bright spot in the darkness and the gloom.

Sitting upon the edge of his bed and gazing into his face with wide open
eyes, she would listen to him by the hour, as he told her of his life in
that far away monastery home; of poor, simple brother John's wonderful
visions, of the good Abbot's books with their beautiful pictures, and of
all the monkish tales and stories of knights and dragons and heroes and
emperors of ancient Rome, which brother Emmanuel had taught him to read
in the crabbed monkish Latin in which they were written.

One day the little maid sat for a long while silent after he had ended
speaking. At last she drew a deep breath. "And are all these things that
thou tellest me about the priests in their castle really true?" said
she.

"Yes," said Otto, "all are true."

"And do they never go out to fight other priests?"

"No," said Otto, "they know nothing of fighting."

"So!" said she. And then fell silent in the thought of the wonder of
it all, and that there should be men in the world that knew nothing of
violence and bloodshed; for in all the eight years of her life she had
scarcely been outside of the walls of Castle Trutz-Drachen.

At another time it was of Otto's mother that they were speaking.

"And didst thou never see her, Otto?" said the little girl.

"Aye," said Otto, "I see her sometimes in my dreams, and her face always
shines so bright that I know she is an angel; for brother John has often
seen the dear angels, and he tells me that their faces always shine in
that way. I saw her the night thy father hurt me so, for I could not
sleep and my head felt as though it would break asunder. Then she
came and leaned over me and kissed my forehead, and after that I fell
asleep."

"But where did she come from, Otto?" said the little girl.

"From paradise, I think," said Otto, with that patient seriousness that
he had caught from the monks, and that sat so quaintly upon him.

"So!" said little Pauline; and then, after a pause, "That is why thy
mother kissed thee when thy head ached--because she is an angel. When
I was sick my mother bade Gretchen carry me to a far part of the house,
because I cried and so troubled her. Did thy mother ever strike thee,
Otto?"

"Nay," said Otto.

"Mine hath often struck me," said Pauline.

One day little Pauline came bustling into Otto's cell, her head full of
the news which she carried. "My father says that thy father is out
in the woods somewhere yonder, back of the castle, for Fritz, the
swineherd, told my father that last night he had seen a fire in the
woods, and that he had crept up to it without anyone knowing. There he
had seen the Baron Conrad and six of his men, and that they were eating
one of the swine that they had killed and roasted. Maybe," said she,
seating herself upon the edge of Otto's couch; "maybe my father will
kill thy father, and they will bring him here and let him lie upon a
black bed with bright candles burning around him, as they did my uncle
Frederick when he was killed."

"God forbid!" said Otto, and then lay for a while with his hands
clasped. "Dost thou love me, Pauline?" said he, after a while.

"Yes," said Pauline, "for thou art a good child, though my father says
that thy wits are cracked."

"Mayhap they are," said Otto, simply, "for I have often been told so
before. But thou wouldst not see me die, Pauline; wouldst thou?"

"Nay," said Pauline, "I would not see thee die, for then thou couldst
tell me no more stories; for they told me that uncle Frederick could not
speak because he was dead."

"Then listen, Pauline," said Otto; "if I go not away from here I shall
surely die. Every day I grow more sick and the leech cannot cure me."
Here he broke down and, turning his face upon the couch, began crying,
while little Pauline sat looking seriously at him.

"Why dost thou cry, Otto?" said she, after a while.

"Because," said he, "I am so sick, and I want my father to come and take
me away from here."

"But why dost thou want to go away?" said Pauline. "If thy father takes
thee away, thou canst not tell me any more stories."

"Yes, I can," said Otto, "for when I grow to be a man I will come
again and marry thee, and when thou art my wife I can tell thee all the
stories that I know. Dear Pauline, canst thou not tell my father where I
am, that he may come here and take me away before I die?"

"Mayhap I could do so," said Pauline, after a little while, "for
sometimes I go with Casper Max to see his mother, who nursed me when I
was a baby. She is the wife of Fritz, the swineherd, and she will make
him tell thy father; for she will do whatever I ask of her, and Fritz
will do whatever she bids him do."

"And for my sake, wilt thou tell him, Pauline?" said Otto.

"But see, Otto," said the little girl, "if I tell him, wilt thou promise
to come indeed and marry me when thou art grown a man?"

"Yes," said Otto, very seriously, "I will promise."

"Then I will tell thy father where thou art," said she.

"But thou wilt do it without the Baron Henry knowing, wilt thou not,
Pauline?"

"Yes," said she, "for if my father and my mother knew that I did such
a thing, they would strike me, mayhap send me to my bed alone in the
dark."




IX. How One-eyed Hans came to Trutz-Drachen.

Fritz, the swineherd, sat eating his late supper of porridge out of a
great, coarse, wooden bowl; wife Katherine sat at the other end of the
table, and the half-naked little children played upon the earthen floor.
A shaggy dog lay curled up in front of the fire, and a grunting pig
scratched against a leg of the rude table close beside where the woman
sat.

"Yes, yes," said Katherine, speaking of the matter of which they had
already been talking. "It is all very true that the Drachenhausens are a
bad lot, and I for one am of no mind to say no to that; all the same it
is a sad thing that a simple-witted little child like the young Baron
should be so treated as the boy has been; and now that our Lord Baron
has served him so that he, at least, will never be able to do us 'harm,
I for one say that he should not be left there to die alone in that
black cell."

Fritz, the swineherd, gave a grunt at this without raising his eyes from
the bowl.

"Yes, good," said Katherine, "I know what thou meanest, Fritz, and that
it is none of my business to be thrusting my finger into the Baron's
dish. But to hear the way that dear little child spoke when she was here
this morn--it would have moved a heart of stone to hear her tell of all
his pretty talk. Thou wilt try to let the red-beard know that that poor
boy, his son, is sick to death in the black cell; wilt thou not, Fritz?"

The swineherd dropped his wooden spoon into the bowl with a clatter.
"Potstausand!" he cried; "art thou gone out of thy head to let thy wits
run upon such things as this of which thou talkest to me? If it should
come to our Lord Baron's ears he would cut the tongue from out thy head
and my head from off my shoulders for it. Dost thou think I am going to
meddle in such a matter as this? Listen! these proud Baron folk, with
their masterful ways, drive our sort hither and thither; they beat us,
they drive us, they kill us as they choose. Our lives are not as much
to them as one of my black swine. Why should I trouble my head if they
choose to lop and trim one another? The fewer there are of them the
better for us, say I. We poor folk have a hard enough life of it without
thrusting our heads into the noose to help them out of their troubles.
What thinkest thou would happen to us if Baron Henry should hear of our
betraying his affairs to the Red-beard?"

"Nay," said Katherine, "thou hast naught to do in the matter but to tell
the Red-beard in what part of the castle the little Baron lies."

"And what good would that do?" said Fritz, the swineherd.

"I know not," said Katherine, "but I have promised the little one that
thou wouldst find the Baron Conrad and tell him that much."

"Thou hast promised a mare's egg," said her husband, angrily. "How shall
I find the Baron Conrad to bear a message to him, when our Baron has
been looking for him in vain for two days past?"

"Thou has found him once and thou mayst find him again," said Katherine,
"for it is not likely that he will keep far away from here whilst his
boy is in such sore need of help."

"I will have nothing to do with it!" said Fritz, and he got up from the
wooden block whereon he was sitting and stumped out of the house. But,
then, Katherine had heard him talk in that way before, and knew, in
spite of his saying "no," that, sooner or later, he would do as she
wished.

Two days later a very stout little one-eyed man, clad in a leathern
jerkin and wearing a round leathern cap upon his head, came toiling up
the path to the postern door of Trutz-Drachen, his back bowed under the
burthen of a great peddler's pack. It was our old friend the one-eyed
Hans, though even his brother would hardly have known him in his present
guise, for, besides having turned peddler, he had grown of a sudden
surprisingly fat.

Rap-tap-tap! He knocked at the door with a knotted end of the crooked
thorned staff upon which he leaned. He waited for a while and then
knocked again--rap-tap-tap!

Presently, with a click, a little square wicket that pierced the door
was opened, and a woman's face peered out through the iron bars.

The one-eyed Hans whipped off his leathern cap.

"Good day, pretty one," said he, "and hast thou any need of glass beads,
ribbons, combs, or trinkets? Here I am come all the way from Gruenstadt,
with a pack full of such gay things as thou never laid eyes on before.
Here be rings and bracelets and necklaces that might be of pure silver
and set with diamonds and rubies, for anything that thy dear one could
tell if he saw thee decked in them. And all are so cheap that thou hast
only to say, 'I want them,' and they are thine."

The frightened face at the window looked from right to left and from
left to right. "Hush," said the girl, and laid her finger upon her lips.
"There! thou hadst best get away from here, poor soul, as fast as thy
legs can carry thee, for if the Lord Baron should find thee here talking
secretly at the postern door, he would loose the wolf-hounds upon thee."

"Prut," said one-eyed Hans, with a grin, "the Baron is too big a fly to
see such a little gnat as I; but wolf-hounds or no wolf-hounds, I
can never go hence without showing thee the pretty things that I have
brought from the town, even though my stay be at the danger of my own
hide."

He flung the pack from off his shoulders as he spoke and fell to
unstrapping it, while the round face of the lass (her eyes big with
curiosity) peered down at him through the grated iron bars.

Hans held up a necklace of blue and white beads that glistened like
jewels in the sun, and from them hung a gorgeous filigree cross. "Didst
thou ever see a sweeter thing than this?" said he; "and look, here is a
comb that even the silversmith would swear was pure silver all the way
through." Then, in a soft, wheedling voice, "Canst thou not let me in,
my little bird? Sure there are other lasses besides thyself who would
like to trade with a poor peddler who has travelled all the way from
Gruenstadt just to please the pretty ones of Trutz-Drachen."

"Nay," said the lass, in a frightened voice, "I cannot let thee in; I
know not what the Baron would do to me, even now, if he knew that I was
here talking to a stranger at the postern;" and she made as if she would
clap to the little window in his face; but the one-eyed Hans thrust his
staff betwixt the bars and so kept the shutter open.

"Nay, nay," said he, eagerly, "do not go away from me too soon. Look,
dear one; seest thou this necklace?"

"Aye," said she, looking hungrily at it.

"Then listen; if thou wilt but let me into the castle, so that I may
strike a trade, I will give it to thee for thine own without thy paying
a barley corn for it."

The girl looked and hesitated, and then looked again; the temptation was
too great. There was a noise of softly drawn bolts and bars, the door
was hesitatingly opened a little way, and, in a twinkling, the one-eyed
Hans had slipped inside the castle, pack and all.

"The necklace," said the girl, in a frightened whisper.

Hans thrust it into her hand. "It's thine," said he, "and now wilt thou
not help me to a trade?"

"I will tell my sister that thou art here," said she, and away she ran
from the little stone hallway, carefully bolting and locking the further
door behind her.

The door that the girl had locked was the only one that connected the
postern hail with the castle.

The one-eyed Hans stood looking after her. "Thou fool!" he muttered to
himself, "to lock the door behind thee. What shall I do next, I should
like to know? Here am I just as badly off as I was when I stood outside
the walls. Thou hussy! If thou hadst but let me into the castle for only
two little minutes, I would have found somewhere to have hidden myself
while thy back was turned. But what shall I do now?" He rested his pack
upon the floor and stood looking about him.

Built in the stone wall opposite to him, was a high, narrow fireplace
without carving of any sort. As Hans' one eye wandered around the bare
stone space, his glance fell at last upon it, and there it rested. For
a while he stood looking intently at it, presently he began rubbing his
hand over his bristling chin in a thoughtful, meditative manner. Finally
he drew a deep breath, and giving himself a shake as though to arouse
himself from his thoughts, and after listening a moment or two to
make sure that no one was nigh, he walked softly to the fireplace, and
stooping, peered up the chimney. Above him yawned a black cavernous
depth, inky with the soot of years. Hans straightened himself, and
tilting his leathern cap to one side, began scratching his bullet-head;
at last he drew a long breath. "Yes, good," he muttered to himself; "he
who jumps into the river must e'en swim the best he can. It is a vile,
dirty place to thrust one's self; but I am in for it now, and must make
the best of a lame horse."

He settled the cap more firmly upon his head, spat upon his hands, and
once more stooping in the fireplace, gave a leap, and up the chimney he
went with a rattle of loose mortar and a black trickle of soot.

By and by footsteps sounded outside the door. There was a pause; a
hurried whispering of women's voices; the twitter of a nervous laugh,
and then the door was pushed softly opens and the girl to whom the
one-eyed Hans had given the necklace of blue and white beads with the
filigree cross hanging from it, peeped uncertainly into the room. Behind
her broad, heavy face were three others, equally homely and stolid; for
a while all four stood there, looking blankly into the room and around
it. Nothing was there but the peddler's knapsack lying in the middle of
the floor-the man was gone. The light of expectancy slowly faded Out of
the girl's face, and in its place succeeded first bewilderment and then
dull alarm. "But, dear heaven," she said, "where then has the peddler
man gone?"

A moment or two of silence followed her speech. "Perhaps," said one of
the others, in a voice hushed with awe, "perhaps it was the evil one
himself to whom thou didst open the door."

Again there was a hushed and breathless pause; it was the lass who had
let Hans in at the postern, who next spoke.

"Yes," said she, in a voice trembling with fright at what she had done,
"yes, it must have been the evil one, for now I remember he had but one
eye." The four girls crossed themselves, and their eyes grew big and
round with the fright.

Suddenly a shower of mortar came rattling down the chimney. "Ach!" cried
the four, as with one voice. Bang! the door was clapped to and away they
scurried like a flock of frightened rabbits.

When Jacob, the watchman, came that way an hour later, upon his evening
round of the castle, he found a peddler's knapsack lying in the middle
of the floor. He turned it over with his pike-staff and saw that it was
full of beads and trinkets and ribbons.

"How came this here?" said he. And then, without waiting for the answer
which he did not expect, he flung it over his shoulder and marched away
with it.




X. How Hans Brought Terror to the Kitchen.

Hans found himself in a pretty pickle in the chimney, for the soot got
into his one eye and set it to watering, and into his nose and set him
to sneezing, and into his mouth and his ears and his hair. But still
he struggled on, up and up; "for every chimney has a top," said Hans
to himself "and I am sure to climb out somewhere or other." Suddenly he
came to a place where another chimney joined the one he was climbing,
and here he stopped to consider the matter at his leisure. "See now," he
muttered, "if I still go upward I may come out at the top of some tall
chimney-stack with no way of getting down outside. Now, below here
there must be a fire-place somewhere, for a chimney does not start from
nothing at all; yes, good! we will go down a while and see what we make
of that."

It was a crooked, zigzag road that he had to travel, and rough and hard
into the bargain. His one eye tingled and smarted, and his knees and
elbows were rubbed to the quick; nevertheless One-eyed Hans had been in
worse trouble than this in his life.

Down he went and down he went, further than he had climbed upward
before. "Sure, I must be near some place or other," he thought.

As though in instant answer to his thoughts, he heard the sudden sound
of a voice so close beneath him that he stopped short in his downward
climbing and stood as still as a mouse, with his heart in his mouth.
A few inches more and he would have been discovered;--what would have
happened then would have been no hard matter to foretell.

Hans braced his back against one side of the chimney, his feet against
the other and then, leaning forward, looked down between his knees. The
gray light of the coming evening glimmered in a wide stone fireplace
just below him. Within the fireplace two people were moving about upon
the broad hearth, a great, fat woman and a shock-headed boy. The woman
held a spit with two newly trussed fowls upon it, so that One-eyed Hans
knew that she must be the cook.

"Thou ugly toad," said the woman to the boy, "did I not bid thee make a
fire an hour ago? and now, here there is not so much as a spark to roast
the fowls withall, and they to be basted for the lord Baron's supper.
Where hast thou been for all this time?"

"No matter," said the boy, sullenly, as he laid the fagots ready for the
lighting; "no matter, I was not running after Long Jacob, the bowman, to
try to catch him for a sweetheart, as thou hast been doing."

The reply was instant and ready. The cook raised her hand; "smack!" she
struck and a roar from the scullion followed.

"Yes, good," thought Hans, as he looked down upon them; "I am glad that
the boy's ear was not on my head."

"Now give me no more of thy talk," said the woman, "but do the work
that thou hast been bidden." Then--"How came all this black soot here, I
should like to know?"

"How should I know?" snuffled the scullion, "mayhap thou wouldst blame
that on me also?"

"That is my doing," whispered Hans to himself; "but if they light the
fire, what then becomes of me?"

"See now," said the cook; "I go to make the cakes ready; if I come back
and find that thou hast not built the fire, I will warm thy other ear
for thee."

"So," thought Hans; "then will be my time to come down the chimney, for
there will be but one of them."

The next moment he heard the door close and knew that the cook had gone
to make the cakes ready as she said. And as he looked down he saw that
the boy was bending over the bundle of fagots, blowing the spark that
he had brought in upon the punk into a flame. The dry fagots began to
crackle and blaze. "Now is my time," said Hans to himself. Bracing his
elbows against each side of the chimney, he straightened his legs so
that he might fall clear His motions loosened little shower of soot that
fell rattling upon the fagots that were now beginning to blaze brightly,
whereupon the boy raised his face and looked up. Hans loosened his hold
upon the chimney; crash! he fell, lighting upon his feet in the midst
of the burning fagots. The scullion boy tumbled backward upon the floor,
where he lay upon the broad of his back with a face as white as
dough and eyes and mouth agape, staring speechlessly at the frightful
inky-black figure standing in the midst of the flames and smoke. Then
his scattered wits came back to him. "It is the evil one," he roared.
And thereupon, turning upon his side, he half rolled, half scrambled to
the door. Then out he leaped and, banging it to behind him, flew down
the passageway, yelling with fright and never daring once to look behind
him.

All the time One-eyed Hans was brushing away the sparks that clung to
his clothes. He was as black as ink from head to foot with the soot from
the chimney.

"So far all is good," he muttered to himself, "but if I go wandering
about in my sooty shoes I will leave black tracks to follow me, so there
is nothing to do but e'en to go barefoot."

He stooped and drawing the pointed soft leather shoes from his feet, he
threw them upon the now blazing fagots, where they writhed and twisted
and wrinkled, and at last burst into a flame. Meanwhile Hans lost no
time; he must find a hiding-place, and quickly, if he would yet hope
to escape. A great bread trough stood in the corner of the kitchen--a
hopper-shaped chest with a flat lid. It was the best hiding place that
the room afforded. Without further thought Hans ran to it, snatching up
from the table as he passed a loaf of black bread and a bottle half full
of stale wine, for he had had nothing to eat since that morning. Into
the great bread trough he climbed, and drawing the lid down upon him,
curled himself up as snugly as a mouse in its nest.

For a while the kitchen lay in silence, but at last the sound of voices
was heard at the door, whispering together in low tones. Suddenly the
door was flung open and a tall, lean, lantern-jawed fellow, clad in
rough frieze, strode into the room and stood there glaring with half
frightened boldness around about him; three or four women and the
trembling scullion crowded together in a frightened group behind him.

The man was Long Jacob, the bowman; but, after all, his boldness was
all wasted, for not a thread or a hair was to be seen, but only the
crackling fire throwing its cheerful ruddy glow upon the wall of the
room, now rapidly darkening in the falling gray of the twilight without.

The fat cook's fright began rapidly to turn into anger.

"Thou imp," she cried, "it is one of thy tricks," and she made a dive
for the scullion, who ducked around the skirts of one of the other women
and so escaped for the time; but Long Jacob wrinkled up his nose and
sniffed. "Nay," said he, "me thinks that there lieth some truth in the
tale that the boy hath told, for here is a vile smell of burned horn
that the black one bath left behind him."

It was the smell from the soft leather shoes that Hans had burned.

The silence of night had fallen over the Castle of Trutz-Drachen; not
a sound was heard but the squeaking of mice scurring behind the
wainscoting, the dull dripping of moisture from the eaves, or the
sighing of the night wind around the gables and through the naked
windows of the castle.

The lid of the great dough trough was softly raised, and a face, black
with soot, peeped cautiously out from under it. Then little by little
arose a figure as black as the face; and One-eyed Hans stepped out upon
the floor, stretching and rubbing himself.

"Methinks I must have slept," he muttered. "Hui, I am as stiff as a new
leather doublet, and now, what next is to become of me? I hope my luck
may yet stick to me, in spite of this foul black soot!"

Along the middle of the front of the great hall of the castle, ran a
long stone gallery, opening at one end upon the court-yard by a high
flight of stone steps. A man-at-arms in breast-plate and steel cap, and
bearing a long pike, paced up and down the length of this gallery, now
and then stopping, leaning over the edge, and gazing up into the starry
sky above; then, with a long drawn yawn, lazily turning back to the
monotonous watch again.

A dark figure crept out from an arched doorway at the lower part of the
long straight building, and some little distance below the end gallery,
but the sentry saw nothing of it, for his back was turned. As silently
and as stealthily as a cat the figure crawled along by the dark shadowy
wall, now and then stopping, and then again creeping slowly forward
toward the gallery where the man-at-arms moved monotonously up and down.
It was One-eyed Hans in his bare feet.

Inch by inch, foot by foot--the black figure crawled along in the angle
of the wall; inch by inch and foot by foot, but ever nearer and nearer
to the long straight row of stone steps that led to the covered gallery.
At last it crouched at the lowest step of the flight. Just then the
sentinel upon watch came to the very end of the gallery and stood there
leaning upon his spear. Had he looked down below he could not have
failed to have seen One-eyed Hans lying there motionlessly; but he was
gazing far away over the steep black roofs beyond, and never saw the
unsuspected presence. Minute after minute passed, and the one stood
there looking out into the night and the other lay crouching by the
wall; then with a weary sigh the sentry turned and began slowly pacing
back again toward the farther end of the gallery.

Instantly the motionless figure below arose and glided noiselessly and
swiftly up the flight of steps.

Two rude stone pillars flanked either side of the end of the gallery.
Like a shadow the black figure slipped behind one of these, flattening
itself up against the wall, where it stood straight and motionless as
the shadows around it.

Down the long gallery came the watchman, his sword clinking loudly in
the silence as he walked, tramp, tramp, tramp! clink, clank, jingle.

Within three feet of the motionless figure behind the pillar he turned,
and began retracing his monotonous steps. Instantly the other left the
shadow of the post and crept rapidly and stealthily after him. One step,
two steps the sentinel took; for a moment the black figure behind him
seemed to crouch and draw together, then like a flash it leaped forward
upon its victim.

A shadowy cloth fell upon the man's face, and in an instant he was flung
back and down with a muffled crash upon the stones. Then followed a
fierce and silent struggle in the darkness, but strong and sturdy as the
man was, he was no match for the almost superhuman strength of One-eyed
Hans. The cloth which he had flung over his head was tied tightly and
securely. Then the man was forced upon his face and, in spite of his
fierce struggles, his arms were bound around and around with strong fine
cord; next his feet were bound in the same way, and the task was done.
Then Hans stood upon his feet, and wiped the sweat from his swarthy
forehead. "Listen, brother," he whispered, and as he spoke he stooped
and pressed something cold and hard against the neck of the other.
"Dost thou know the feel of this? It is a broad dagger, and if thou
dost contrive to loose that gag from thy mouth and makest any outcry, it
shall be sheathed in thy weasand."

So saying, he thrust the knife back again into its sheath, then stooping
and picking up the other, he flung him across his shoulder like a sack,
and running down the steps as lightly as though his load was nothing at
all, he carried his burden to the arched doorway whence he had come a
little while before. There, having first stripped his prisoner of
all his weapons, Hans sat the man up in the angle of the wall. "So,
brother;" said he, "now we can talk with more ease than we could up
yonder. I will tell thee frankly why I am here; it is to find where the
young Baron Otto of Drachenhausen is kept. If thou canst tell me,
well and good; if not, I must e'en cut thy weasand and find me one who
knoweth more. Now, canst thou tell me what I would learn, brother?"

The other nodded dimly in the darkness.

"That is good," said Hans, "then I will loose thy gag until thou hast
told me; only bear in mind what I said concerning my dagger."

Thereupon, he unbound his prisoner, and the fellow slowly rose to his
feet. He shook himself and looked all about him in a heavy, bewildered
fashion, as though he had just awakened from a dream.

His right hand slid furtively down to his side, but the dagger-sheath
was empty.

"Come, brother!" said Hans, impatiently, "time is passing, and once lost
can never be found again. Show me the way to the young Baron Otto or--."
And he whetted the shining blade of his dagger on his horny palm.

The fellow needed no further bidding; turning, he led the way, and
together they were swallowed up in the yawning shadows, and again the
hush of night-time lay upon the Castle of Trutz-Drachen.




XI. How Otto was Saved.

Little Otto was lying upon the hard couch in his cell, tossing in
restless and feverish sleep; suddenly a heavy hand was laid upon him and
a voice whispered in his ear, "Baron, Baron Otto, waken, rouse yourself;
I am come to help you. I am One-eyed Hans."

Otto was awake in an instant and raised himself upon his elbow in the
darkness. "One-eyed Hans," he breathed, "One-eyed Hans; who is One-eyed
Hans?"

"True," said the other, "thou dost not know me. I am thy father's
trusted servant, and am the only one excepting his own blood and kin
who has clung to him in this hour of trouble. Yes, all are gone but me
alone, and so I have come to help thee away from this vile place."

"Oh, dear, good Hans! if only thou canst!" cried Otto; "if only thou
canst take me away from this wicked place. Alas, dear Hans! I am weary
and sick to death." And poor little Otto began to weep silently in the
darkness.

"Aye, aye," said Hans, gruffly, "it is no place for a little child
to be. Canst thou climb, my little master? canst thou climb a knotted
rope?"

"Nay," said Otto, "I can never climb again! See, Hans;" and he flung
back the covers from off him.

"I cannot see," said Hans, "it is too dark."

"Then feel, dear Hans," said Otto.

Hans bent over the poor little white figure glimmering palely in the
darkness. Suddenly he drew back with a snarl like an angry wolf. "Oh!
the black, bloody wretches!" he cried, hoarsely; "and have they done
that to thee, a little child?"

"Yes," said Otto, "the Baron Henry did it." And then again he began to
cry.

"There, there," said Hans, roughly, "weep no more. Thou shalt get away
from here even if thou canst not climb; I myself will help thee. Thy
father is already waiting below the window here, and thou shalt soon be
with him. There, there, cry no more."

While he was speaking Hans had stripped off his peddler's leathern
jacket, and there, around his body, was wrapped coil after coil of stout
hempen rope tied in knots at short distances. He began unwinding the
rope, and when he had done he was as thin as ever he had been before.
Next he drew from the pouch that hung at his side a ball of fine cord
and a leaden weight pierced by a hole, both of which he had brought with
him for the use to which he now put them. He tied the lead to the end of
the cord, then whirling the weight above his head, he flung it up toward
the window high above. Twice the piece of lead fell back again into the
room; the third time it flew out between the iron bars carrying the cord
with it. Hans held the ball in his hand and paid out the string as the
weight carried it downward toward the ground beneath. Suddenly the cord
stopped running. Hans jerked it and shook it, but it moved no farther.
"Pray heaven, little child," said he, "that it hath reached the ground,
for if it hath not we are certainly lost."

"I do pray," said Otto, and he bowed his head.

Then, as though in answer to his prayer, there came a twitch upon the
cord.

"See," said Hans, "they have heard thee up above in heaven; it was thy
father who did that." Quickly and deftly he tied the cord to the end of
the knotted rope; then he gave an answering jerk upon the string. The
next moment the rope was drawn up to the window and down the outside by
those below. Otto lay watching the rope as it crawled up to the window
and out into the night like a great snake, while One-eyed Hans held the
other end lest it should be drawn too far. At last it stopped. "Good,"
muttered Hans, as though to himself. "The rope is long enough."

He waited for a few minutes and then, drawing upon the rope and finding
that it was held from below, he spat upon his hands and began slowly
climbing up to the window above. Winding his arm around the iron bars of
the grating that guarded it, he thrust his hand into the pouch that hung
by his side, and drawing forth a file, fell to work cutting through all
that now lay between Otto and liberty.

It was slow, slow work, and it seemed to Otto as though Hans would never
finish his task, as lying upon his hard couch he watched that figure,
black against the sky, bending over its work. Now and then the file
screeched against the hard iron, and then Hans would cease for a moment,
but only to begin again as industriously as ever. Three or four times he
tried the effects of his work, but still the iron held. At last he
set his shoulder against it, and as Otto looked he saw the iron bend.
Suddenly there was a sharp crack, and a piece of the grating went flying
out into the night.

Hans tied the rope securely about the stump of the stout iron bar that
yet remained, and then slid down again into the room below.

"My little lord," said he, "dost thou think that if I carry thee, thou
wilt be able and strong enough to cling to my neck?"

"Aye," said Otto, "methinks I will be able to do that."

"Then come," said Hans.

He stooped as he spoke, and gently lifting Otto from his rude and rugged
bed he drew his broad leathern belt around them both, buckling it firmly
and securely. "It does not hurt thee?" said he.

"Not much," whispered Otto faintly.

Then Hans spat upon his hands, and began slowly climbing the rope.

They reached the edge of the window and there they rested for a moment,
and Otto renewed his hold around the neck of the faithful Hans.

"And now art thou ready?" said Hans

"Aye," said Otto.

"Then courage," said Hans, and he turned and swung his leg over the
abyss below.

The next moment they were hanging in mid-air.

Otto looked down and gave a gasp. "The mother of heaven bless us," he
whispered, and then closed his eyes, faint and dizzy at the sight of
that sheer depth beneath. Hans said nothing, but shutting his teeth
and wrapping his legs around the rope, he began slowly descending, hand
under hand. Down, down, down he went, until to Otto, with his eyes shut
and his head leaning upon Hans' shoulder, it seemed as though it could
never end. Down, down, down. Suddenly he felt Hans draw a deep breath;
there was a slight jar, and Otto opened his eyes; Hans was standing upon
the ground.

A figure wrapped in a dark cloak arose from the shadow of the wall, and
took Otto in its arms. It was Baron Conrad.

"My son--my little child!" he cried, in a choked, trembling voice, and
that was all. And Otto pressed his cheek against his father's and began
crying.

Suddenly the Baron gave a sharp, fierce cry. "Dear Heaven!" he cried;
"what have they done to thee?" But poor little Otto could not answer.

"Oh!" gasped the Baron, in a strangled voice, "my little child! my
little child!" And therewith he broke down, and his whole body shook
with fierce, dry sobs; for men in those days did not seek to hide their
grief as they do now, but were fierce and strong in the expression of
that as of all else.

"Never mind, dear father," whispered Otto; "it did not hurt me so very
much," and he pressed his lips against his father's cheek.

Little Otto had but one hand.




XII. A Ride For Life.

But not yet was Otto safe, and all danger past and gone by. Suddenly, as
they stood there, the harsh clangor of a bell broke the silence of
the starry night above their heads, and as they raised their faces and
looked up, they saw lights flashing from window to window. Presently
came the sound of a hoarse voice shouting something that, from the
distance, they could not understand.

One-eyed Hans smote his hand upon his thigh. Look said he, "here is
what comes of having a soft heart in one's bosom. I overcame and bound a
watchman up yonder, and forced him to tell me where our young Baron lay.
It was on my mind to run my knife into him after he had told me every
thing, but then, bethinking how the young Baron hated the thought of
bloodshed, I said to myself, 'No, Hans, I will spare the villain's
life.' See now what comes of being merciful; here, by hook or by crook,
the fellow has loosed himself from his bonds, and brings the whole
castle about our ears like a nest of wasps."

"We must fly," said the Baron; "for nothing else in the world is
left me, now that all have deserted me in this black time of trouble,
excepting these six faithful ones."

His voice was bitter, bitter, as he spoke; then stooping, he raised Otto
in his arms, and bearing him gently, began rapidly descending the rocky
slope to the level road that ran along the edge of the hill beneath.
Close behind him followed the rest; Hans still grimed with soot and in
his bare feet. A little distance from the road and under the shade of
the forest trees, seven horses stood waiting. The Baron mounted upon
his great black charger, seating little Otto upon the saddle in front of
him. "Forward!" he cried, and away they clattered and out upon the road.
Then--"To St. Michaelsburg," said Baron Conrad, in his deep voice, and
the horses' heads were turned to the westward, and away they galloped
through the black shadows of the forest, leaving Trutz-Drachen behind
them.

But still the sound of the alarm bell rang through the beating of the
horses' hoofs, and as Hans looked over his shoulder, he saw the light
of torches flashing hither and thither along the outer walls in front of
the great barbican.

In Castle Trutz-Drachen all was confusion and uproar: flashing torches
lit up the dull gray walls; horses neighed and stamped, and men shouted
and called to one another in the bustle of making ready. Presently Baron
Henry came striding along the corridor clad in light armor, which he had
hastily donned when roused from his sleep by the news that his prisoner
had escaped. Below in the courtyard his horse was standing, and without
waiting for assistance, he swung himself into the saddle. Then away they
all rode and down the steep path, armor ringing, swords clanking, and
iron-shod hoofs striking sparks of fire from the hard stones. At their
head rode Baron Henry; his triangular shield hung over his shoulder, and
in his hand he bore a long, heavy, steel-pointed lance with a pennant
flickering darkly from the end.

At the high-road at the base of the slope they paused, for they were at
a loss to know which direction the fugitives had taken; a half a score
of the retainers leaped from their horses, and began hurrying about
hither and thither, and up and down, like hounds searching for the lost
scent, and all the time Baron Henry sat still as a rock in the midst of
the confusion.

Suddenly a shout was raised from the forest just beyond the road; they
had come upon the place where the horses had been tied. It was an easy
matter to trace the way that Baron Conrad and his followers had taken
thence back to the high-road, but there again they were at a loss. The
road ran straight as an arrow eastward and westward--had the fugitives
taken their way to the east or to the west?

Baron Henry called his head-man, Nicholas Stein, to him, and the
two spoke together for a while in an undertone. At last the Baron's
lieutenant reined his horse back, and choosing first one and then
another, divided the company into two parties. The baron placed himself
at the head of one band and Nicholas Stein at the head of the other.
"Forward!" he cried, and away clattered the two companies of horsemen in
opposite directions.

It was toward the westward that Baron Henry of Trutz-Drachen rode at the
head of his men.

The early springtide sun shot its rays of misty, yellow light across the
rolling tops of the forest trees where the little birds were singing in
the glory of the May morning. But Baron Henry and his followers thought
nothing of the beauty of the peaceful day, and heard nothing of the
multitudinous sound of the singing birds as, with a confused sound of
galloping hoofs, they swept along the highway, leaving behind them a
slow-curling, low-trailing cloud of dust.

As the sun rose more full and warm, the misty wreaths began to dissolve,
until at last they parted and rolled asunder like a white curtain and
there, before the pursuing horsemen, lay the crest of the mountain
toward which they were riding, and up which the road wound steeply.

"Yonder they are," cried a sudden voice behind Baron Henry of
Trutz-Drachen, and at the cry all looked upward.

Far away upon the mountain-side curled a cloud of dust, from the midst
of which came the star-like flash of burnished armor gleaming in the
sun.

Baron Henry said never a word, but his lips curled in a grim smile.

And as the mist wreaths parted One-eyed Hans looked behind and down
into the leafy valley beneath. "Yonder they come," said he. "They have
followed sharply to gain so much upon us, even though our horses are
wearied with all the travelling we have done hither and yon these five
days past. How far is it, Lord Baron, from here to Michaelsburg?"

"About ten leagues," said the Baron, in a gloomy voice.

Hans puckered his mouth as though to whistle, but the Baron saw nothing
of it, for he was gazing straight before him with a set and stony face.
Those who followed him looked at one another, and the same thought was
in the mind of each--how long would it be before those who pursued would
close the distance between them?

When that happened it meant death to one and all.

They reached the crest of the hill, and down they dashed upon the other
side; for there the road was smooth and level as it sloped away into the
valley, but it was in dead silence that they rode. Now and then those
who followed the Baron looked back over their shoulders. They had gained
a mile upon their pursuers when the helmeted heads rose above the crest
of the mountain, but what was the gain of a mile with a smooth road
between them, and fresh horses to weary ones?

On they rode and on they rode. The sun rose higher and higher, and
hotter and hotter. There was no time to rest and water their panting
horses. Only once, when they crossed a shallow stretch of water, the
poor animals bent their heads and caught a few gulps from the cool
stream, and the One-eyed Hans washed a part of the soot from his hands
and face. On and on they rode; never once did the Baron Conrad move his
head or alter that steadfast look as, gazing straight before him, he
rode steadily forward along the endless stretch of road, with poor
little Otto's yellow head and white face resting against his steel-clad
shoulder--and St. Michaelsburg still eight leagues away.

A little rise of ground lay before them, and as they climbed it, all,
excepting the baron, turned their heads as with one accord and looked
behind them. Then more than one heart failed, for through the leaves
of the trees below, they caught the glint of armor of those who
followed--not more than a mile away. The next moment they swept over the
crest, and there, below them, lay the broad shining river, and nearer a
tributary stream spanned by a rude, narrow, three-arched, stone bridge
where the road crossed the deep, slow-moving water.

Down the slope plodded the weary horses, and so to the bridge-head.

"Halt," cried the baron suddenly, and drew rein.

The others stood bewildered. What did he mean to do? He turned to Hans
and his blue eyes shone like steel.

"Hans," said he, in his deep voice, "thou hast served me long and truly;
wilt thou for this one last time do my bidding?"

"Aye," said Hans, briefly.

"Swear it," said the Baron.

"I swear it," said Hans, and he drew the sign of the cross upon his
heart.

"That is good," said the Baron, grimly. "Then take thou this child,
and with the others ride with all the speed that thou canst to St.
Michaelsburg. Give the child into the charge of the Abbot Otto. Tell
him how that I have sworn fealty to the Emperor, and what I have gained
thereby--my castle burnt, my people slain, and this poor, simple child,
my only son, mutilated by my enemy.

"And thou, my Lord Baron?" said Hans.

"I will stay here," said the Baron, quietly, "and keep back those who
follow as long as God will give me grace so to do."

A murmur of remonstrance rose among the faithful few who were with
him, two of whom were near of kin. But Conrad of Drachenhausen turned
fiercely upon them.

"How now," said he, "have I fallen so low in my troubles that even ye
dare to raise your voices against me? By the good Heaven, I will begin
my work here by slaying the first man who dares to raise word against
my bidding." Then he turned from them. "Here, Hans," said he, "take the
boy; and remember, knave, what thou hast sworn."

He pressed Otto close to his breast in one last embrace. "My little
child," he murmured, "try not to hate thy father when thou thinkest of
him hereafter, even though he be hard and bloody as thou knowest."

But with his suffering and weakness, little Otto knew nothing of what
was passing; it was only as in a faint flickering dream that he lived in
what was done around him.

"Farewell, Otto," said the Baron, but Otto's lips only moved faintly in
answer. His father kissed him upon either cheek. "Come, Hans," said
he, hastily, "take him hence;" and he loosed Otto's arms from about his
neck.

Hans took Otto upon the saddle in front of him.

"Oh! my dear Lord Baron," said he, and then stopped with a gulp, and
turned his grotesquely twitching face aside.

"Go," said the Baron, harshly, "there is no time to lose in woman's
tears."

"Farewell, Conrad! farewell, Conrad!" said his two kinsmen, and coming
forward they kissed him upon the cheek then they turned and rode away
after Hans, and Baron Conrad was left alone to face his mortal foe.




XIII. How Baron Conrad Held the Bridge.

As the last of his followers swept around the curving road and was lost
to sight, Baron Conrad gave himself a shake, as though to drive away the
thoughts that lay upon him. Then he rode slowly forward to the middle of
the bridge, where he wheeled his horse so as to face his coming enemies.
He lowered the vizor of his helmet and bolted it to its place, and then
saw that sword and dagger were loose in the scabbard and easy to draw
when the need for drawing should arise.


Down the steep path from the hill above swept the pursuing horsemen.
Down the steep path to the bridge-head and there drew rein; for in the
middle of the narrow way sat the motionless, steel-clad figure upon the
great war-horse, with wide, red, panting nostrils, and body streaked
with sweat and flecked with patches of foam.

One side of the roadway of the bridge was guarded by a low stone wall;
the other side was naked and open and bare to the deep, slow-moving
water beneath. It was a dangerous place to attack a desperate man clad
in armor of proof.

"Forward!" cried Baron Henry, but not a soul stirred in answer, and
still the iron-clad figure sat motionless and erect upon the panting
horse.

"How," cried the Baron Henry, "are ye afraid of one man? Then follow
me!" and he spurred forward to the bridge-head. But still no one moved
in answer, and the Lord of Trutz-Drachen reined back his horse again.
He wheeled his horse and glared round upon the stolid faces of his
followers, until his eyes seemed fairly to blaze with passion beneath
the bars of his vizor.

Baron Conrad gave a roar of laughter. "How now," he cried; "are ye all
afraid of one man? Is there none among ye that dares come forward and
meet me? I know thee, Baron Henry thou art not afraid to cut off the
hand of a little child. Hast thou not now the courage to face the
father?"

Baron Henry gnashed his teeth with rage as he glared around upon the
faces of his men-at-arms. Suddenly his eye lit upon one of them. "Ha!
Carl Spigler," he cried, "thou hast thy cross-bow with thee;--shoot me
down yonder dog! Nay," he said, "thou canst do him no harm under his
armor; shoot the horse upon which he sits."

Baron Conrad heard the speech. "Oh! thou coward villain!" he cried,
"stay; do not shoot the good horse. I will dismount and fight ye upon
foot." Thereupon, armed as he was, he leaped clashing from his horse and
turning the animal's head, gave it a slap upon the flank. The good horse
first trotted and then walked to the further end of the bridge, where it
stopped and began cropping at the grass that grew beside the road.

"Now then!" cried Baron Henry, fiercely, "now then, ye cannot fear him,
villains! Down with him! forward!"

Slowly the troopers spurred their horses forward upon the bridge and
toward that one figure that, grasping tightly the great two-handed
sword, stood there alone guarding the passage.

Then Baron Conrad whirled the great blade above his head, until it
caught the sunlight and flashed again. He did not wait for the attack,
but when the first of the advancing horsemen had come within a few feet
of him, he leaped with a shout upon them. The fellow thrust at him with
his lance, and the Baron went staggering a few feet back, but instantly
he recovered himself and again leaped forward. The great sword flashed
in the air, whistling; it fell, and the nearest man dropped his lance,
clattering, and with a loud, inarticulate cry, grasped the mane of his
horse with both hands. Again the blade whistled in the air, and this
time it was stained with red. Again it fell, and with another shrill cry
the man toppled headlong beneath the horse's feet. The next instant they
were upon him, each striving to strike at the one figure, to ride him
down, or to thrust him down with their lances. There was no room now to
swing the long blade, but holding the hilt in both hands, Baron Conrad
thrust with it as though it were a lance, stabbing at horse or man, it
mattered not. Crowded upon the narrow roadway of the bridge, those who
attacked had not only to guard themselves against the dreadful strokes
of that terrible sword, but to keep their wounded horses (rearing and
mad with fright) from toppling bodily over with them into the water
beneath.

Presently the cry was raised, "Back! back!" And those nearest the Baron
began reining in their horses. "Forward!" roared Baron Henry, from the
midst of the crowd; but in spite of his command, and even the blows that
he gave, those behind were borne back by those in front, struggling and
shouting, and the bridge was cleared again excepting for three figures
that lay motionless upon the roadway, and that one who, with the
brightness of his armor dimmed and stained, leaned panting against the
wall of the bridge.

The Baron Henry raged like a madman. Gnashing his teeth together, he
rode back a little way; then turning and couching his lance, he suddenly
clapped spurs to his horse, and the next instant came thundering down
upon his solitary enemy.

Baron Conrad whirled his sword in the air, as he saw the other coming
like a thunderbolt upon him; he leaped aside, and the lance passed close
to him. As it passed he struck, and the iron point flew from the shaft
of the spear at the blow, and fell clattering upon the stone roadway of
the bridge.

Baron Henry drew in his horse until it rested upon its haunches, then
slowly reined it backward down the bridge, still facing his foe,
and still holding the wooden stump of the lance in his hand. At the
bridge-head he flung it from him.

"Another lance!" he cried, hoarsely. One was silently reached to him
and he took it, his hand trembling with rage. Again he rode to a little
distance and wheeled his horse; then, driving his steel spurs into its
quivering side, he came again thundering down upon the other. Once more
the terrible sword whirled in the air and fell, but this time the lance
was snatched to one side and the blow fell harmlessly. The next instant,
and with a twitch of the bridle-rein, the horse struck full and fair
against the man.

Conrad of Drachenhausen was whirled backward and downward, and the cruel
iron hoofs crashed over his prostrate body, as horse and man passed with
a rush beyond him and to the bridge-head beyond. A shout went up from
those who stood watching. The next moment the prostrate figure rose and
staggered blindly to the side of the bridge, and stood leaning against
the stone wall.

At the further end of the bridge Baron Henry had wheeled his horse. Once
again he couched lance, and again he drove down upon his bruised and
wounded enemy. This time the lance struck full and fair, and those who
watched saw the steel point pierce the iron breast-plate and then snap
short, leaving the barbed point within the wound.

Baron Conrad sunk to his knees and the Roderburg, looming upon his horse
above him, unsheathed his sword to finish the work he had begun.

Then those who stood looking on saw a wondrous thing happen: the wounded
man rose suddenly to his feet, and before his enemy could strike he
leaped, with a great and bitter cry of agony and despair, upon him as he
sat in the saddle above.

Henry of Trutz-Drachen grasped at his horse's mane, but the attack
was so fierce, so sudden, and so unexpected that before he could save
himself he was dragged to one side and fell crashing in his armor upon
the stone roadway of the bridge.

"The dragon! the dragon!" roared Baron Conrad, in a voice of thunder,
and with the energy of despair he dragged his prostrate foe toward the
open side of the bridge.

"Forward!" cried the chief of the Trutz-Drachen men, and down they rode
upon the struggling knights to the rescue of their master in this new
danger. But they were too late.

There was a pause at the edge of the bridge, for Baron Henry had gained
his feet and, stunned and bewildered as he was by the suddenness of his
fall, he was now struggling fiercely, desperately. For a moment they
stood swaying backward and forward, clasped in one another's arms, the
blood from the wounded man's breast staining the armor of both. The
moment passed and then, with a shower of stones and mortar from beneath
their iron-shod heels, they toppled and fell; there was a thunderous
splash in the water below, and as the men-at-arms came hurrying up and
peered with awe-struck faces over the parapet of the bridge, they saw
the whirling eddies sweep down with the current of the stream, a few
bubbles rise to the surface of the water, and then--nothing; for the
smooth river flowed onward as silently as ever.

Presently a loud voice burst through the awed hush that followed. It
came from William of Roderburg, Baron Henry's kinsman.

"Forward!" he cried. A murmur of voices from the others was all the
answer that he received. "Forward!" cried the young man again, "the boy
and those with him are not so far away but that we might yet catch up
with them."

Then one of the men spoke up in answer--a man with a seamed,
weather-beaten face and crisp grizzled hair. "Nay," said he, "our Lord
Baron is gone, and this is no quarrel of ours; here be four of us that
are wounded and three I misdoubt that are dead; why should we follow
further only to suffer more blows for no gain?" A growl of assent rose
from those that stood around, and William of Roderburg saw that nothing
more was to be done by the Trutz-Dragons that day.




XIV. How Otto Saw the Great Emperor.

Through weakness and sickness and faintness, Otto had lain in a half
swoon through all that long journey under the hot May sun. It was as in
a dreadful nightmare that he had heard on and on and on that monotonous
throbbing of galloping hoofs upon the ground; had felt that last kiss
that his father had given him upon his cheek. Then the onward ride
again, until all faded away into a dull mist and he knew no more. When
next he woke it was with the pungent smell of burned vinegar in his
nostrils and with the feeling of a cool napkin bathing his brow. He
opened his eyes and then closed them again, thinking he must have been
in a dream, for he lay in his old room at the peaceful monastery of the
White Cross on the hill; the good Father Abbot sat near by, gazing upon
his face with the old absent student look, Brother John sat in the deep
window seat also gazing at him, and Brother Theodore, the leech of the
monastery, sat beside him bathing his head. Beside these old familiar
faces were the faces of those who had been with him in that long flight;
the One-eyed Hans, old Master Nicholas his kinsman, and the others.
So he closed his eyes, thinking that maybe it was all a dream. But the
sharp throbbing of the poor stump at his wrist soon taught him that he
was still awake.

"Am I then really home in St. Michaelsburg again?" he murmured, without
unclosing his eyes.

Brother Theodore began snuffling through his nose; there was a pause.
"Yes," said the old Abbot at last, and his gentle voice trembled as
he spoke; "yes, my dear little child, thou art back again in thine own
home; thou hast not been long out in the great world, but truly thou
hast had a sharp and bitter trial of it."

"But they will not take me away again, will they?" said Otto quickly,
unclosing his blue eyes.

"Nay," said the Abbot, gently; "not until thou art healed in body and
art ready and willing to go."

Three months and more had passed, and Otto was well again; and now,
escorted by One-eyed Hans and those faithful few who had clung to the
Baron Conrad through his last few bitter days, he was riding into the
quaint old town of Nurnburg; for the Emperor Rudolph was there at that
time, waiting for King Ottocar of Bohemia to come thither and answer
the imperial summons before the Council, and Otto was travelling to the
court.

As they rode in through the gates of the town, Otto looked up at the
high-peaked houses with their overhanging gables, the like of which he
had never seen before, and he stared with his round blue eyes at seeing
them so crowded together along the length of the street. But most of
all he wondered at the number of people that passed hither and thither,
jostling each other in their hurry, and at the tradesmen's booths
opening upon the street with the wonderful wares hanging within; armor
at the smiths, glittering ornaments at the goldsmiths, and rich fabrics
of silks and satins at the mercers. He had never seen anything so rich
and grand in all of his life, for little Otto had never been in a town
before.

"Oh! look," he cried, "at that wonderful lady; see, holy father! sure
the Emperor's wife can be no finer than that lady."

The Abbot smiled. "Nay, Otto," said he, "that is but a burgher's wife or
daughter; the ladies at the Emperor's court are far grander than such as
she."

"So!" said Otto, and then fell silent with wonder.

And now, at last the great moment had come when little Otto with his own
eyes was to behold the mighty Emperor who ruled over all the powerful
kingdoms of Germany and Austria, and Italy and Bohemia, and other
kingdoms and principalities and states. His heart beat so that he could
hardly speak as, for a moment, the good Abbot who held him by the hand
stopped outside of the arrased doorway to whisper some last instructions
into his ear. Then they entered the apartment.

It was a long, stone-paved room. The floor was covered with rich rugs
and the walls were hung with woven tapestry wherein were depicted
knights and ladies in leafy gardens and kings and warriors at battle.
A long row of high glazed windows extended along the length of the
apartment, flooding it with the mellow light of the autumn day. At
the further end of the room, far away, and standing by a great carved
chimney place wherein smouldered the remains of a fire, stood a group of
nobles in gorgeous dress of velvet and silks, and with glittering golden
chains hung about their necks.

One figure stood alone in front of the great yawning fireplace. His
hands were clasped behind him, and his look bent thoughtfully upon the
floor. He was dressed only in a simple gray robe without ornament or
adornment, a plain leathern belt girded his waist, and from it hung a
sword with a bone hilt encased in a brown leathern scabbard. A noble
stag-hound lay close behind him, curled up upon the floor, basking in
the grateful warmth of the fire.

As the Father Abbot and Otto drew near he raised his head and looked
at them. It was a plain, homely face that Otto saw, with a wrinkled
forehead and a long mouth drawn down at the corners. It was the face of
a good, honest burgher burdened with the cares of a prosperous trade.
"Who can he be," thought Otto, "and why does the poor man stand there
among all the great nobles?"

But the Abbot walked straight up to him and kneeled upon the floor,
and little Otto, full of wonder, did the same. It was the great Emperor
Rudolph.

"Who have we here," said the Emperor, and he bent his brow upon the
Abbot and the boy.

"Sire," said Abbot Otto, "we have humbly besought you by petition, in
the name of your late vassal, Baron Conrad of Vuelph of Drachenhausen,
for justice to this his son, the Baron Otto, whom, sire, as you may see,
hath been cruelly mutilated at the hands of Baron Henry of Roderburg of
Trutz-Drachen. He hath moreover been despoiled of his lands, his castle
burnt, and his household made prisoner."

The Emperor frowned until the shaggy eyebrows nearly hid the keen gray
twinkle of the eyes beneath. "Yes," said he, "I do remember me of
that petition, and have given it consideration both in private and in
council." He turned to the group of listening nobles. "Look," said he,
"at this little child marred by the inhumanity and the cruelty of those
robber villains. By heavens! I will put down their lawless rapine, if I
have to give every castle from the north to the south to the flames and
to the sword." Then turning to Otto again, "Poor little child," said he,
"thy wrongs shall be righted, and so far as they are able, those cruel
Roderburgs shall pay thee penny for penny, and grain for grain, for what
thou hast lost; and until such indemnity hath been paid the family of
the man who wrought this deed shall be held as surety."

Little Otto looked up in the kind, rugged face above him. "Nay, Lord
Emperor," said he, in his quaint, quiet way, "there are but two in the
family--the mother and the daughter--and I have promised to marry the
little girl when she and I are old enough; so, if you please, I would
not have harm happen to her."

The Emperor continued to look down at the kneeling boy, and at last he
gave a short, dry laugh. "So be it," said he, "thy plan is not without
its wisdom. Mayhap it is all for the best that the affair should be
ended thus peacefully. The estates of the Roderburgs shall be held in
trust for thee until thou art come of age; otherwise it shall be as thou
hast proposed, the little maiden shall be taken into ward under our own
care. And as to thee--art thou willing that I should take thee under my
own charge in the room of thy father, who is dead?"

"Aye," said Otto, simply, "I am willing, for it seems to me that thou
art a good man."

The nobles who stood near smiled at the boy's speech. As for the
Emperor, he laughed outright. "I give thee thanks, my Lord Baron," said
he; "there is no one in all my court who has paid me greater courtesy
than that."

So comes the end of our tale.

But perhaps you may like to know what happened afterward, for no one
cares to leave the thread of a story without tying a knot in it.

Eight years had passed, and Otto grew up to manhood in the Emperor's
court, and was with him through war and peace.

But he himself never drew sword or struck a blow, for the right hand
that hung at his side was of pure silver, and the hard, cold fingers
never closed. Folks called him "Otto of the Silver Hand," but perhaps
there was another reason than that for the name that had been given him,
for the pure, simple wisdom that the old monks of the White Cross on
the hill had taught him, clung to him through all the honors that the
Emperor bestowed upon his favorite, and as he grew older his words were
listened to and weighed by those who were high in Council, and even by
the Emperor himself.

And now for the end of all.

One day Otto stood uncertainly at the doorway of a room in the imperial
castle, hesitating before he entered; and yet there was nothing so very
dreadful within, only one poor girl whose heart fluttered more than his.
Poor little Pauline, whom he had not seen since that last day in the
black cell at Trutz-Drachen.

At last he pushed aside the hangings and entered the room.

She was sitting upon a rude bench beside the window, looking at him out
of her great, dark eyes.

He stopped short and stood for a moment confused and silent; for he had
no thought in his mind but of the little girl whom he had last seen, and
for a moment he stood confused before the fair maiden with her great,
beautiful dark eyes.

She on her part beheld a tall, slender youth with curling, golden hair,
one hand white and delicate, the other of pure and shining silver.

He came to her and took her hand and set it to his lips, and all that
she could do was to gaze with her great, dark eyes upon the hero of whom
she had heard so many talk; the favorite of the Emperor; the wise young
Otto of the Silver Hand.




Afterword

The ruins of Drachenhausen were rebuilt, for the walls were as sound as
ever, though empty and gaping to the sky; but it was no longer the den
of a robber baron for beneath the scutcheon over the great gate was
carved a new motto of the Vuelphs; a motto which the Emperor Rudolph
himself had given:

"Manus argentea quam manus ferrea melior est."




[Illustration]

PREFACE


Here, my little man, you may hold my cap and bells,--and you, over
there, may hold the bauble! Now, then, I am ready to talk as a wise man
should and am a giddy-pated jester no longer!

This is what I have to say:

One must have a little pinch of seasoning in this dull, heavy life of
ours; one should never look to have all the troubles, the labors, and
the cares, with never a whit of innocent jollity and mirth. Yes, one
must smile now and then, if for nothing else than to lift the corners of
the lips in laughter that are only too often dragged down in sorrow.

It is for this that I sit here now, telling you all manner of odd quips
and jests until yon sober, wise man shakes his head and goes his way,
thinking that I am even more of a shallow-witted knave than I really am.
But, prut! Who cares for that? I am sure that I do not if you do not.

Yet listen! One must not look to have nothing but pepper and salt in
this life of ours--no, indeed! At that rate we would be worse off than
we are now. I only mean that it is a good and pleasant thing to have
something to lend the more solid part a little savor now and then!

So, here I'll sit; and, perhaps, when you have been good children, and
have learned your lessons or done your work, your mother will let you
come and play a little while with me. I will always be ready and waiting
for you here, and I will warrant your mother that I will do you no harm
with anything that I may tell you. If I can only make you laugh and be
merry for a little while, then my work will be well done, and I will be
glad in the doing of it.

And now give me my cap and bells again, for my wits are growing cold
without them; and you will be pleased to reach me my bauble once more,
for I love to have him by me.

Will you be seated? And you, over there, seat the baby on the grass! Are
you ready? Very well; then I will tell you a story, and it shall be
about "The Skillful Huntsman."




[Illustration]

Table of Contents

THE SKILLFUL HUNTSMAN                            Page   1
  Two Opinions                              Facing P.   4
  Ye Song Of Ye Foolish Old Woman              "        5
  A Newspaper Puff                             "       12
  Three Fortunes                               "       13

CLAUS AND HIS WONDERFUL STAFF                    Page  14
  Venturesome Boldness                      Facing P.  16
  Superficial Culture                          "       17

HOW DAME MARGERY TWIST SAW MORE THAN WAS         Page  28
        GOOD FOR HER
  Ye Song Of Ye Gossips                     Facing P.  32
  A Victim To Science                          "       33
  Play And Earnest                             "       36
  The Accident Of Birth                        "       37

CLEVER PETER AND THE TWO BOTTLES                 Page  43
  Ye Romantic Adventures Of Three Tailors   Facing P.  44
  Fancy And Fact                               "       45
  Ye Two Wishes                                "       48
  A Verse With A Moral But Not Name            "       49

HANS HECKLEMANN'S LUCK                           Page  57
  Ye Song Of Ye Rajah And Ye Fly            Facing P.  64
  Pride In Distress                            "       65
  Profession And Practice                      "       68
  A Tale Of A Tub                              "       69

FARMER GRIGGS'S BOGGART                          Page  69
  Ye Story Of A Blue China Plate            Facing P.  76
  Moral Blindness                              "       77
  Overconfidence                               "       80
  The Force Of Need                            "       81

THE BIRD IN THE LINDEN TREE                      Page  82

THE APPLE OF CONTENTMENT                         Page  96
  A Disappointment                          Facing P.  96
  Ye Sad Story Concerning One Innocent         "       97
      Little Lamb And Four Wicked Wolves




[Illustration]

List of Illustrations

This Is The Way That One In Cap And          Frontispiece
   Motley Stops For Awhile Along The Stony
   Path Of Life To Make You Laugh

Jacob's Mother And The Herr Mayor                Page   2

Jacob And The Red One                              "    4

Two Opinions                                Facing P.   4

Ye Song Of Ye Foolish Old Woman                "        5

Jacob Shoots At The Magpie                       Page   6

Jacob And The Magic Plough                         "    8

Jacob And The Red One Go Hunting Together          "   11

A Newspaper Puff                            Facing P.  12

Three Fortunes                                 "       13

Jacob And Gretchen Get The Best Of The Red       Page  13
    One And Go Home Together Happily

Claus And The Master Of Black-arts                 "   16

Venturesome Boldness                        Facing P.  16

Superficial Culture                            "       17

Clause And The White Snake                       Page  18

The Master Is Angry                                "   20

Claus Listens To The Talk Of The Two Ravens        "   21

Claus And The Manikin                              "   23

Hans Discovers Claus's Luck                        "   25

Dame Twist Drinketh Tea                            "   30

The Little Man And The Great Horse                 "   32

Ye Song Of Ye Gossips                       Facing P.  32

A Victim To Science                            "       33

Dame Twist Visits A Strange Patient              Page  34

Dame Twist Drives Away The Little Folks            "   36

Play And Earnest                            Facing P.  36

The Accident Of Birth                          "       37

Dame Margery Twist Goeth To See The Merry        Page  38
    Doings At The Fair

Dame Twist Sees The Little Man In Green For      Page  40
    The Last Time

Ye Romantic Adventures Of Three Tailors     Facing P.  44

Fancy And Fact                                 "       45

Clever Peter And The Little Gentleman In Black   Page  46

Clever Peter Rides To The King's Palace            "   48
    Upon His Fine Horse

Ye Two Wishes                               Facing P.  48

A Verse With A Moral But No Name               "       49

Peter Eats With The King And Princess            Page  51

Clever Peter And The Unlucky Bottle                "   54

Clever Peter Opens The Unlucky Bottle For          "   56
    The King And Princess

Hans Hecklemann                                  Page  58

Catherine                                          "   58

Hans Hecklemann Goes To The Cottage Of             "   61
    The Old Wise Woman In Search Of His Luck

Hans Hecklemann And The Old Wise Woman           Page  62

Hans Finds His Luck                                "   64

Ye Song Of Ye Rajah And Ye Fly              Facing P.  64

Pride In Distress                              "       65

Hans Hecklemann Ploughs For Gold                 Page  65

Profession And Practice                     Facing P.  68

A Tale Of A Tub                                "       69

Farmer Georgie Griggs                            Page  70

Dame Mally Griggs                                  "   72

Farmer Griggs And The Boggart                      "   73

Ye Story Of A Blue China Plate              Facing P.  76

Moral Blindness                                "       77

The Departure                                    Page  77

Farmer Griggs And The Wise Man                     "   78

Overconfidence                              Facing P.  80

The Force Of Need                              "       81

The Boggart Rejoices                             Page  81

Ye King                                            "   84

Prince John                                        "   84

The Prince Aids The Old Woman                      "   86

The Great Ugly Troll Finds The Prince By The Fire  "   88

The Goose-herd And Her Daughter Meet The Princess  "   90
    At The Roadside

The Prince Looks Through The Magic Key           Page  91

The Old King Rejoices At His New Daughter-in-law   "   94

A Disappointment                            Facing P.  96

Ye Sad Story Concerning One Innocent Little    "       97
    Lamb And Four Wicked Wolves

The Little Man Asks For His Cap                  Page  98

Christine And The Apple                            "  100

Christine's Mother And Sisters Wish For The Apple  "  101

The King Reaches For The Apple                     "  101

The King Talks With The Wise Man                   "  105

The King's Steward And Christine                   "  106

Christine Gives The Apple To The King              "  107




PEPPER AND SALT




[Illustration]

THE SKILLFUL HUNTSMAN


Once upon a time there was a lad named Jacob Boehm, who was a practical
huntsman.

One day Jacob said to his mother, "Mother, I would like to marry
Gretchen--the nice, pretty little daughter of the Herr Mayor."

Jacob's mother thought that he was crazy. "Marry the daughter of the
Herr Mayor, indeed! You want to marry the daughter of the Herr Mayor?
Listen; many a man wants and wants, and nothing comes of it!"

That was what Jacob Boehm's mother said to him.

But Jacob was deaf in that ear; nothing would do but his mother must go
to the Herr Mayor, and ask for leave for him to marry Gretchen. And
Jacob begged and begged so prettily that at last his mother promised to
go and do as he wished. So off she went, though doubt was heavy in her
shoes, for she did not know how the Herr Mayor would take it.

"So Jacob wants to marry Gretchen, does he?" said the Herr Mayor.

Yes; that was what Jacob wanted.

"And is he a practical huntsman?" said the Herr Mayor.

Oh yes, he was that.

"So good," said the Herr Mayor. "Then tell Jacob that when he is such a
clever huntsman as to be able to shoot the whiskers off from a running
hare without touching the skin, then he can have Gretchen."

[Illustration: JACOB'S MOTHER & THE HERR MAYOR]

Then Jacob's mother went back home again. "Now," said she, "Jacob will,
at least, be satisfied."

"Yes," said Jacob, when she had told him all that the Herr Mayor had
said to her, "that is a hard thing to do; but what one man has done,
another man can." So he shouldered his gun, and started away into the
world to learn to be as clever a huntsman as the Herr Mayor had said.

He plodded on and on until at last he fell in with a tall stranger
dressed all in red.

"Where are you going, Jacob?" said the tall stranger, calling him by his
name, just as if he had eaten pottage out of the same dish with him.

"I am going," said Jacob, "to learn to be so clever a huntsman that I
can shoot the whiskers off from a running hare without touching the
skin."

"That is a hard thing to learn," said the tall stranger.

Yes; Jacob knew that it was a hard thing; but what one man had done
another man could do.

"What will you give me if I teach you to be as clever a huntsman as
that?" said the tall stranger.

"What will you take to teach me?" said Jacob; for he saw that the
stranger had a horse's hoof instead of a foot, and he did not like his
looks, I can tell you.

"Oh, it is nothing much that I want," said the tall man; "only just sign
your name to this paper--that is all."

But what was in the paper? Yes; Jacob had to know what was in the paper
before he would set so much as a finger to it.

Oh, there was nothing in the paper, only this: that when the red one
should come for Jacob at the end of ten years' time, Jacob should
promise to go along with him whithersoever he should take him.

At this Jacob hemmed and hawed and scratched his head, for he did not
know about that. "All the same," said he, "I will sign the paper, but on
one condition."

[Illustration: Jacob and The Red One]

At this the red one screwed up his face as though he had sour beer in
his mouth, for he did not like the sound of the word "condition."
"Well," said he, "what is the condition?"

"It is only this," said Jacob: "that you shall be _my_ servant for the
ten years, and if, in all that time, I should chance to ask you a
question that you cannot answer, then I am to be my own man again."

Oh, if that was all, the red man was quite willing for that.

Then he took Jacob's gun, and blew down into the barrel of it. "Now,"
said he, "you are as skillful a huntsman as you asked to be."

"That I must try," said Jacob. So Jacob and the red one went around
hunting here and hunting there until they scared up a hare. "Shoot!"
said the red one; and Jacob shot. Clip! off flew the whiskers of the
hare as neatly as one could cut them off with the barber's shears.

"Yes, good!" said Jacob, "now I am a skillful huntsman."

Then the stranger in red gave Jacob a little bone whistle, and told him
to blow in it whenever he should want him. After that Jacob signed the
paper, and the stranger went one way and he went home again.

Well, Jacob brushed the straws off from his coat, and put a fine shine
on his boots, and then he set off to the Herr Mayor's house.

"How do you find yourself, Jacob?" said the Herr Mayor.

"So good," said Jacob.

"And are you a skillful huntsman now?" said the Herr Mayor.

Oh yes, Jacob was a skillful huntsman now.

Yes, good! But the Herr Mayor must have proof of that. Now, could Jacob
shoot a feather out of the tail of the magpie flying over the trees
yonder?

Oh yes! nothing easier than that. So Jacob raised the gun to his cheek.
Bang! went the gun, and down fell a feather from the tail of the magpie.
At this the Herr Mayor stared and stared, for he had never seen such
shooting.

"And now may I marry Gretchen?" said Jacob.

[Illustration: Jacob shoots at the Magpie]

At this the Herr Mayor scratched his head, and hemmed and hawed. No;
Jacob could not marry Gretchen yet, for he had always said and sworn
that the man who should marry Gretchen should bring with him a plough
that could go of itself, and plough three furrows at once. If Jacob
would show him such a plough as that, then he might marry Gretchen and
welcome. That was what the Herr Mayor said.

Jacob did not know how about that; perhaps he could get such a plough,
perhaps he could not. If such a plough was to be had, though, he would
have it. So off he went home again, and the Herr Mayor thought that he
was rid of him now for sure and certain.

But when Jacob had come home, he went back of the woodpile and blew a
turn or two on the little bone whistle that the red stranger had given
him. No sooner had he done this than the other stood before him as
suddenly as though he had just stepped out of the door of nowheres.

"What do you want, Jacob?" said he.

"I would like," said Jacob, "to have a plough that can go by itself and
plough three furrows at once."

"That you shall have," said the red one. Then he thrust his hand into
his breeches pocket, and drew forth the prettiest little plough that you
ever saw. He stood it on the ground before Jacob, and it grew large as
you see it in the picture. "Plough away," said he, and then he went back
again whither he had come.

So Jacob laid his hands to the plough and--whisk!--away it went like
John Stormwetter's colt, with Jacob behind it. Out of the farm-yard they
went, and down the road, and so to the Herr Mayor's house, and behind
them lay three fine brown furrows, smoking in the sun.

When the Herr Mayor saw them coming he opened his eyes, you may be sure,
for he had never seen such a plough as that in all of his life before.

"And now," said Jacob, "I should like to marry Gretchen, if you
please."

At this the Herr Mayor hemmed and hawed and scratched his head again.
No; Jacob could not marry Gretchen yet, for the Herr Mayor had always
said and sworn that the man who married Gretchen should bring with him a
purse that always had two pennies in it and could never be emptied, no
matter how much was taken out of it.

[Illustration: Jacob and the Magic Plough]

Jacob did not know how about that; perhaps he could get it and perhaps
he could not. If such a thing was to be had, though, he would have it,
as sure as the Mecklenburg folks brew sour beer. So off he went home
again, and the Herr Mayor thought that now he was rid of him for
certain.

But Jacob went back of the woodpile and blew on his bone whistle again,
and once more the red one came at his bidding.

"What will you have now?" said he to Jacob.

"I should like," said Jacob, "to have a purse which shall always have
two pennies in it, no matter how much I take out of it."

"That you shall have," said the red one; whereupon he thrust his hand
into his pocket, and fetched out a beautiful silken purse with two
pennies in it. He gave the purse to Jacob, and then he went away again
as quickly as he had come.

After he had gone, Jacob began taking pennies out of his purse and
pennies out of his purse, until he had more than a hatful--hui! I would
like to have such a purse as that.

Then he marched off to the Herr Mayor's house with his chin up, for he
might hold his head as high as any, now that he had such a purse as that
in his pocket. As for the Herr Mayor, he thought that it was a nice,
pretty little purse; but could it do this and that as he had said?

Jacob would show him that; so he began taking pennies and pennies out of
it, until he had filled all the pots and pans in the house with them.
And now might he marry Gretchen?

Yes; that he might! So said the Herr Mayor; for who would not like to
have a lad for a son-in-law who always had two pennies more in his purse
than he could spend.

So Jacob married his Gretchen, and, between his plough and his purse, he
was busy enough, I can tell you.

So the days went on and on and on until the ten years had gone by and
the time had come for the red one to fetch Jacob away with him. As for
Jacob, he was in a sorry state of dumps, as you may well believe.

At last Gretchen spoke to him. "See, Jacob," said she, "what makes you
so down in the mouth?"

"Oh! nothing at all," said Jacob.

But this did not satisfy Gretchen, for she could see that there was more
to be told than Jacob had spoken. So she teased and teased, until at
last Jacob told her all, and that the red one was to come the next day
and take him off as his servant, unless he could ask him a question
which he could not answer.

"Prut!" said Gretchen, "and is that all? Then there is no stuffing to
that sausage, for I can help you out of your trouble easily enough."
Then she told Jacob that when the next day should come he should do thus
and so, and she would do this and that, and between them they might
cheat the red one after all.

So, when the next day came, Gretchen went into the pantry and smeared
herself all over with honey. Then she ripped open a bed and rolled
herself in the feathers.

By-and-by came the red one. Rap! tap! tap! he knocked at the door.

"Are you ready to go with me now, Jacob?" said he.

Yes; Jacob was quite ready to go, only he would like to have one favor
granted him first.

"What is it that you want?" said the red one.

"Only this," said Jacob: "I would like to shoot one more shot out of my
old gun before I go with you."

Oh, if that was all, he might do that and welcome. So Jacob took down
his gun, and he and the red one went out together, walking side by side,
for all the world as though they were born brothers.

[Illustration: Jacob and the Red One go hunting together]

By-and-by they saw a wren. "Shoot at that," said the red one.

"Oh no," said Jacob, "that is too small."

So they went on a little farther.

By-and-by they saw a raven. "Shoot at that, then," said the red one.

"Oh no," said Jacob, "that is too black."

So they went on a little farther.

By-and-by they came to a ploughed field, and there was something
skipping over the furrows that looked for all the world like a great
bird. That was Gretchen; for the feathers stuck to the honey and all
over her, so that she looked just like a great bird.

"Shoot at that! shoot at that!" said the red one, clapping his hands
together.

"Oh yes," said Jacob, "I will shoot at that." So he raised his gun and
took aim. Then he lowered his gun again. "But what is it?" said he.

At this the red one screwed up his eyes, and looked and looked, but for
the life of him he could not tell what it was.

"No matter what it is," said he, "only shoot and be done with it, for I
must be going."

"Yes, good! But what _is_ it?" said Jacob.

Then the red one looked and looked again, but he could tell no better
this time than he could before. "It may be this and it may be that,"
said he. "Only shoot and be done with it, for they are waiting for me at
home."

"Yes, my friend," said Jacob, "that is all very good; only tell me what
it is and I will shoot."

"Thunder and lightning!" bawled the red one, _"I do not know what it
is!"_

"Then be off with you!" said Jacob, "for, since you cannot answer my
question, all is over between us two."

At this the red one had to leave Jacob, so he fled away over hill and
dale, bellowing like a bull.

As for Jacob and Gretchen, they went back home together, very well
pleased with each other and themselves.

And the meaning of all this is, that many another
  man beside Jacob Boehm would find himself
    in a pretty scrape only for his wife.

[Illustration: Jacob and Gretchen get the best of the Red One and go
home together happily.]




[Illustration: TWO OPINIONS. This is a full page illustrated poem
depicting the magpie in the poem, with the poem weaving through the
pictures.]

TWO OPINIONS

(Ye first opinion)

A noisy chattering Magpie once
A talking gabbling hairbrained dunce
  Came by where a sign-post stood.
He nodded his head with a modish air
And said "good day" for he wasn't aware
That the sign-post pointing its finger there
  Was only a block of wood.

Quoth he, "An exceedingly sultry day.
T'is more like June than the first of May."
  The post said never a word.
"I've just dropped over from Lincolnshire.
My home is in the Cathedral Spire--
The air is cooler and purer the higher
  You get--as you've doubtless heard."

So on he chattered with never a stop,
And on and on till you'd think he would drop.
  (The post was dumb as your hat.)
But so as the pie could say his say
He didn't care whether it spoke all day;
For thus he observed as he walked away--
  "An intelligent creature that."

(Ye second opinion)

  Now once when the sky was pouring rain,
The Magpie chanced to come by again--
  And there stood the post in the wet.
"Helloa." said the Magpie. "What you here
Pray tell me I beg is there sheltering near--
A terrible day for this time of the year.
  T'would make a Saint Anthony fret."

"I beg your pardon--I didn't quite hear."
(Then louder) "I say is there sheltering near"
  But the post was as dumb as Death.
"What can't you answer a question pray
You will not--No--Then I'll say good-day."
And flirting his tail he walked away.
"You'r a fool." (this under his breath.)

L'ENVOY

The moral that this story traces
Is--Circumstances alter cases.

Howard Pyle




[Illustration: Ye song of ye foolish old woman. This is an illustrated
poem, with the top half being an old woman going up then down a hill.
The bottom is the poem, with court jesters on either side, left side
titled Hope in Adversity, right titled Fear in Prosperity.]

Ye song of ye foolish old woman.

I saw an old woman go up a steep hill,
And she chuckled and laughed, as she went, with a will.
    And yet, as she went,
    Her body was bent,
With a load as heavy as sins in Lent.

"Oh! why do you chuckle, old woman;" says I,
"As you climb up the hill-side so steep and so high?"
    "Because, don't you see,
     I'll presently be,
At the top of the hill. He! he!" says she.

I saw the old woman go downward again;
And she easily travelled, with never a pain;
    Yet she loudly cried,
    And gustily sighed,
And groaned, though the road was level and wide.

"Oh! why, my old woman," says I, "do you weep,
When you laughed, as you climbed up the hill-side so steep?"
    "High-ho! I am vexed,
     Because I expects,"
Says she, "I shall ache in climbing the next."

H. Pyle






[Illustration: A newspaper puff. This is a full page illustrated poem
depicting the geese acting out the poem.]

A NEWSPAPER PUFF

Twelve geese
In a row
(So these
Always go).
Down-hill
They meander,
Tail to bill;
First the gander.
So they stalked,
Bold as brass
As they walked
To the grass.

Suddenly
Stopped the throng;
Plain to see
Something's wrong
Yes; there is
Something white!
No quiz;
Clear to sight.
('Twill amuse
When you're told
'Twas a news-
Paper old.)

Gander spoke.
Braver bird
Never broke
Egg, I've heard:
"Stand here
Steadily,
Never fear,
Wait for me."

Forth he went,
Cautious, slow,
Body bent,
Head low.
All the rest
Stood fast,
Waiting for
What passed.

Wind came
With a caper,
Caught same
Daily paper.
Up it sailed
In the air;
Courage failed
Then and there.
Scared well
Out of wits;
Nearly fell
Into fits.
Off they sped,
Helter-skelter,
'Till they'd fled
Under shelter.

Poor geese!
Never mind;
Other geese
One can find,
Cut the same
Foolish caper
At empty wind
In a paper.

H. Pyle



[Illustration: Three Fortunes. This is a full page illustrated poem,
depicting: the three as they start the journey, the shoemaker with his
lady, the tailor and baker on the path, the tailor lounging in the Inn,
and the baker wandering "To Nowhere."]

THREE FORTUNES

    A merry young shoemaker,
    And a tailor, and a baker,
Went to seek their fortunes, for they had been told,
    Where a rainbow touched the ground,
    (If it only could be found,)
Was a purse that should be always full of gold.

    So they traveled day by day,
    In a jolly, jocund way
Till the shoemaker a pretty lass espied;
    When quoth he, "It seems to me,
    There can never, never be,
Better luck than this in all the world beside."

    So the others said good-bye,
    And went on, till by-and-by
They espied a shady inn beside the way;
    Where the Hostess fair,--a widow--
    In a lone seclusion hid; "Oh,
Here is luck!" the tailor said, "and here I'll stay."

    So the baker jogged along,
    All alone, with ne'er a song,
Or a jest; and nothing tempted him to stay.
    But he went from bad to worse,
    For he never found the purse,
And for all I know he is wandering to this day.

    It is better, on the whole,
    For an ordinary soul,
(So I gather from this song I've tried to sing,)
    For to take the luck that may
    Chance to fall within his way,
Than to toil for an imaginary thing.

H. Pyle




[Illustration]

CLAUS & HIS WONDERFUL STAFF


Hans and Claus were born brothers. Hans was the elder and Claus was the
younger; Hans was the richer and Claus was the poorer--that is the way
that the world goes sometimes.

Everything was easy for Hans at home; he drank much beer, and had
sausages and white bread three times a day; but Claus worked and worked,
and no luck came of it--that, also, is the way that the world goes
sometimes.

One time Claus spoke to Hans of this matter. "See, Hans," said he, "you
should give me some money, for that which belongs to one brother should
help the other."

But Hans saw through different colored spectacles than Claus. No; he
would do nothing of the kind. If Claus wanted money he had better go out
into, the world to look for it; for some folks said that money was
rolling about in the wide world like peas on a threshing-floor. So said
Hans, for Claus was so poor that Hans was ashamed of him, and wanted him
to leave home so as to be rid of him for good and all.

This was how Claus came to go out into the world.

But before he went, he cut himself a good stout staff of hazel-wood to
help his heavy feet over the road.

Now the staff that Claus had cut was a rod of witch-hazel, which has
the power of showing wherever treasure lies buried. But Claus knew no
more of that than the chick in the shell.

So off he went into the world, walking along with great contentment,
kicking up little clouds of dust at every step, and whistling as gayly
as though trouble had never been hatched from mares' eggs. By-and-by he
came to the great town, and then he went to the market-place and stood,
with many others, with a straw in his mouth--for that meant that he
wanted to take service with somebody.

Presently there came along an old, old man, bent almost double with the
weight of the years which he carried upon his shoulders. This was a
famous doctor of the black-arts. He had read as many as a hundred books,
so that he was more learned than any man in all of the world--even the
minister of the village. He knew, as well as the birds know when the
cherries are ripe, that Claus had a stick of witch-hazel, so he came to
the market-place, peering here and peering there, just as honest folks
do when they are looking for a servant. After a while he came to where
Claus was, and then he stopped in front of him. "Do you want to take
service, my friend?" said he.

Yes, that was what Claus wanted; why else should he stand in the
market-place with a straw in his mouth?

Well, they bargained and bargained, and talked and talked, and the end
of the matter was that Claus agreed to sell his services to the old
master of black-arts for seven pennies a week. So they made their
bargain, and off went the master with Claus at his heels. After they had
come a little distance away from the crowd at the marketplace, the
master of black-arts asked Claus where he had got that fine staff of
hazel.

[Illustration: Claus and the Master of Black-Arts]

"Oh, I got it over yonder," said Claus, pointing with his thumb.

But could he find the place again?

Well, Claus did not know how about that; perhaps he could, and perhaps
he could not.

But suppose that Claus had a thaler in his hand, _then_ could he find
the place again?

Oh yes; in that case Claus was almost sure that he could find the place
again.

So good. Then here was a bottle of yellow water. If Claus would take the
bottle of yellow water, and pour it over the stump from which he had cut
his staff, there would come seven green snakes out of a hole at the foot
of the hazel-bush. After these seven snakes, there would come a white
snake, with a golden crown on its head, from out of the same hole. Now
if Claus would catch that white snake in the empty bottle, and bring it
to the master of black-arts, he should have not one thaler, but
two--that was what the master said.

Oh yes, Claus could do that; that was no such hard thing. So he took the
bottle of yellow water and off he went.

By-and-by he came to the place where he had cut his hazel-twig. There he
did as the master of black-arts had told him; he poured the yellow water
over the stump of hazel from which he had cut his staff. Then everything
happened just as the other had said: first there came seven green snakes
out of the hole at the foot of the hazel-bush, and after they had all
gone, there came a white snake, with a little golden crown on its head,
and with its body gleaming like real silver. Then Claus caught the white
snake, and put it into the bottle and corked it up tightly. After he had
done this he went back to the master of black-arts again.

Now this white snake was what the folk call a tomtsnake in that land.
Whoever eats of a broth made of it can understand the language of all
the birds of the air and all the beasts of the field; so nobody need
wonder that the master was as glad as glad could be to have his white
snake safe and sound.

[Illustration: Claus and the White Snake]

He bade Claus build a fire of dry wood, and as soon as there was a good
blaze he set a pot of water upon it to boil. When the water in the pot
began to boil, he chopped up the white snake into little pieces and
threw them into it. So the snake boiled and boiled and boiled, and Claus
stared with wonder as though he would never shut his eyes again.

Now it happened that just about the time that the broth was cooked, the
master was called out of the room for this or for that. No sooner was
his back turned than Claus began to wonder what the broth was like. "I
will just have a little taste," said he to himself; "surely it can do no
harm to the rest of the soup." So he stuck his finger first into the
broth and then into his mouth; but what the broth tasted like he never
could tell, for just then the master came in again, and Claus was so
frightened at what he had done that he had no wits to think of the taste
of anything.

Presently the master of black-arts went to the pot of broth, and, taking
off the lid, began smelling of it. But no sooner had he sniffed a smell
of the steam than he began thumping his head with his knuckles, and
tearing his hair, and stamping his feet. "_Somebody's had a finger in my
broth!!!_" he roared. For the master knew at once that all the magic had
been taken out of it by the touch of Claus's finger.

As for poor Claus, he was so frightened that he fell upon his knees, and
began begging: "Oh! dear master--" But he got no further than this, for
the master bawled at him,

"You have taken the best,
 You may have the rest."

And so saying, he threw pot and broth and all at Claus, so that if he
hadn't ducked his head he might have been scalded to death. Then Claus
ran out into the street, for he saw that there was no place for him to
stay in that house.

Now in the street there was a cock and a hen, scratching and clucking
together in the dust, and Claus understood every word that they said to
each other, so he stopped and listened to them.

This is what they said:

The cock said to the hen, "Yonder goes our new serving-man."

And the hen said to the cock, "Yes, yonder he goes."

And the cock said to the hen, "He is leaving the best behind him."

[Illustration: THE MASTER IS ANGRY]

And the hen said to the cock, "What is it that he is leaving?"

And the cock said to the hen, "He is leaving behind him the witch-hazel
staff that he brought with him."

And the hen said to the cock, "Yes, that is so. He would be a fool to
leave that behind, yet he is not the first one to think that peas are
pebbles."

As for Claus, you can guess how he opened his eyes, for he saw how the
land lay, and that he had other ears than he had before.

"Hui!" said he, "that is good! I have bought more for my penny than I
had in my bargain."

As for the hazel staff, he was not going to leave that behind, you may
be sure. So he sneaked about the place till he laid hand on it again;
then he stepped away, right foot foremost, for he did not know what the
master of black-arts might do to him if he should catch him.

Well, after he had left the town, he went along, tramp! tramp! tramp!
until, by-and-by, he grew tired and sat down beneath an oak-tree to rest
himself.

[Illustration: Claus listens to the talk of the two ravens]

Now, as he sat there, looking up through the leaves, thinking of nothing
at all, two ravens came flying and lit in the tree above him. After a
while the ravens began talking together, and this was what they said:

The one raven said, "Yonder is poor Claus sitting below us."

And the other raven said, "_Poor_ Claus, did you say, brother? Do you
not see the witch-hazel lying on the ground beside him?"

The one raven said, "Oh yes; I see that, but what good does it do him?"

And the other raven said, "It does him no good now, but if he were to go
home again and strike on the great stone on the top of the hill back of
Herr Axel's house, then it would do him good; for in it lies a great
treasure of silver and gold."

Claus had picked up his ears at all this talk, you may be sure. "See,"
said he, "that is the way that a man will pass by a great fortune in the
little world at home to seek for a little fortune in the great world
abroad"--which was all very true. After that he lost no time in getting
back home again.

"What! are you back again?" said Hans.

"Oh yes," said Claus, "I am back again."

"That is always the way with a pewter penny," said Hans--for that is how
some of us are welcomed home after we have been away.

As for Claus, he was as full of thoughts as an egg is of meat, but he
said nothing of them to Hans. Off he went to the high hill back of Herr
Axel's house, and there, sure enough, was the great stone at the very
top of the hill.

Claus struck on the stone with his oaken staff, and it opened like the
door of a beer vault, for all was blackness within. A flight of steps
led down below, and down the steps Claus went. But when he had come to
the bottom of the steps, he stared till his eyes were like great round
saucers; for there stood sacks of gold and silver, piled up like bags of
grain in the malt-house.

[Illustration: Claus and the Manikin]

At one end of the room was a great stone seat, and on the seat sat a
little manikin smoking a pipe. As for the beard of the little man, it
was as long as he was short, for it hung down so far that part of it
touched the stone floor.

"How do you find yourself, Claus?" said the little manikin, calling
Claus by his name.

"So good!" said Claus, taking off his hat to the other.

"And what would you like to have, Claus?" said the little man.

"I would like," said Claus, "to have some money, if you please."

"Take what you want," said the little man, "only do not forget to take
the best with you."

Oh no; Claus would not forget the best; so he held the staff tighter
than ever in his fist--for what could be better than the staff that
brought him there? So he went here and there, filling his pockets with
the gold and silver money till they bulged out like the pockets of a
thief in the orchard; but all the time he kept tight hold of his staff,
I can tell you.

When he had as much as his pockets could hold, he thanked the little
manikin and went his way, and the stone door closed behind him.

And now Claus lived like a calf in the green corn-field. Everything he
had was of the best, and he had twice as much of that as any of the
neighbors. Then how brother Hans stared and scratched his head and
wondered, when he saw how Claus sat in the sun all day, doing nothing
but smoking his pipe and eating of the best, as though he were a born
prince! Every day Claus went to the little man in the hill with his
pockets empty, and came back with them stuffed with gold and silver
money. At last he had so much that he could not count it, and so he had
to send over to brother Hans for his quart-pot, so that he might measure
it.

But Hans was cunning. "I will see what makes brother Claus so well-off
in the world all of a sudden," said he; so he smeared the inside of the
quart-pot with bird-lime.

Then Claus measured his gold and silver money in Hans's quart-pot, and
when he was done with it he sent it back again. But more went back with
the quart-pot than came with it, for two gold-pieces stuck to the
birdlime, and it was these that went back with the pot to brother Hans.

[Illustration: Hans discovers Claus's Luck]

"What!" cried Hans, "has that stupid Claus found so much money that he
has to measure it in a quart-pot? We must see the inside of this
business!" So off he went to Claus's house, and there he found Claus
sitting in the sun and smoking his pipe, just as though he owned all of
the world.

"Where did you get all that money, Claus?" said Hans.

Oh! Claus could not tell him that.

But Hans was bound to know all about it, so he begged and begged so
prettily that at last Claus had to tell him everything. Then, of course,
nothing would do but Hans must have a try with the hazel staff also.

Well, Claus made no words at that. He was a good-natured fellow, and
surely there was enough for both. So the upshot of the matter was that
Hans marched off with the hazel staff.

But Hans was no such simpleton as Claus; no, not he. Oh no, he would
not take all that trouble for two poor pocketfuls of money. He would
have a bagful; no, he would have _two_ bagfuls. So he slung two meal
sacks over his shoulder, and off he started for the hill back of Herr
Axel's house.

When he came to the stone he knocked upon it, and it opened to him just
as it had done for Claus. Down he went into the pit, and there sat the
little old manikin, just as he had done from the very first.

"How do you find yourself, Hans?" said the little old manikin.

Oh, Hans found himself very well. Might he have some of the money that
stood around the room in the sacks?

Yes, that he might; only remember to take the best away with him.

Prut! teach a dog to eat sausages. Hans would see that he took the best,
trust him for that. So he filled the bags full of gold, and never
touched the silver--for, surely, gold is better than anything else in
the world, says Hans to himself. So, when he had filled his two bags
with gold, and had shaken the pieces well down, he flung the one over
one shoulder, and the other over the other, and then he had as much as
he could carry. As for the staff of witch-hazel, he let it lie where it
was, for he only had two hands and they were both full.

But Hans never got his two bags of gold away from the vault, for just as
he was leaving--bang! came the stone together, and caught him as though
he was a mouse in the door; and that was an end of him. That happened
because he left the witch-hazel behind.

That was the way in which Claus came to lose his magic staff; but that
did not matter much, for he had enough to live on and to spare. So he
married the daughter of the Herr Baron (for he might marry whom he
chose, now that he was rich), and after that he lived as happy as a fly
on the warm chimney.

Now, _this_ is so--it is better to take a little away at a
  time and carry your staff with you, than to
    take all at once and leave it behind.




[Illustration: Venturesome Boldness. This illustrated poem depicts the
tailor with a wooden sword standing before the knight on horseback.]

VENTURESOME BOLDNESS

A tailor came a-walking by,
The fire of courage in his eye.
"Where are you going Sir?" Said I.

    "I slew a mouse
     In our house
Where other tailors live," said he,
    "And not a Jack
     Among the pack
Would dare to do the like; pardie!
  Therefore, I'm going out to try
  If there be greater men that I;
     Or in the land
     As bold a hand
At wielding brand as I, you see!"

The tailor came a-limping by
With woful face and clothes awry
And all his courage gone to pie.

    "I met a knight
     In armor bright
And bade him stand and draw," said he;
    "He straightaway did
     As he was bid,
And treated me outrageously.
  So I shall get me home again,
  And probably shall there remain.
     A little man.
     Sir, always can
Be great with folk of less degree!"

H. Pyle




[Illustration: Superficial Culture. This is a full page illustrated
poem depicting: the dame in a chair with the pig sitting on the floor in
front of her, the pig dancing in full dress, the pig in full dress
bowing to a person, and the pig in full dress on bent knee before the
lady he loved.]

SUPERFICIAL CULTURE

I'll tell of a certain old dame;
        The same
Had a beautiful piggy, whose name
        Was James;
  and whose beauty and worth,
  From the day of his birth,
Were matters of popular fame,
        And his claim
To gentility no one could blame.

So, seeing his promise, she thought
        She ought
To have him sufficiently taught
        The art
  Of deportment, to go
  Into company; so
A master of dancing she brought,
        Who was fraught
With a style which the piggiwig caught.

So his company manners were rare.
        His care
Of social observances there
        Would bear
  The closest inspection,
  And not a reflection
Could rest on his actions, howe'er
        You might care
To examine 'em down to a hair.

Now, things went beau-ti-ful-ly,
        Till he
Fell in love with a dame of degree;
        Pardie!
  When he tried for to speak,
  But could only say, "O w-e-e-k!"
For, whatever his polish might be,
        Why, dear me!
He was pig at the bottom, you see.

H. PYLE.



[Illustration]

HOW DAME MARGERY TWIST SAW MORE THAN WAS GOOD FOR HER


If one could always hold one's tongue as to what one sees, one would be
the better for it. They are the wise people of this world who keep
silence as to what they see; many such there are who behold things such
as neither you nor I may ever hope to look upon, and yet we know nothing
of this because they say nothing of it, going their own ways like common
folks, and as though they saw nothing in an egg but the meat.

Dame Margery Twist of Tavistock town was not one of these wise folks who
hold their tongues; she was a good, gossiping, chattering old soul,
whose hen never hatched a chick but all of the neighbors knew of it, as
the saying goes. The poor old creature had only one eye; how she lost
the other you shall presently hear, and also how her wonderful tulip
garden became like anybody else's tulip garden.

Dame Margery Twist lived all alone with a great tabby cat. She dwelt in
a little cottage that stood back from the road, and just across the way
from the butcher's shop. All within was as neat and as bright as a new
pin, so that it was a delight just to look upon the row of blue dishes
upon the dresser, the pewter pipkins as bright as silver, or the sanded
floor, as clean as your mother's table. Over the cottage twined sweet
woodbines, so that the air was ladened with their fragrance in the
summer-time, when the busy, yellow-legged bees droned amid the blossoms
from the two hives that stood along against the wall. But the wonder of
the garden was the tulip bed, for there were no tulips in all England
like them, and folks came from far and near, only to look upon them and
to smell their fragrance. They stood in double rows, and were of all
colors--white, yellow, red, purple, and pied. They bloomed early, and
lasted later than any others, and, when they were in flower, all the air
was filled with their perfume.

Now all of these things happened before the smoke of the factories and
the rattling of the steam-cars had driven the fairy folks away from this
world into No-man's-land, and this was the secret of the dame's fine
tulip bed. For the fairies dwelt among the flowers, and she often told
her gossips how that she could hear the fairy mothers singing their
babies to sleep at night, when the moon was full and the evening was
warm. She had never seen the little folks herself, for few folks are
given to look upon them, and Dame Margery's eyes were not of that
nature. Nevertheless, she heard them, and that, in my opinion, is the
next best thing to seeing them.

Dame Margery Twist, as I said, was a good, kind, comfortable old soul,
and was, moreover, the best nurse in all of Tavistock town. Was any one
ill, it was Dame Margery who was called upon to attend him; as for the
dame herself, she was always ready to bring a sick body into good health
again, and was always paid well for the nursing.

[Illustration: DAME TWIST DRINKETH TEA]

One evening the dame was drinking her tea by herself with great comfort.
It was just at the dusking of the twilight; the latticed window was
opened, so that the little breezes came rushing into the room, or stayed
a while to play wantonly with the white linen curtains. The tabby cat
was purring in the door-way, and the dame was enjoying the sweetness of
the summer-time. There came a knock at the door, "Who is it?" said Dame
Margery.

"It's Tommy Lamb, if you please, ma'am," said a little voice.

"Come in, Tommy," said the dame.

So in came Tommy Lamb, a little, curly-headed fellow, not any older than
you, "What is it you want, Tommy?" said the dame.

"If you please, ma'am, there's a little gentleman outside, no taller
than I be; he gave me this box, and told me to tell you to rub your eyes
with the salve and then to come out to him."

The dame looked out of the window, but never a body stood there that she
could see. "Where is the gentleman, dearie?" said she.

"Yonder he is, with a great white horse standing beside him," said Tommy
Lamb, and he pointed with his finger as he spoke.

The dame rubbed her eyes and looked again, but never a thing did she see
but the green gate, the lilac-bushes, and the butcher's shop opposite.
The truth of the matter is, that little children like you, my dear, see
things which we grown folks, with the dust of the world in our eyes, may
never behold. "Well," said Dame Margery to herself, "this is strange,
for sure! _I_ see no little old gentleman in green." Then she opened the
box that she held, and looked into it and saw that it was filled with a
green salve. "I'll rub some of it on my eyes, at any rate," said she;
whereupon she did so. Then she looked again, and, lo and behold! there
stood a little old man, no taller than Tommy Lamb. His face was as
brown, and as withered, and as wrinkled as a winter's crab-apple left on
the bare tree when the frost is about. He was dressed all in green from
top to toe, and on his head was a tall green cap, with a bell at the
peak, which tinkled at every movement of his head. By his side stood a
great, tall, milk-white horse, with a long tail and mane tied with
party-colored ribbons.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE MAN AND THE GREAT HORSE]

Dame Margery went out to the little old gentleman in green, and asked
him what he would have with her. He told the dame that his wife was
sorely sick, and that he wanted her to come and nurse her for the night.
At this Dame Margery hemmed and hawed and shook her head, for she did
not like the thought of going out at night, she knew not where, and with
such a strange little body. Then the little man begged her and pleaded
with her, and his voice and his words were as sweet as honey. At last he
persuaded her to go, promising her a good reward if she would nurse his
wife back into her health again. So the dame went back into the cottage
to make ready for her journeying, throwing her red riding-cloak over her
shoulders, and drawing her thick shoes upon her feet. Then she filled
her reticule with a parcel of simples, in case they should be needed.
After this she came out again, and climbed up behind the little man in
green, and so settled herself upon the pillion saddle for her ride. Then
the little man whistled to his horse, and away they went.

They seemed to fly rather than ride upon the hard ground, for the hedges
and cottages and orchards flew past as though in a dream. But fast as
they went, the old dame saw many things which she had never dreamed of
before. She saw all of the hedge-rows, the by-ways, the woods and fields
alive with fairy-folk. Each little body was busy upon his or her own
business, laughing, chatting, talking, and running here and there like
folks on a market-day.

[Illustration: DAME TWIST VISITS A STRANGE PATIENT]

So they came at last to a place which the dame knew was the
three-tree-hill; but it was not the three-tree-hill which she had seen
in all of her life before, for a great gateway seemed to open into it
and it was into this gateway that the little man in green urged the
great white horse.

After they had entered the hill, Dame Margery climbed down from the
pillion and stood looking about her. Then she saw that she was in a
great hall, the walls of which were glistening with gold and silver,
while bright stones gleamed like so many stars all over the roof of the
place. Three little fairy children were playing with golden balls on the
floor, and when they saw the dame they stopped in their sport and stood
looking silently upon her with great, wide-opened eyes, just as though
they were little mortal children. In the corner of the room was a bed
all of pure gold, and over the bed were spread coverlets of gold and
silver cloth, and in the bed lay a beautiful little lady, very white and
ill. Then Dame Margery knew well enough that every one of these little
people were fairies.

The dame nursed the fairy lady all that night, and by cock-crow in the
morning the little woman had ease from her pain.

Then the little man spoke for the first time since Dame Margery had left
home. "Look'ee, Dame Margery," said he; "I promised to pay you well and
I will keep my word. Come hither!" So the dame went to him as he had
bidden her to do, and the little man filled her reticule with black
coals from the hearth. The dame said nothing, but she wondered much
whether the little man called this good pay for her pains. After this
she climbed up on the great horse again, and behind the little man, and
they rode out of the place and home, where they were safe and sound
ere the day had fairly broken. But before the little man had left her he
drew out another little box just like the one that Tommy Lamb had
brought her the evening before, only this time the box was filled with
red ointment. "Rub your eyes with this, Dame Margery," said he.

[Illustration: DAME TWIST DRIVES AWAY THE LITTLE FOLKS]

Now Dame Margery Twist knew butter from cheese, as the saying is. She
knew that the green salve was of a kind which very few people have had
rubbed over their eyes in this world; that it was of a kind which poets
would give their ears to possess--even were it a lump no larger than a
pea. So, when she took the box of red ointment, she only rubbed one eye
with it--her left eye. Her right eye she pretended to rub, but, in
truth, she never touched it at all.

Then the little man got upon his horse again, and rode away to his home
in the hill.

After he had gone away, Dame Margery thought that she would empty her
reticule of the dirty black coals; so she turned it topsy-turvy, and
shook it over the hearth, and out tumbled--black coals? No; great lumps
of pure gold that shone bright yellow, like fire, in the light of the
candle. The good dame could scarcely believe her eyes, for here was
wealth enough to keep her in comfort for all the rest of her days.

But Dame Margery's right eye! I wish I could only see what she saw with
that right eye of hers! What was it she saw? That I will tell you.

The next night was full moon, and Dame Margery came and looked out over
the fine bed of tulips, of which she was very proud. "Hey-day!" she
cried, and rubbed her eyes, in doubt as to whether she was asleep or
awake, for the whole place was alive with little folks.

But she was awake, and it was certain that she saw them. Yes; there they
were--little men, little women, little children, and little babies, as
thick in the tulip bed as folks at a wedding. The little men sat smoking
their pipes and talking together; the little women sat nursing their
babies, singing to them or rocking them to sleep in cradles of tulip
flowers; the little children played at hide-and-seek among the
flower-stalks. So the dame leaned out of the window, watching them with
great delight, for it is always a delight to watch the little folks at
their sports.

[Illustration: Dame Margery Twist goeth to see the merry doings at the
Fair.]

After a while she saw where one of the tiny fairy children hid himself
under a leaf, while the others who were to seek him looked up and down,
and high and low, but could find him nowhere. Then the old dame laughed
and laughed to see how the others looked for the little fellow, but
could not tell where he was. At last she could hold her peace no longer,
but called out in a loud voice, "Look under the leaf, Blackcap!"

The words were no sooner out of her mouth than, whisk! whirr! off they
scampered out of the garden and away--fathers, mothers, children,
babies, all crying in their shrill voices, "She sees us! she sees us!"
For fairies are very timid folk, and dread nothing more than to have
mortals see them in their own shapes.

So they never came back again to the dame's garden, and from that day to
this her tulips have been like everybody else's tulips. Moreover,
whenever she went out the fairies scampered away before her like so many
mice, for they all knew that she could see them with her magical eye.
This, as you may see, was bad enough, but no other harm would have come
of it if she had only gathered wisdom at that time, seeing what ill came
of her speech. But, like many other old dames that I wot of, no sound
was so pleasant to her ears as the words of her own mouth.

Now, about a twelvemonth after the time that the dame had nursed the
fairy lady, the great fair was held at Tavistock. All the world and his
wife were there, so, of course, Dame Margery went also. And the fair was
well worth going to, I can tell you! Booths stood along in a row in the
yellow sunlight of the summer-time, and flags and streamers of many
colors fluttered in the breeze from long poles at the end of each booth.
Ale flowed like water, and dancing was going on on the green, for Peter
Weeks the piper was there, and his pipes were with him. It was a fine
sight to see all of the youths and maids, decked in fine ribbons of pink
and blue, dancing hand-in-hand to his piping. In the great tent the
country people had spread out their goods--butter, cheese, eggs, honey,
and the like--making as goodly a show as you would want to see. Dame
Margery was in her glory, for she had people to gossip with everywhere;
so she went hither and thither, and at last into the great tent where
these things of which I have spoken were all spread out for show.

[Illustration: Dame Twist sees the little man in green for the last
time]

Then, lo and behold! who should she see, gliding here and there among
the crowd of other people, but the little man in green whom she had seen
a year ago. She opened her eyes mightily wide, for she saw that he was
doing a strange thing. By his side hung a little earthenware pot, and
in his hand he held a little wooden scraper, which he passed over the
rolls of butter, afterwards putting that which he scraped from the rolls
into the pot that hung beside him. Dame Margery peeped into the pot, and
saw that it was half full; then she could contain herself no longer.

"Hey-day, neighbor!" cried she, "here be pretty doings, truly! Out upon
thee, to go scraping good luck and full measure off of other folks'
butter!"

When the little man in green heard the dame speak to him, he was so
amazed that he nearly dropped his wooden scraper. "Why, Dame Margery!
can you see me then?"

"Aye, marry can I! And what you are about doing also; out upon you, say
I!"

"And did you not rub your eyes with the red salve then?" said the little
man.

"One eye, yes, but one eye, no," said the dame, slyly.

"Which eye do you see me with?" said he.

"With this eye, gossip, and very clearly, I would have you know," and
she pointed to her right eye.

Then the little man swelled out his cheeks until they were like two
little brown dumplings. Puff! he blew a breath into the good dame's eye.
Puff! he blew, and if the dame's eye had been a candle, the light of it
could not have gone out sooner.

The dame felt no smart, but she might wink and wink, and wink again, but
she would never wink sight into the eye upon which the little man had
blown his breath, for it was blind as the stone wall back of the mill,
where Tom the tinker kissed the miller's daughter.

Dame Margery Twist never greatly missed the sight of that eye; but all
the same, I would give both of mine for it.

All of these things are told at Tavistock town even to this day; and if
you go thither, you may hear them for yourself.

But I say again, as I said at first: if one could
  only hold one's tongue as to what one sees,
    one would be the better for it.




[Illustration: YE SONG OF YE GOSSIPS. This is a full page illustrated
poem depicting: the three old maids gossiping at a table, the two old
maids gossiping as the other leaves, and the last old maid sitting
alone.]

YE SONG OF YE GOSSIPS

         1

    One old maid,
    And another old maid,
  And another old maid--that's three--
And they were agossiping, I am afraid,
  As they sat sipping their tea.

         2

    They talked of this,
    And they talked of that,
  In the usual gossiping way
Until everybody was black as your hat,
  And the only ones white were they.

         3

    One old maid,
    And another old maid,--
  For the third had gone into the street--
Who talked in a way of that third old maid,
  Which never would do to repeat.

         4

    And now but one
    Dame sat all alone,
  For the others were both away.
"I've never yet met," said she, with a groan,
    "Such scandalous talkers as they."

         5

    "Alas! and alack!"
    "We're all of a pack!
  For no matter how we walk,
Or what folk say to our face, our back
  Is sure to breed gossip and talk."

H. PYLE




[Illustration: A victim to Science. This is a full page illustrated
poem depicting the two physicians walking, the two finding the crow, and
the crow feet up on the path as they continue to argue.]

A VICTIM TO SCIENCE

Th're were two wise physicians once, of glory and renown,
Who went to take a little walk nigh famous Concord town.
Oh! very, very great and wise and learned men were they,
And wise and learned was th'r talk, as they walked on th'r way.
And as they walked and talked and talked, they came to wh're they found
A Crow as black as any hat, a-sitting on ye ground.
Ye Crow was very, very sick, as you may quickly see
By just looking at ye picture th't is drawn h're by me.
Now wh'n ye doctors came to him they mended of th'r pace,
And said one unto ye other, "H're's an interesting case,
A case th't sh'ld be treated, and be treated speedily.
I have--yes, here it is--a pill th't has been made by me.
Now, I have had occasion--" Said ye other, "In most cases
Your pills are excellently good, but h're, my friend, are traces
Of a lassitude, a languor, th't your pills c'ld hardly aid;
In short, they're rather violent for th's, I am afraid.
_I_ have a tincture--" Said ye first, "Your tincture cannot touch
A case as difficult as th's, my pills are better much."
"Your pills, sir, are too violent." "Your tonic is too weak."
"As I have said, sir, in th's case--" "Permit me, sir, to speak."
And so they argued long and high, and on, and on, and on,
Until they lost their tempers, and an hour or more had gone.
But long before their arguments ye question did decide,
Ye Crow, not waiting for ye end, incontinently died.

YE MORAL

(_is apparent_.)

H. Pyle




[Illustration: Play & Earnest. This is a full page illustrated poem
depicting the wind in fairy form first playing with the tree and then as
a tempest.]

PLAY & EARNEST

Over dewy hill and lea
    Merrily
Rushed a mad-cap breeze at play,
And the daisies, like the bright
    Stars at night,
Danced and twinkled in its way.

Now, a tree called to the breeze,
    "Little breeze,
Will you come and have a play?"
And the wind upon its way
    Stopped to play.
Then the leaves, with sudden shiver,
    Sudden quiver,
    Met the light
    Mad-cap breeze
    With delight.

Presently the breeze grew stronger,
For it cared to play no longer.
  So it flung the limbs about,
  And it tossed the leaves in rout,
Till it roared, as though with thunder.
  Then the poor tree groaned and bent,
  And the breeze,--a tempest,--rent
  Leaves and branches from its crowns
  Till, at last, it flung it down,
Stripped, and bare, and torn asunder.

H. Pyle




[Illustration: The accident of birth. This is a full page illustrated
poem with pictures of: "Ye King" praying, "Ye Saint" holding the baby
with stork standing by, "Ye Stork" with baby in flight, and "Ye Cobbler"
at work.]

THE ACCIDENT OF BIRTH.

  _Saint Nicholas_ used to send, so I am told,
  All new-born babes by storks, in days of old.

1
King Friedrich Max of Stultzenmannenkim,
    For many years unto the Saint did pray,
That he would send unto his Queen and him,
    A baby boy, to be the King some day.
At last the Saint the King's petition heard,
And called to him a sober long-legged bird.

2
Quoth he, "Good Wilhelm Stork (such was its name),
    Here is a baby boy to take away.
It is for Fritz; so bear him to the same,
    Or rather to his Queen, without delay.
For one grows weary when one always hears
The same words daily dinning in one's ears."

3
Now Wilhelm Stork was old, and dull of wits,
    For age not always sharpens wisdom much,
So what does he but bear the gift to Fritz
    The cobbler, who had half a score of such.
And so the baby, through a blunder, passed
From being first of all, unto--_ye last_.

4
From this I gather that a new-born Prince,
    From new-born cobbler's somewhat hard to know,
For which of us could tell the difference, since
    One thus experienced was mistaken so?
Also, perhaps, _I_ should be great, instead
Of writing thus, to earn my daily bread.

H.P. MDCCCLXXXIII




[Illustration]

CLEVER PETER & THE TWO BOTTLES

"Yes, Peter is clever." So said his mother; but then every goose thinks
her own gosling a swan.

The minister and all of the people of the village said Peter was but a
dull block. Maybe Peter _was_ a fool; but, as the old saying goes, never
a fool tumbles out of the tree but he lights on his toes. So now you
shall hear how that Peter sold his two baskets of eggs for more than you
or I could do, wise as we be.

"Peter," said his mother.

"Yes," said Peter, for he was well brought up, and always answered when
he was spoken to.

"My dear little child, thou art wise, though so young now; how shall we
get money to pay our rent?"

"Sell the eggs that the speckled hen has laid," said Peter.

"But when we have spent the money for them, what then?"

"Sell more eggs," said Peter, for he had an answer for everything.

"But when the speckled hen lays no more eggs, what shall we do then?"

"We shall see," said Peter.

"Now indeed art thou wise," said his mother, "and I take thy meaning;
it is this, when we have spent all, we must do as the little birds do,
and trust in the good Heaven." Peter meant nothing of the kind, but then
folks will think that such wise fellows as Peter and I mean more than we
say, whence comes our wisdom.

So the next day Peter started off to the town, with the basket full of
nice white eggs. The day was bright and warm and fair; the wind blew
softly, and the wheatfields lay like green velvet in the sun. The
flowers were sprinkled all over the grass, and the bees kicked up their
yellow legs as they tilted into them. The garlic stuck up stout spikes
into the air, and the young radishes were green and lusty. The brown
bird in the tree sang, "Cuckoo! cuckoo!" and Peter trudged contentedly
along, kicking up little clouds of dust at every footstep, whistling
merrily and staring up into the bright sky, where the white clouds hung
like little sheep, feeding on the wide blue field. "If those clouds were
sheep, and the sheep were mine, then I would be a great man and very
proud," said Peter. But the clouds were clouds, and he was not a great
man; nevertheless, he whistled more merrily than ever, for it was very
nice to think of these things.

So he trudged along with great comfort until high noontide, against
which time he had come nigh to the town, for he could see the red roofs
and the tall spires peeping over the crest of the next green hill. By
this time his stomach was crying, "Give! give!" for it longed for bread
and cheese. Now, a great gray stone stood near by at the forking of the
road, and just as Peter came to it he heard a noise. "Click! clack!" he
turned his head, and, lo and behold! the side of the stone opened like a
door, and out came a little old man dressed all in fine black velvet.
"Good-day, Peter," said he. "Good-day, sir," said Peter, and he took off
his hat as he spoke, for he could see with half an eye that this little
old gentleman was none of your cheese-paring fine folks.

"Will you strike a bargain with me for your eggs?" said the little old
man. Yes, Peter would strike a bargain; what would the little gentleman
give him for his eggs? "I will give you this," said the little old man,
and he drew a black bottle out of his pocket.

Peter took the bottle and turned it over and over in his hands. "It is,"
said he, "a pretty little, good little, sweet little bottle, but it is
not worth as much as my basket of eggs."

"Prut!" said the little gentleman, "now you are not talking like the
wise Peter. You should never judge by the outside of things. What would
you like to have?"

"I should like," said Peter, "to have a good dinner."

"Nothing easier!" said the little gentleman, and he drew the cork. Pop!
pop! and what should come out of the bottle but two tall men, dressed
all in blue with gold trimmings. "What will you have, sir?" said the
first of these to the little gentleman.

"A good dinner for two," said the little man.

No sooner said than done; for, before you could say Frederic
Strutzenwillenbachen, there stood a table, with a sweet, clean, white
cloth spread over it, and on this was the nicest dinner that you ever
saw, for there were beer and chitterlings, and cheese and good white
bread, fit for the king. Then Peter and the little man fell to with
might and main, and ate till they could eat no more. After they were
done, the two tall men took table and dishes and all back into the
bottle again, and the little gentleman corked it up.

[Illustration: Clever Peter & the Little Gentleman in Black]

"Yes," said Peter, "I will give you my basket of eggs for the little
black bottle." And so the bargain was struck. Then Peter started off
home, and the little man went back again into the great stone and closed
the door behind him. He took the basket of eggs with him; where he took
it neither Peter nor I will ever be able to tell you.

So Peter trudged along homeward, until, after a while, the day waxing
warm, he grew tired. "I wish," said he, "that I had a fine white horse
to ride."

Then he took the cork out of the bottle. Pop! pop! and out came the two
tall fellows, just as they had done for the little old man. "What will
you have, sir?" said the first of them.

"I will have," said Peter, "a fine white horse to ride."

No sooner said than done; for there, before him in the road, stood a
fine white horse, with a long mane and tail, just like so much spun
silk. In his mouth was a silver bit; on his back was a splendid saddle,
covered all over with gold and jewels; on his feet were shoes of pure
gold, so that he was a very handsome horse indeed.

Peter mounted on his great horse and rode away home, as grand as though
he were a lord or a nobleman.

Every one whom he met stopped in the middle of the road and looked after
him. "Just look at Peter!" cried they; but Peter held his chin very
high, and rode along without looking at them, for he knew what a fine
sight he was on his white horse.

And so he came home again.

"What didst thou get for thy eggs, my little duck?" said his mother.

"I got a bottle, mother," said Peter.

Then at first Peter's mother began to think as others thought, that
Peter was a dull block. But when she saw what a wonderful bottle it was,
and how it held many good things and one over, she changed her mind
again, and thought that her Peter was as wise as the moon.

And now nothing was lacking in the cottage; if Peter and his mother
wanted this, it came to them; if they wished for that, the two tall men
in the bottle fetched it. They lined the house all inside with pure
gold, and built the chimneys of bricks of silver, so that there was
nothing so fine between all the four great rivers. Peter dressed in
satin and his mother in silk, and everybody called him "Lord Peter."
Even the minister of the village said that he was no dull boy, for
nobody is dull who rides on horseback and never wears wooden shoes. So
now Peter was a rich man.

[Illustration: Clever Peter rides to the King's Palace upon his fine
Horse.]

One morning Peter said to his mother, "Mother, I am going to ask the
King to let me marry his daughter."

To this his mother said nothing, for surely her Peter was as good as any
princess that ever lived.

So off Peter rode, dressed all in his best and seated astride of a grand
horse. At last he came to the palace which was finer than the handsome
new house of Herr Mayor Kopff. Rap! rap! rap! Peter knocked at the door,
and presently came a neat servant girl and opened it to him. "Is the
King at home, my dear?" said Peter.

Yes, the King was at home; would he come into the parlor and sit down?
So Peter went into the parlor and sat down, and then the King came in,
dressed all in his best dressing-gown, with silver slippers upon his
feet, and a golden crown upon his head.

"What is your name?" said the King.

"Peter Stultzenmilchen," said Peter.

"And what do you want, Lord Peter," said the King; for, as I have said,
Peter was dressed in his best clothes, and the old King thought that he
was a great lord.

"I want to marry your daughter," said Peter.

To this the King said "Hum-m-m," and Peter said nothing. Then the King
said that he had determined that no one should marry his daughter
without bringing him a basketful of diamonds, rubies, topazes, emeralds,
pearls, and all manner of precious stones; for he thought by this to get
rid of Peter.

"Is that all?" said Peter. "Nothing is easier."

So off he went, until he came to a chestnut woods just back of the royal
kitchen-garden. There he uncorked his bottle. Pop! pop! and out came the
two tall men. "What will you have, sir?" said they. Peter told them what
he wanted, and it was no sooner said than done; for, there on the ground
before him, stood a basketful of all kinds of precious stones; each of
them was as large as a hen's egg, and over all of them was spread a
nice clean white napkin. So Peter took the basket on his arm and went
back again to the palace.

But how the King did open his eyes, to be sure, and how he stared!
"Now," said Peter, "I should like to marry your daughter, if you
please."

At this the King hemmed and hawed again. No, Peter could not marry the
Princess yet, for the King had determined that no man should marry his
daughter without bringing him a bird all of pure silver that could sing
whenever it was wanted, and that more sweetly than a nightingale; for he
thought that now he should be rid of Peter, at any rate.

"Nothing easier," said Peter, and off he went again.

When he had come to the chestnut woods, he uncorked his bottle and told
the two tall men what he wanted. No sooner said than done; for there was
a bird all of pure silver. And not only that, but the bird sat in a
little golden tree, and the leaves of the tree were emeralds, and rubies
hung like cherries from the branches.

Then Peter wrapped this up in his handkerchief and took it to the
palace. As for the King, he could not look at it or listen to it enough.

"Now," said Peter, "I should like to marry your daughter, if you
please."

But at this the King sang the same tune again. No, Peter could not marry
his daughter yet, for the King had determined that the man who was to
marry his daughter should first bring him a golden sword, so keen that
it could cut a feather floating in the air, yet so strong that it could
cut through an iron bar.

"Nothing easier," said Peter, and this time the men of the bottle
brought him such a sword as he asked for, and the hilt was studded all
over with precious stones, so that it was very handsome indeed. Then
Peter brought it to the King, and it did as the King would have it--it
cut through a feather floating in the air; as for the iron bar, it cut
through that as easily as you would bite through a radish.

[Illustration: Peter Eats With the King and Princess]

And now it seemed as though there was nothing else to be done but to let
Peter marry the Princess. So the King asked him in to supper, and they
all three sat down together, the King and the Princess and Peter. And
it was a fine feast, I can tell you, for they had both white and red
wine, besides sausages and cheese, and real white bread and puddings,
and all manner of good things; for kings and princesses eat and drink of
the best.

As for Peter, he made eyes at the Princess, and the Princess looked down
on her plate and blushed, and Peter thought that he had never seen such
a pretty girl.

After a while the King began to question Peter how he came by all these
fine things--the precious stones, the silver bird, and the golden sword;
but no, Peter would not tell. Then the King and the Princess begged and
begged him, until, at last, Peter lost his wits and told all about the
bottle. Then the King said nothing more, and presently, it being nine
o'clock, Peter went to bed. After he had gone the King and the Princess
put their heads together, and the end of the matter was that the wicked
King went to Peter's room and stole the bottle from under the pillow
where he had hidden it, and put one in its place that was as empty as a
beer barrel after the soldiers have been in the town; for the King and
the Princess thought that it would be a fine thing to have the bottle
for themselves.

When the next morning had come, and they were all sitting at their
breakfast together, the King said, "Now, Lord Peter, let us see what
your bottle will do; give us such and such a kind of wine."

"Nothing easier," said Peter. Then he uncorked the bottle, but not so
much as a single dead fly came out of it.

"But where is the wine?" said the King.

"I do not know," said Peter.

At this the King called him hard names and turned him out of the
palace, neck and heels; so back poor Peter went to his mother with a
flea in his ear, as the saying is. Now he was poor again, and everybody
called him a dull block, for he rode no great white horse and he wore
wooden shoes.

"Never mind," said his mother, "here is another basket of eggs from the
speckled hen." So Peter set off with these to the market town, as he had
done with the others before. When he had come to the great stone at the
forking of the road, whom should he meet but the same little gentleman
he had met the first time. "Will you strike a bargain?" said he. Yes,
Peter would strike a bargain, and gladly. Thereupon the little old man
brought out another black bottle.

"Two men are in this bottle," said the little old man; "when they have
done all that you want them to do, say 'brikket-ligg' and they will go
back again. Will you trade with me?" Yes, Peter would trade. So Peter
gave the little man the eggs, and the little man gave Peter the second
bottle, and they parted very good friends.

After a while Peter grew tired. "Now," said he to himself, "I will ride
a little"; and so he drew the cork out of the bottle. Pop! pop! out came
two men from the bottle; but this time they were ugly and black, and
each held a stout stick in his hand. They said not a word, but, without
more ado, fell upon Peter and began threshing him as though he was wheat
on the barn floor. "Stop! stop!" cried Peter, and he went hopping and
skipping up and down, and here and there, but it seemed as though the
two ugly black men did not hear him, for the blows fell as thick as
hail on the roof. At last he gathered his wits together, like a flock of
pigeons, and cried, "Brikket-ligg! brikket-ligg!" Then, whisk! pop! they
went back into the bottle again, and Peter corked it up, and corked it
tightly, I can tell you.

[Illustration: Clever Peter and the Unlucky Bottle]

The next day he started off to the palace once more. Rap! rap! rap! he
knocked at the door. Was the King at home? Yes, the King was at home;
would he come and sit in the parlor?

Presently the King came in, in dressing-gown and slippers. "What! are
you back again?" said he.

"Yes; I am back again," said Peter.

"What do you want?" said the King.

"I want to marry the Princess," said Peter.

"What have you brought this time?" said the King.

"I have brought another bottle," said Peter.

Then the King rubbed his hands and was very polite indeed, and asked
Peter in to breakfast, and Peter went. So they all three sat down
together, the King, the Princess, and Peter.

"My dear," said the King, to the Princess, "the Lord Peter has brought
another bottle with him." Thereat the Princess was very polite also.
Would Lord Peter let them see the bottle? Oh yes! Peter would do that:
so he drew it out of his pocket and sat it upon the table.

Perhaps they would like to have it opened. Yes, that they would. So
Peter opened the bottle.

Hui! what a hubbub there was! The King hopped about till his slippers
flew off, his dressing-gown fluttered like great wings, and his crown
rolled off from his head and across the floor, like a quoit at the fair.
As for the Princess, she never danced in all of her life as she danced
that morning. They made such a noise that the soldiers of the Royal
Guard came running in; but the two tall black men spared them no more
than the King and the Princess. Then came all of the Lords of the
Council, and they likewise danced to the same music as the rest.

"Oh, Peter! dear Lord Peter! cork up your men again!" they all cried.

"Will you give me back my bottle?" said Peter.

"Yes! yes!" cried the King.

"Will you marry me?" said Peter.

"Yes! yes!" cried the Princess.

Then Peter said "brikket-ligg!" and the two tall men popped back into
the bottle again. So the King gave him back his other bottle, and the
minister was called in and married him to the Princess.

After that he lived happily, and when the old King died he became King
over all of the land. As for the Princess, she was as good a wife as you
ever saw, but Peter always kept the bottle near to him--maybe that was
the reason.

Ah me! if I could only take my eggs to such a
  market and get two such bottles for them!
    What would I do with them? It would
      take too long to tell you.

[Illustration: Clever Peter opens the Unlucky Bottle for the King and
Princess.]




[Illustration: Ye Romantic Adventures of Three Tailors. This is a full
page poem showing the three tailors walking together, the three
approaching the milk-maids, and the three walking away saddened.]

YE ROMANTIC ADVENTURES OF THREE TAILORS

Three little men went ajogging along--
 Along in the sunshiny weather.
And they laughed and they sang an occasional song
 Which they all of them caroled together.
And the great white clouds floated over the sky
And the day it was warm and the sun it was high.

As three jolly tailor men all were they
 As you'd find in a dozen of years.
One carried the yardstick another the goose
 And the bravest of all bore the shears
So they merrily trudged until after awhile
The came where three milk-maids sat all on a stile.

The grass it was green and the flowers were gay,
 And it was the pleasantest weather.
And the milkmaids were pretty as blossoms in May
 As they sat on the stile all together.
Then they stopped on the high-way those three gallant men
For they never had seen as fair lasses as then.

Then up spake the first of the tailor men three
 And the one with the goodliest parts.
"We are all of us good men gallant and free
 And have never yet plighted our hearts.
So prithee fair maids will you marry us all
For our hearts they be great as our bodies be small."

Then up spake the first of the three pretty dears
 "Pray tell what your fortunes may be sir."
"Oh three loving hearts and a yard goose and shears."
 "Then you've not enough fortune for me sir.
So get you along while your boots are still green
For richer young men we shall marry I ween."

Three little tailor men jogging along--
 Along in the sunshiny weather.
No longer they laugh with a jest and a song
 But they walk very sadly together.
For when maidens are proud like the milkmaidens cold,
The lads they grow sad like the tailors so bold.

Howard Pyle




[Illustration: FANCY AND FACT. This is an illustrated poem with the
shepherd and shepherdess sitting in the grass above the poem, and the
two of them sick with their heads wrapped on either side of the poem.]

FANCY AND FACT

O! a shepherd and a shepherdess,
  They dwelt in Arcadee,
And they were dressed in Watteau dress,
  Most charming for to see.

They sat upon the dewy grass,
  With buds and blossoms set.
And the shepherd played unto the lass,
  Upon a flageolet.

It seemed to me as though it was
  A very pleasant thing;
Particularly so because
  The time of year was Spring.

But, O! the ground was damp, and so,
  At least, I have been told,
The shepherd caught the lumbago,
  The shepherdess, a cold.

My darling Child! the fact is
  That the Poets often sing
Of those joys which in the practice
  Are another sort of thing.

H. P.




[Illustration: YE TWO WISHES. This is a full page illustrated poem with
the angel and faggot-maker sitting together, the faggot-maker going into
the bottle, and the faggot-maker coming out again.]

YE TWO WISHES

An Angel went a walking out one day, as I've heard said,
And, coming to a faggot-maker, begged a crust of bread
The faggot-maker gave a crust and something rather queer
To wash it down withall, from out a bottle that stood near.
The Angel finished eating; but before he left, said he,
"Thou shalt have two wishes granted, for that thou hast given me.
One wish for that good drinkable, another for the bread."
The he left the faggot-maker all amazed at what he'd said.

"I wonder," says the faggot-maker, after he had gone,
"I wonder if there's any truth in that same little song!"
So, turning this thing over in his mind, he cast around,
'Till he saw the empty bottle where it lay upon the ground.
"I wish," said he, just as a test, "if what he said is so,
Into that empty bottle, now, that I may straightway go"
No sooner said that done; for,--_Whisk!_ into the flask he fell,
Where he found himself as tightly packed as chicken in the shell.
In vain he kicked and twisted, and in vain he howled with pain;
For, in spite of all his efforts, he could not get out again.
So, seeing how the matter stood, he had to wish once more.
When, out he slipped, as easily as he'd gone in before.

If we had two wishes, granted by an Angel thus,
We would not throw away the good so kindly given us.
For first we'd ask for wisdom, which, when we had in store,
I'm very doubtful if we'd care to ask for anymore.

Howard Pyle




[Illustration: A VERSE WITH A MORAL BUT NO NAME. This illustrated poem
depicts the wise man asking all sorts of people.]

A VERSE WITH A MORAL BUT NO NAME

A wise man once, of Haarlem town,
Went wandering up, and wandering down,
  And ever the question asked:

"If all the world was paper,
  And if all the sea was ink,
And if the trees were bread and cheese,
  What would we do for drink?"

Then all the folk, both great and small,
  Began to beat their brains,
But they could not answer him at all,
  In spite of all their pains.

But still he wandered here and there,
  This man of great renown,
And still he questioned everywhere,
  The folk of Haarlem town:

"If all the world was paper,
  And if all the sea was ink,
And if the trees were bread and cheese,
  What would we do for drink?"

Full thin he grew, as, day by day,
  He toiled with mental strain,
Until the wind blew him away,
  And he ne'er was seen again.

And now methinks I hear you say,
"Was ere a man so foolish, pray,
  Since first the world began?"
Oh, hush! I'll tell you secretly
Down East there dwells a man, and he
Is asking questions constantly,
That none can answer, that I see,
  Yet he's a wise-wise man!

H. Pyle




[Illustration]

HANS HECKLEMANN'S LUCK

Hans Hecklemann had no luck at all. Now and then we hear folks say that
they have no luck, but they only mean that their luck is bad and that
they are ashamed of it. Everybody but Hans Hecklemann had luck of some
kind, either good or bad, and, what is more, everybody carries his luck
about with him; some carry it in their pocket-books, some carry it in
their hats, some carry it on their finger tips, and some carry it under
their tongues--these are lawyers. Mine is at this moment sitting astride
of my pen, though I can no more see it than though it was thin air;
whether it is good or bad depends entirely as to how _you_ look upon it.

But Hans Hecklemann had no luck at all. How he lost it nobody knows, but
it is certain that it was clean gone from him.

He was as poor as charity, and yet his luck was not bad, for, poor as he
was, he always had enough for his wife and his family and himself to
eat. They all of them worked from dawn to nightfall, and yet his luck
was not good, for he never laid one penny on top of the other, as the
saying is. He had food enough to eat, and clothes enough to wear, so his
luck was not indifferent. Now, as it was neither good, bad, nor
indifferent, you see that it could have been no luck at all.

Hans Hecklemann's wife was named Catherine. One evening when Hans came
into the cottage with just enough money to buy them all bread and not a
cracked farthing to spare, Catherine spoke to him of this matter.

"Hans," said she, "you have no luck at all."

[Illustration: Hans Hecklemann, Catherine.]

"No," said Hans, "I have not," which was the truth, as I have already
told you.

"What are you going to do about it?" said Catherine.

"Nothing at all," said Hans.

"Doing nothing puts no cabbage into the pot," said Catherine.

"It takes none out," said Hans.

"See, Hans," said Catherine; "go to the old wise woman in the wood and
talk to her about it; who knows but that she can tell you how and where
you lost your luck?"

"If I should find my luck it might be bad and not good," said Hans.

"It is worth having a look at," said Catherine; "you can leave it where
you find it if it does not please you."

"No," said Hans; "when a man finds his luck he has to take it, whether
he likes it or no."

So Hans talked, but he had made up his mind to do as Catherine said, to
go and see the old wise woman in the wood. He argued with her, but he
only argued with her to let her know how little was her knowledge and
how great was his. After he had clearly shown her how poor her advice
was, he took it. Many other men are like Hans Hecklemann.

So, early the next morning, Hans jogged along to the old wise woman's
cottage, while the day was sweet and fresh. The hedgerows were covered
all over with white blossoms, as though it was with so much snow; the
cuckoo was singing among the budding branches, and the little flowers
were looking up everywhere with their bright faces. "Surely," said Hans
to himself, "if I find my luck on this day, it must be good and not
ill."

So he came to the little red cottage at the edge of the wood wherein
lived the wise woman who knew many things and one. Hans scraped his feet
on the stones until they were clean, and then he knocked at the door.

"Come in," said the old wise woman.

She was as strange an old woman as one could hope to see in a lifetime.
Her nose bent down to meet her chin, and her chin bent up to reach her
nose; her face was gray with great age, and her hair was as white as
snow. She wore a long red cloak over her shoulders, and a great black
cat sat on the back of her chair.

"What do you want, Son Hans?" said she.

"I want to find my luck, mother," said Hans.

"Where did you lose it, Son Hans?" said she.

"That I do not know, mother," said Hans.

Then the old wise woman said "Hum-m-m!" in a very thoughtful voice, and
Hans said nothing at all.

After a while she spoke again. "Have you enough to eat?" said she.

"Oh yes!" said Hans.

"Have you enough to drink?" said she.

"Plenty of water, enough of milk, but no beer," said Hans.

"Have you enough clothes to cover you?" said she.

"Oh yes!" said Hans.

"Are you warm enough in winter?" said she.

"Oh yes!" said Hans.

"Then you had better leave well enough alone," said she, "for luck can
give you nothing more."

"But it might put money into my pocket," said Hans.

"And it might take away the good things that you already have," said
she.

"All the same, I should like to find it again," said Hans; "if I could
only lay my hands on it I might make good out of it, even if it is bad."

"I doubt that," said the old wise woman. Nevertheless, she saw that
Hans was set in his own way, and that he only talked stiffness into his
stubbornness. So she arose from her chair with much groaning, for her
joints were stiffened with age, and limping to a closet in the wall she
brought a book thence. Then she ran her finger down one page and up
another, until she had found that which she sought. When she had found
it she spoke:

[Illustration: Hans Hecklemann goes to the cottage of the old Wise Woman
in search of his Luck.]

"Son Hans, you lost your luck three years ago when you were coming from
the fair at Kneitlingen. You sat down on the overturned cross that lies
where three roads meet, and it fell out of your pocket along with a
silver shilling. Now, Hans, your luck was evil, therefore it stuck to
the good sign, as all evil things of that kind must, like a fly to
butter. Also, I tell you this: when an evil manikin such as this touches
the sign of the good cross, he becomes visible to the eyes of everybody
who chooses to look upon him. Therefore go to the stone cross and you
will find your luck running this way and that, but never able to get
away from it." So saying, the old woman shut her book again. Then she
arose from her chair and went once more to the closet in the wall. This
time she took from it a little sack woven of black goat's hair. "When
you have found your luck again, put it into this little bag," said she;
"once in it, no evil imp will be able to get out again so long as you
keep the strings tied. And now good-bye!"

[Illustration: Hans Hecklemann and the Old Wise-Woman]

Then Hans slipped the little sack into his pocket, and set out for the
overturned stone cross where the three roads meet. When he had come to
the place, he looked here and there, and this way and that, but for a
long time he could see nothing at all. At last, after much looking, he
beheld a little black beetle running hither and thither on the stone. "I
wonder," said Hans, "if this can be my luck."

So saying, he caught the little beetle betwixt his finger and thumb, but
very carefully, for he could not tell whether or not it might bite him.
The beetle stuck to the stone as though it had been glued there, but, at
last, Hans pulled it away; then--lo! it was not a beetle that he held in
his hand, but a little manikin about as long as your thumb and as black
as ink. Hans Hecklemann was so frightened that he nearly dropped it, for
it kicked and screeched and rolled its red eyes in a very ugly way as he
held it. However, he popped it into the little sack and pulled the
strings tight, and there it was, safe and sound.

That is what Hans Hecklemann's luck was like.

So Hans having his luck secure in the little sack began to bargain with
it. "What will you do for me if I let you out?" said he.

"Nothing at all," snarled his luck.

"Very well," said Hans, "we will see about that."

So he carried it home with him, and threw sack and all into a nasty pot
where Catherine cast the scrapings of the dishes--the fat and what not
that she boiled down into soap now and then. There he left his luck to
stay until the next day, and then he went to it again. "What will you do
for me if I will let you out now?" said he.

"Nothing at all," snarled his luck.

"Very well," said Hans, "we will see about that." So he let him stay
where he was for another day. And so the fiddle played; every day Hans
Hecklemann went to his luck and asked it what it would give him if he
would let it out, and every day his luck said nothing; and so a week
or more passed.

[Illustration: Hans finds his Luck]

At last Hans's luck gave in.

"See, Hans," it said one morning; "if you will let me out of this nasty
pickle I will give you a thousand thalers."

"Ah no!" said Hans. "Thalers are only thalers, as my good father used to
say. They melt away like snow, and then nothing is left of them. I will
trust no such luck as that!"

"I will give you two thousand thalers," said his luck.

[Illustration: Hans Hecklemann ploughs for Gold]

"Ah no!" said Hans; "two thousand thalers are only twice one thousand
thalers. I will trust no such luck as that, either!"

"Then what will you take to let me out, Hans Hecklemann?" said his luck.

"Look," said Hans; "yonder stands my old plough. Now, if you will give
me to find a golden noble at the end of every furrow that I strike with
it I will let you out. If not--why, then, into the soap you go."

"Done!" said Hans's luck.

"Done!" said Hans.

Then he opened the mouth of the sack, and--puff! went his luck, like
wind out of a bag, and--pop! it slipped into his breeches pocket.

He never saw it again with his mortal eyes, but it stayed near to him, I
can tell you. "Ha! ha! ha!" it laughed in his pocket, "you have made an
ill bargain, Hans, I can tell you!"

"Never mind," said Hans, "I am contented."

Hans Hecklemann did not tarry long in trying the new luck of his old
plough, as you may easily guess. Off he went like the wind and borrowed
Fritz Friedleburg's old gray horse. Then he fastened the horse to the
plough and struck the first furrow. When he had come to the end of
it--pop! up shot a golden noble, as though some one had spun it up from
the ground with his finger and thumb. Hans picked it up, and looked at
it and looked at it as though he would swallow it with his eyes. Then he
seized the handle of the plough and struck another furrow--pop! up went
another golden noble, and Hans gathered it as he had done the other one.
So he went on all of that day, striking furrows and gathering golden
nobles until all of his pockets were as full as they could hold. When it
was too dark to see to plough any more he took Fritz Friedleburg's horse
back home again, and then he went home himself.

All of his neighbors thought that he was crazy, for it was nothing but
plough, plough, plough, morning and noon and night, spring and summer
and autumn. Frost and darkness alone kept him from his labor. His stable
was full of fine horses, and he worked them until they dropped in the
furrows that he was always ploughing.

"Yes; Hans is crazy," they all said; but when Hans heard them talk in
this way he only winked to himself and went on with his ploughing, for
he felt that he knew this from that.

But ill luck danced in his pocket with the golden nobles, and from the
day that he closed his bargain with it he was an unhappy man. He had no
comfort of living, for it was nothing but work, work, work. He was up
and away at his ploughing at the first dawn of day, and he never came
home till night had fallen; so, though he ploughed golden nobles, he did
not turn up happiness in the furrows along with them. After he had eaten
his supper he would sit silently behind the stove, warming his fingers
and thinking of some quicker way of doing his ploughing. For it seemed
to him that the gold-pieces came in very slowly, and he blamed himself
that he had not asked his luck to let him turn up three at a time
instead of only one at the end of each furrow; so he had no comfort in
his gathering wealth. As day followed day he grew thin and haggard and
worn, but seven boxes of bright new gold-pieces lay hidden in the
cellar, of which nobody knew but himself. He told no one how rich he was
growing, and all of his neighbors wondered why he did not starve to
death.

So you see the ill luck in his breeches pocket had the best of the
bargain, after all.

After Hans had gone the way of all men, his heirs found the chests full
of gold in the cellar, and therewith they bought fat lands and became
noblemen and gentlemen; but that made Hans's luck none the better.

From all this I gather:

That few folks can turn ill luck into good luck.
That the best thing for one to do is to let well enough alone.
That one cannot get happiness as one does cabbages--with
    money.
That happiness is the only good luck, after all!




[Illustration: Ye Song of ye Rajah & ye Fly. This illustrated poem
depicts the Rajah in the various stages of the poem.]

YE SONG OF YE RAJAH & YE FLY

Great and rich beyond comparing
Was the Rajah Rhama Jaring,
As he went to take an airing
  With his Court one summer day.
All were gay with green and yellow;
And a little darky fellow
Bore a monstrous fun umbrella,
  For to shade him on the way.

Now a certain fly, unwitting
Of this grandeur, came a-flitting
To the Royal nose, and sitting
  Twirled his legs upon the same.
Then the Rajah's eyes blazed fire
At the insult, and the ire
In his heart boiled high and higher.
  Slap! he struck, but missed his aim.

Then all trembled at this passion,
For he spoke in furious fashion.
"Saw ye how yon fly did dash on
  To our august nose!" he said.
"Now let all within our nation
Wage a war without cessation
War of b-lood, ex-ter-mi-nation,
  Until every fly is dead!!!!"

Now the while this war was raging,
That the rajah was a-waging,
Things that should have been engaging
  His attention went to pot.
So he came at last to begging,
Though the flies continued plaguing.
For it's not so easy pegging
  Out vexation thus, I wot.

From this you may see what all have to expect,
Who, fighting small troubles, great duties neglect.

H. Pyle




[Illustration: Pride in Distress. This full page illustrated poem shows
the mistress walking along with others watching, until she steps into a
small pool and scares some geese aloft.]

PRIDE IN DISTRESS

Mistress Polly Poppenjay
Went to take a walk one day.
On that morning she was dressed
In her very Sunday best;
Feathers, frills and ribbons gay,--
Proud was Mistress Poppenjay.

Mistress Polly Poppenjay
Spoke to no one on her way;
Passed acquaintances aside;
Held her head aloft with pride;
Did not see a puddle lay
In front of Mistress Poppenjay.

Mistress Polly Poppenjay
Harked to naught the folk could say.
Loud they cried, "Beware the puddle!"
_Plump!_ She stepped into the middle.
And a pretty plight straightway
Was poor Mistress Poppenjay.

Mistress Polly Poppenjay;
From your pickle others may
Learn to curb their pride a little;--
Learn to exercise their wit, till
They are sure no puddles may
Lie in front, Miss Poppenjay.

Howard Pyle.




[Illustration: Profession & Practice. This full page poem has the saint
at the door of a thin man with empty purse, then at the door with the
man well fed and full purse, and finally the saint alone scratching his
head.]

PROFESSION & PRACTICE

Once, when Saint Swithin chanced to be
A-wandering in Hungary,
He, being hungered, cast around
To see if something might be found
To stay his stomach.

                     Near by stood
A little house, beside a wood,
Where dwelt a worthy man, but poor.
Thither he went, knocked at the door.
The good man came. Saint Swithin said,
"I prithee give a crust of bread
To ease my hunger."

                        "Brother," quoth
The good man, "I am sadly loath
To say" (here tears stood on his cheeks)
"I've had no bread for weeks and weeks,
Save what I've begged. Had I one bit,
I'd gladly give thee half of it."
  "How," said the Saint, "can one so good
Go lacking of his daily food,
Go lacking means to aid the poor,
Yet weep to turn them from his door?
Here--take this purse.  Mark what I say:
Thou'lt find within it every day
Two golden coins."

                     Years passed. Once more
Saint Swithin knocked upon the door.
The good man came.  He'd grown fat
And lusty, like a well-fed cat.
Thereat the Saint was pleased.  Quoth he,
"Give me a crust for charity."
  "A crust, thou say'st? Hut, tut! How now?
Wouldst come a-begging here? I trow,
Thou lazy rascal, thou couldst find
Enough of work hadst thou a mind!
'Tis thine own fault if thou art poor.
Begone, sir!" _Bang!_--he shut the door.

Saint Swithin slowly scratched his head.
"Well, I _am_--humph!--just so," he said.
"How very different the fact is
'Twixt the profession and the practice!"

HP




[Illustration: A Tale of a Tub. This full page illustrated poem shows
the man in the tub on the sea, dreaming of the roasted pig.]

A TALE OF A TUB

              1

You may bring to mind I've sung you a song,
  Of a man of Haarlem town.
I'll sing of another,--'t will not take long--,
  Of equally great renown.

              2

"I've read," said he, "there's a land afar,
  O'er the boundless rolling sea,
Where fat little pigs ready roasted are:
  Now, that is the land for me.

              3

Where tarts may be plucked from the wild tart tree,
  And puddings like pumpkins grow,
Where candies, like pebbles, lie by the sea,--
  Now, thither I'll straightway go."

              4

Now, what do you think I've heard it said
  Was his boat, his oar, his sail?
A tub, a spoon, and a handkerchief red,
  For to breast both calm and gale.

              5

So he sailed away, for a livelong day;
  And the sun was warm and mild,
And the small waves laughed as they seemed to play,
  And the sea-gulls clamored wild.

              6

So he sailed away, for a livelong day;
  Till the wind began to roar,
And the waves rose high, and, to briefly say,
  He never was heard of more.

H. PYLE.




[Illustration]

FARMER GRIGG'S BOGGART


Did you ever hear of a boggart? No! Then I will tell you. A boggart is a
small imp that lives in a man's house, unseen by any one, doing a little
good and much harm. This imp was called a boggart in the old times, now
we call such by other names--ill-temper, meanness, uncharitableness, and
the like. Even now, they say, you may find a boggart in some houses.
There is no placing reliance on a boggart; sometimes he may seem to be
of service to his master, but there is no telling when he may do him an
ill turn.

Rap! tap! tap! came a knock at the door.

The wind was piping Jack Frost's, for the time was winter, and it blew
from the north. The snow lay all over the ground, like soft feathers,
and the hay-ricks looked as though each one wore a dunce-cap, like the
dull boy in Dame Week's school over by the green. The icicles hung down
by the thatch, and the little birds crouched shivering in the bare and
leafless hedge-rows.

But inside the farm-house all was warm and pleasant; the great logs
snapped and crackled and roared in the wide chimney-place, throwing red
light up and down the walls, so that the dark night only looked in
through the latticed windows. Farmer Griggs sat warming his knees at
the blaze, smoking his pipe in great comfort, while his crock of ale,
with three roasted crab-apples bobbing about within it, warmed in the
hot ashes beside the blazing logs, simmering pleasantly in the ruddy
heat.

[Illustration: Farmer Georgie Griggs.]

Dame Griggs's spinning-wheel went humm-m-m! hum-m-m-m-m! like a whole
hiveful of bees, the cat purred in the warmth, the dog basked in the
blaze, and little red sparks danced about the dishes standing all along
in a row on the dresser.

But, rap! tap! tap! came a knock at the door.

Then Farmer Griggs took his pipe from out his mouth. "Did'ee hear un,
dame?" said he. "Zooks now, there be somebody outside the door."

"Well then, thou gert oaf, why don't 'ee let un in?" said Dame Griggs.

"Look'ee now," said Georgie Griggs to himself, "sure women be of quicker
wits than men!" So he opened the door. Whoo! In rushed the wind, and the
blaze of the logs made as though it would leap up the chimney for fear.

"Will you let me in out of the cold, Georgie Griggs?" piped a small
voice. Farmer Griggs looked down and saw a little wight no taller than
his knee standing in the snow on the door-step. His face was as brown as
a berry, and he looked up at the farmer with great eyes as bright as
those of a toad. The red light of the fire shone on him, and Georgie
Griggs saw that his feet were bare and that he wore no coat.

"Who be 'ee, little man?" said Farmer Griggs.

"I'm a boggart, at your service."

"Na, na," said Farmer Griggs, "thee's at na sarvice o'mine. I'll give na
room in my house to the likes o' thee"; and he made as though he would
have shut the door in the face of the little urchin.

"But listen, Georgie Griggs," said the boggart; "I will do you a good
service."

Then Farmer Griggs did listen. "What sarvice will'ee do me, then?" said
he.

[Illustration: Dame Mally Griggs.]

"I'll tend your fires," said the manikin, "I'll bake your bread, I'll
wash your dishes, I'll scour your pans, I'll scrub your floors, I'll
brew your beer, I'll roast your meat, I'll boil your water, I'll stuff
your sausages, I'll skim your milk, I'll make your butter, I'll press
your cheese, I'll pluck your geese, I'll spin your thread, I'll knit
your stockings, I'll mend your clothes, I'll patch your shoes--I'll be
everywhere and do all of the work in your house, so that you will not
have to give so much as a groat for wages to cook, scullion, or serving
wench!"

[Illustration: Farmer Griggs and the Boggart.]

Then Farmer Griggs listened a little longer without shutting the door,
and so did Dame Griggs. "What's thy name, boggart?" said he.

"Hardfist," said the boggart; and he came a little farther in at the
door, for he saw that Farmer Griggs had a mind to let him in all of the
way.

"I don't know," said Georgie Griggs, scratching his head doubtfully;
"it's an ill thing, lettin' mischief intull the house! Thee's better
outside, I doubt."

"Shut the door, Georgie!" called out Dame Griggs; "thou'rt lettin' th'
cold air intull th' room."

Then Farmer Griggs shut the door, but the boggart was on the inside.

This is the way in which the boggart came into Farmer Griggs's house,
and there he was to stay, for it is no such easy matter getting rid of
the likes of him when we once let him in, I can tell you.

The boggart came straightway over to the warm fire, and the dog
growled--"chur-r-r-r!"--and showed his teeth, and the cat spit anger and
jumped up on the dresser, with her back arched and her tail on end. But
the boggart cared never a whit for this, but laid himself comfortably
down among the warm ashes.

Now imps, like this boggart, can only be seen as the frost is seen--when
it is cold. So as he grew warmer and warmer, he grew thin, like a
jelly-fish, and at last, when he had become thoroughly warmed through,
Farmer Griggs and the dame could see him no more than though he was thin
air. But he was in the house, and he stayed there, I can tell you. For a
time everything went as smooth as cream; all of the work of the house
was done as though by magic, for the boggart did all that he had
promised; he made the fires, he baked the bread, he washed the dishes,
he scoured the pans, he scrubbed the floors, he brewed the beer, he
roasted the meat, he stuffed the sausages, he skimmed the milk, he made
the butter, he pressed the cheese, he plucked the geese, he spun the
thread, he knit the stockings, he mended the clothes, he patched the
shoes--he was everywhere and did all of the work of the house. When
Farmer Griggs saw these things done, and so deftly, he rubbed his hands
and chuckled to himself. He sent cook and scullion and serving maid
a-packing, there being nothing for them to do, for, as I said, all of
these things were done as smooth as cream. But after a time, and when
the boggart's place had become easy to him, like an old shoe, mischief
began to play the pipes and he began to show his pranks. The first thing
that he did was to scrape the farmer's butter, so that it was light of
weight, and all of the people of the market town hooted at him for
giving less than he sold. Then he skimmed the children's milk, so that
they had nothing but poor watery stuff to pour over their pottage of a
morning. He took the milk from the cat, so that it was like to starve;
he even pilfered the bones and scrapings of the dishes from the poor
house-dog, as though he was a very magpie. He blew out the rush-lights,
so that they were all in the dark after sunset; he made the fires burn
cold, and played a hundred and forty other impish tricks of the like
kind. As for the poor little children, they were always crying and
complaining that the boggart did this and the boggart did that; that he
scraped the butter from their bread and pulled the coverlids off of them
at night.

Still the boggart did his work well, and so Farmer Griggs put up with
his evil ways as long as he could. At last the time came when he could
bear it no longer. "Look'ee, now, Mally," said he to his dame, "it's all
along o' thee that this trouble's coome intull th' house. I'd never let
the boggart in with my own good-will!" So spoke Farmer Griggs, for even
nowadays there are men here and there who will now and then lay their
own bundle of faults on their wives' shoulders.

"I bade thee do naught but shut the door!" answered Dame Griggs.

"Ay; it's easy enough to shut the door after the trouble's come in!"

"Then turn it out again!"

"Turn un out! Odds bodkins, that's woman's wit! Dost'ee not see that
there's no turnin' o' un out? Na, na; there's naught to do but to go out
ourselves!"

Yes; there was nothing else to be done. Go they must, if they would be
rid of the boggart. So one fine bright day in the blessed spring-time,
they packed all of their belongings into a great wain, or cart, and set
off to find a new home.

Oft they trudged, just as you see in the picture, the three little
children seated high up in the wain, and the farmer and the dame
plodding ahead.

[Illustration: THE DEPARTURE.]

[Illustration: Farmer Griggs and the Wise Man.]

Now, as they came to the bottom of Shooter's Hill, whom should they meet
but their good neighbor and gossip, Jerry Jinks. "So, Georgie," said he,
"you're leavin' th' ould house at last?"

"High, Jerry," quoth Georgie. "We were forced tull it, neighbor, for
that black boggart torments us so that there was no rest night or day
for it. The poor bairns' stomachs are empty, and the good dame's nigh
dead for it. So off we go, like th' field-fares in the autumn--we're
flittin', we're flittin'!"

Now on the wain was a tall, upright churn; as soon as Georgie had ended
his speech, the lid of the churn began to clipper-clapper, and who
should speak out of it but the boggart himself. "Ay, Jerry!" said he,
"we're a flittin', we're a flittin', man! Good-day to ye, neighbor,
good-day to ye! Come and see us soon time!"

"High!" cried Georgie Griggs, "art thou there, thou black imp? Dang un!
We'll all go back tull th' old house, for sure it's better to bear
trouble there than in a new place."

So back they went again--boggart and all.

By this you may see, my dear, if you warm an imp by your fire, he will
soon turn the whole house topsy-turvy. Likewise, one cannot get rid of a
boggart by going from here to there, for it is sure to be in the cart
with the household things.

But how did Georgie Griggs get rid of his boggart? That I will tell you.

He went to Father Grimes, the wise man, who lived on in a little house
on the moor. "Father Grimes," said he, "how shall I get rid of my
boggart?"

Then Father Grimes told him to take this and that, and to do thus and so
with them, and see what followed. So Farmer Griggs went to Hugh the
tailor's, and told him to make a pretty red coat and a neat pair of blue
breeches. Then he went to William the hatter's, and bade him to make a
nice little velvet cap with a bell at the top of it. Then he went to
Thomas the shoemaker's, and bade him to make a fine little pair of
shoes. So they all did as he told them, and after these things were
made he took them home with him. He laid them on a warm spot on the
hearth where the boggart used to come to sleep at night. Then he and his
dame hid in the closet to see what would follow.

Presently came the boggart, whisking here and dancing there, though
neither the farmer nor the dame could see him any more than though he
had been a puff of wind.

"Heigh-ho!" cried the boggart, "these be fine things for sure." So
saying, he tried the hat upon his head, and it fitted exactly. Then he
tried the coat on his shoulders, and it fitted like wax. Then he tried
the breeches on his legs, and they fitted as though they grew there.
Then he tried the shoes on his feet, and there never was such a fit. So
he was clad in all his new clothes from top to toe, whereupon he began
dancing until he made the ashes on the hearth spin around with him as
though they had gone mad, and, as he danced, he sang:

"Cap for the head, alas poor head!
 Coat for the back, alas poor back!
 Breeks for the legs, alas poor legs!
 Shoen for the feet, alas poor feet!
 If these be mine, mine cannot be
 The house of honest man, Georgie!"

So he went singing and dancing, and skipping and leaping, out of the
house and away. As for Georgie Griggs and his dame, they never heard a
squeak from him afterwards.

Thus it was that Farmer Griggs got rid of his boggart. All I can say is,
that if I could get rid of mine as easily (for I have one in my own
house), I would make him a suit of clothes of the finest silks and
satins, and would hang a bell of pure silver on the point of his cap.
But, alackaday! there are no more wise men left to us, like good Father
Grimes, to tell one an easy way to get rid of one's boggart.

[Illustration: The Boggart Rejoices]




[Illustration: YE STORY OF A BLUE CHINA PLATE. This illustrated page
depicts the father seeing the man sing to his daughter, the father
chasing them with a whip, and then the two flying away from his as
birds.]

YE STORY OF A BLUE CHINA PLATE.

  There was a Cochin Chinaman,
    Whose name it was Ah-Lee
  And the same was just as fine a man
    As you could wish to see,
      For he was rich and strong,
      And his queue was extra long,
And he lived on rice and fish and chiccory.

  Which he had a lovely daughter,
    And her name was Mai-Ri-An,
  And the youthful Wang who sought her
    Hand was but a poor young man;
    So her haughty father said,
    "You shall never, never wed
Such a pauper as this penniless young man!"

  So the daughter and her lover,
    They eloped one summer day,
  Which Ah-Lee he did discover,
    And pursued without delay;
      But the Goddess Loo, I've heard,
      Changed each lover to a bird,
And from the bad Ah-Lee they flew away.

  Ah me! Ah-Lee; the chance is,
    That we all of us may know
  Of unpleasant circumstances
    We would like to stay, but oh!
      The inevitable things
      Will take unto them wings,
And will fly where we may never hope to go.
      I would further like to state,
      That the tale which I relate,
      You can see on any plate
That was made in Cochin China years ago.




[Illustration: Moral Blindness. This illustrated poem depicts the two
woman fighting, people plugging their ears near the goose, and running
away from the goat.]

MORAL BLINDNESS

There was an old woman, as I've heard say,
    Who owned but a single goose.
And the dame lived over toward Truxton way,
    And the animal ran at loose.
  It cackled up and it cackled down,
  Disturbing the peace of all the town:
  Gentle and simple, knight and clown,
    From the dawn to the close of the day.

Another old woman, of not much note,
    Lived over toward Truxton way,
Who owned a goat with a shaggy black coat,
    As I've heard the neighbours say.
  And it was the fear of one and all;
  Butting the great, butting the small,--
  No matter whom,--who happened to fall
    In the way of this evil goat.

Said the first old woman, "This ugly goat
    Should never thus run at loose."
Said the second, "I wish they'd cut the throat
    Of that noisy cackling goose."
  And so it happened when e'er that they
  Would meet each other upon the way
  They'd bicker and hicker the livelong day
    In the key of a scolding note.

But all the neighbours, great and small,
  Complained of both with grievous tone.
From which I gather that we all
  See other's faults and not our own.

H. PYLE




[Illustration: OVERCONFIDENCE. This illustrated poem shows the people
gazing upon the peacock, and later running away covering their ears.]

OVERCONFIDENCE

A peacock sat on ye garden wall
(See picture here to ye right),
An ye folk came crowding-great and small
For it chanced that none in ye town at all
    Had ever seen such a sight
If you'd have been there perhaps you'd have heard
Ye folk talk thus, as they looked at ye bird:

      "O crickety!--Law!--
       O jimmeny me!--
       I never yet saw!--
       Who ever did see
Such a beautiful sight in the world before,
Since ye animals marched from ye old ark door?
       O! Look at ye spots
       In his tail! And ye lots
Of green and of blue in his beautiful wings!
I'd give a new shilling to know if he sings!"

Ye peacock says, "Surely, they'll greatly rejoice
To hear but a touch of my delicate voice."
                                  (_Sings._)

      "O dear! O dear!--
       O stop it!--O do!--
       We never did hear
       Such a hullballoo!
'Tis worse than ye noise that ye carpenters make
When they sharpen their saws!--Now, for charity's sake,
       Give over this squalling,
       And catermawalling!"
Cried all ye good people who chanced to be near;
Each thrusting a finger-tip into each ear.

  You see ye poor dunce had attempted to shine
  In a way that was out of his natural line.

H. Pyle.




[Illustration: THE FORCE OF NEED. This page has the poem on one side,
with the lady gazing up into the tree with the robin, and the lady warm
in a house and robin outside in the snow at the bottom of the page.]

THE FORCE OF NEED

"Hey, Robin! ho, Robin!
  Singing on the tree,
I will give you white bread,
  If you will come to me."

"Oh! the little breeze is singing
  To the nodding dairies white,
And the tender grass is springing,
  And the sun is warm and bright;
And my little mate is waiting
  In the budding hedge for me;
So, on the whole, I'll not accept
  Your kindly courtesy."

"Hey, Robin! ho, Robin!
  Now the north winds blow
Wherefore do you come here,
  In the ice and snow?"

"The wind is raw, the flowers are dead,
  The frost is on the thorn,
So I'll gladly take a crust of bread,
  And come where it is warm."

Oh, Children! little Children!
  Have _you_ ever chanced to see
One beg for crust that sneered at crumb
  In bright prosperity?

HP




[Illustration]

THE BIRD IN THE LINDEN TREE


Once there was a prince, and his name was John. One day his father said
to him, "See, John; I am growing old, and after a while the time will
come when I must go the way of everybody else. Now I would like to see
you married before I leave you."

"Very well," said the Prince, for he always answered the King in seemly
fashion; "and who shall it be?"

"Why not the Princess of the White Mountain?" said the old King.

"Why not, indeed?" said the young Prince, "only she is too short."

"Why not the Princess of the Blue Mountain?" said the old King.

"Why not, indeed?" said the young Prince, "only she is too tall."

"Why not the Princess of the Red Mountain?" said the old King.

"Why not, indeed?" said the young Prince, "only she is too dark."

"Then whom will you have?" said the old King.

"That I do not know," said the young Prince, "only this: that her brow
shall be as white as milk, and her cheeks shall be as red as blood, and
her eyes shall be as blue as the skies, and her hair shall be like spun
gold."

"Then go and find her!" said the old King, in a huff, for his temper was
as short as chopped flax. "And don't come back again till you've found
her!" he bawled after the Prince as he went out to the door.

So the Prince went out into the wide world to find such a maiden as he
spoke of--whose brow was as white as milk, whose cheeks were as red as
blood, whose eyes were as blue as the skies, and whose hair was like
spun gold--and he would have to travel a long distance to find such a
one nowadays, would he not?

So off he went, tramp! tramp! tramp! till his shoes were dusty and his
clothes were gray. Nothing was in his wallet but a lump of brown bread
and a cold sausage, for he had gone out into the world in haste, as many
a one has done before and since his day.

So he went along, tramp! tramp! tramp! and by-and-by he came to a place
where three roads met, and there sat an old woman.

"Hui! hui! but I am hungry!" said the old woman.

Now the Prince was a good-hearted fellow, so he said to the old woman,
"It is little I have, but such as it is you are welcome to it."
Thereupon he gave the old woman the lump of brown bread and the cold
sausage that was in his wallet, and the old woman ate it up at a bite.

"Hui! hui! but I am cold!" said she.

"It is little that I have, but such as it is you are welcome to it,"
said the Prince, and he gave the old woman the dusty coat off his back.
After that he had nothing more to give her.

[Illustration: Ye King Prince John]

"One does not give something for nothing," said the old woman, so she
began fumbling about in her pocket until she found an old rusty key. And
the best part of the key was, that whenever one looked through the ring
of it, one saw everything just as it really was and not as it seemed to
be.

Who would not give his dinner and the coat off his back for such a key?

After that the Prince stepped out again, right foot foremost, tramp!
tramp! tramp! until evening had come, and he felt as hungry as one is
like to do when one goes without one's dinner. At last he came to a dark
forest, and to a gray castle that stood just in the middle of it. This
castle belonged to a great, ugly troll, though the Prince knew nothing
of that.

"Now I shall have something to eat," said he, and he opened the door of
the castle and went in.

Only one person was within, and that was a maiden; but she was as black
from head to foot as Fritz the charcoal burner. The Prince had never
seen the like of her in all of his life before, so he drew the rusty key
out of his pocket and took a peep at her through the ring of it, to see
what manner of body she really was.

Then he saw that she was no longer black and ugly, but as beautiful as a
ripe apple; for her forehead was as white as milk, her cheeks were as
red as blood, her eyes were as blue as the skies, and her hair was like
spun gold. Moreover, any one could see with half an eye that she was a
real princess, for she wore a gold crown on her head, such as real
princesses are never without.

"You are the one whom I seek," said the Prince.

"Yes, I am the one you seek," said she.

"And how can I free you from your enchantment?" said he.

"If you will abide here three nights, and will bear all that shall
happen to you without a word, then I shall be free," said she.

"Oh yes, I will do that," said the Prince.

After that the black Princess set a good supper before him, and the
Prince ate like three men.

By-and-by there was a huge noise, and the door opened and in came an
ugly troll with a head as big as a bucket. He rolled his great saucer
eyes around till he saw the Prince where he sat beside the fire.

[Illustration: The Prince aids the Old Woman]

"Black cats and spotted toads!" bellowed he, "what are you doing here?"

But to this the Prince answered never a word.

"We shall see whether or no there is sound in you!" roared the troll.
Thereupon he caught the Prince by the hair and dragged him out into the
middle of the room. Then he snatched up a great cudgel and began beating
the Prince as though he were a sack of barley-flour; but the Prince said
never a word. At last the troll had to give over beating him, for the
morning had come and the troll was afraid the sun would catch him; and
if that were to happen, he would swell up and burst with a great noise.
"We shall see whether you will come again!" said he, and then he left
the Prince lying on the floor more dead than alive; and if anybody was
sore in all of the world, the Prince was that man.

After the troll had left the house, the black Princess came and wept
over the Prince; and when her tears fell on him, pain and bruise left
him, and he was as whole as ever. When he looked he saw that the black
Princess's feet were as white as silver.

The next night the troll came again, and with him two others. "Black
cats and spotted toads!" bellowed he, "are you here again?" Then he
caught the Prince by the hair and dragged him out into the middle of the
floor, and all three of the trolls fell upon the Prince and beat him
with clubs, as though he had been a sack of barley-flour. But the Prince
bore this too without a word. At last the morning came, and they had to
give over beating him. "We shall see if you will come again," said the
troll of the house.

After the trolls had gone, the black Princess came and wept over the
Prince as she had done before, and when her tears fell on him he was
made whole again. And now the hands of the black Princess were as white
as silver.

[Illustration: THE GREAT UGLY TROLL FINDS THE PRINCE BY THE FIRE]

The third night the troll of the house came, and brought with him six
others. Then the same thing happened as before, and they beat the Prince
with great cudgels as thick as my thumb. At last the morning came, and
they went away bellowing and howling, for their enchantment had gone. As
for the Prince, he lay upon the floor more dead than alive, for he could
neither see nor hear anything that happened about him.

Then the Princess came for the third time and wept over him, and he was
whole and sound again. As for the Princess, she stood before him, and
now her brow was as white as milk, and her cheeks were as red as blood,
and her eyes were as blue as the skies, and her hair was like spun gold.
But the beautiful Princess had little or nothing upon her, so the Prince
wrapped her in a ram's skin that was in the troll's house. Then he
turned his toes the way he had come, and started away for home, taking
her along with him.

So they went along and along till they had come so near to the King's
house that they could see the high roofs and the weathercocks over the
crest of the next hill. There the Prince bade the Princess to wait for
him till he went home and brought her a dress of real silver and gold,
such as was fitting for her to wear. Then he left her, and the Princess
sat down beside the roadside to wait until he should come again.

Now as the Princess sat there, there came along the old goose-herd of
the palace, and with her came her daughter; for they were driving the
royal geese home again from where they had been eating grass. When they
saw the beautiful Princess, clad in her ram's hide, they stared as
though they would never shut their eyes again. Then they wanted to know
all about her--who she was, and where she came from, and what she sat
there for. So the Princess told them all that they wanted to know, and
that she waited there for the Prince to come with a dress all of silver
and gold, which would suit her better than the old ram's hide which she
wore.

Then the old goose-woman thought that it would be a fine thing to have
her daughter in the Princess's place, so that she might have the dress
of real silver and gold, and marry the Prince. So the goose-herd's
daughter held the Princess, and the old goose-herd stripped the ram's
hide off from her.

No sooner had they done this than the Princess was changed into a
beautiful golden bird, and flew away over hill and over valley. Then the
goose-herd's daughter clad herself in the ram's hide, and sat down in
the Princess's place.

[Illustration: The Gooseherd & her Daughter meet the Princess at the
Roadside]

"Yes, my pretty little bird," said the old goose-herd, "thou wilt make a
fine Princess!" But, prut! she was no more like a Princess than I am,
for she was squat, and round-shouldered, and had hair of the color of
tow.

Then the old goose-herd drove her geese away, and the goose-girl waited
for the coming of the Prince.

Sure enough, after a while the Prince came with a fine dress, all of
real silver and gold; but when he saw the goose-girl he beat his head
with his knuckles, for he thought that it was the Princess, and that she
was enchanted again.

Why did he not look through the ring of his magic key?

Perhaps for this, perhaps for that--one cannot be always wise.

[Illustration: The Prince looks through the Magic Key.]

Then the Prince dressed the goose-girl in the fine dress of gold and
silver, and took her home with him. Hui! how everybody stared and
laughed when they saw what kind of a Princess it was that the Prince
brought home with him! As for the poor old King, he rubbed his
spectacles and looked and looked, for he thought that this was a strange
sort of a wife for the Prince to make such a buzz about. However, he
said nothing, for he thought to himself that perhaps she would grow
prettier by-and-by.

So orders were given for a grand wedding on Thursday, and the old King
asked all of the neighbors to come, and even those who lived at a
distance, for this was to be a very grand wedding indeed.

But the old goose-herd told her daughter to mix a sleeping powder with
the Prince's wine at supper, for, if the real Princess were to come at
all, she would come that night. So the goose-girl did as she was told,
and the Prince drank the sleeping powder with his wine, and knew nothing
of it.

That night the golden bird came flying, and sat in the linden tree just
outside of the Prince's chamber window. Then she clapped her wings and
sang:

"I wept over you once,
 I wept over you twice,
 I wept over you three times.
 In the ram's skin I waited,
 And out of the ram's skin I flew.
   Why are you sleeping,
   Life of my life?"

But the Prince slept as sound as a dormouse, and when the dawn came and
the cocks crew the golden bird was forced to fly away.

The next night the false Princess did as she had done before, and mixed
a sleeping powder with the Prince's cup of wine.

That night the golden bird came again, and perched in the linden tree
outside of the Prince's window, and sang:

"I wept over you once,
 I wept over you twice,
 I wept over you three times.
 In the ram's skin I waited,
 And out of the ram's skin I flew.
   Why are you sleeping,
   Life of my life?"

But once more the Prince slept through it all, and when morning had come
the golden bird was forced to fly away.

Now it chanced that that night some of the folk of the King's household
heard the bird singing, and they told the Prince all about it. So when
the third night came, and the false Princess gave the Prince the cup of
wine with the sleeping powder in it, he threw the wine over his
shoulder, and never touched so much as a drop of it.

That night the bird came for the third time, and sang as it had done
before.

But this time the Prince was not sleeping. He jumped out of his bed and
ran to the window, and there he saw the bird, and its feathers shone
like fire because they were of pure gold. Then he got his magic key and
looked through the ring of it, and whom should he see but his own
Princess sitting in the linden tree.

Then the Prince called to her, "What shall I do to set you free from
this enchantment?"

"Throw your knife over me," said the Princess.

No sooner said than done. The Prince threw his knife over her, and
there she stood in her own true shape. Then the Prince took her to the
King, and when the King saw how pretty she was, he skipped and danced
till his slippers flew about his ears.

The next morning the old King went to the false Princess, and said,
"What should be done to one who would do thus and so?"

[Illustration: The Old King Rejoices at His New Daughter-in-Law.]

To this the false Princess answered, as bold as brass, "Such a one
should be thrown into a pit full of toads and snakes."

"You have spoken for yourself," said the King; and he would have done
just so to her had not the true Princess begged for her so that she was
sent back again to tend the geese, for that was what she was fit for.

Then they had the grandest wedding that ever was seen in all of the
world. Everybody was asked, and there was enough for all to eat as much
as they chose, and to take a little something home to the children
beside. If I had been there I would have brought you something.

What is the meaning of all this?
Listen, I will tell you something.
Once there was a man, and he winnowed a whole
peck of chaff, and got only three good solid grains from
it, and yet he was glad to have so much.
Would you winnow a whole peck of chaff for only
three good grains? No? Then you will never know
all that is meant by this story.




[Illustration: A Disappointment. This illustrated poem has the two
talking to each other by a road.]

A DISAPPOINTMENT

    _He_
"I prithee, tell me wh're you live?
  Oh Maid, so sweet and rare!"
    _She_
"I am ye miller's daughter, sir,
  And live just over th're"
    _He_
"Of all ye Maids I ever saw,
  You are beyond compare."
    _She_
"Oh; Thank you, sir! Oh; thank you, sir!
  Your words are very fair."
    _He_
"So I w'ld ask you something, now;
  If I might only dare."
    _She_
"Now, you may ask me wh't you please,
  For anything I care."
    _He_
"Then will you marry me? For we.
  W'ld make a goodly pair."
    _She_
"I thank you sir; your offer, it
  Is most extremely rare.
But as I am already wed,
  You'r late, sir, for ye Fair."

At th's ye Bachelor walked away,
And talked to himself of th' Lass so gay--
"Her hair is very decidedly red;
And her eyes have somewhat of a cast in her head;
And her feet are large, and her hands are coarse;
And, without I'm mistaken, her voice is hoarse.
'Tis a bargain of wh'ch I am very well rid;
I am glad, on ye whole, I escaped as I did."

Howard Pyle




[Illustration: Ye sad story concerning one innocent little _Lamb_ and
four wicked _Wolves._ The illustrations show small insets of the lamb
dancing, the four wolves sitting and watching the lamb dance, and
finally a group of lambs looking at its tail as the wolves run away.]

YE SAD STORY CONCERNING ON INNOCENT LITTLE _LAMB_ AND FOUR WICKED
_WOLVES_

A little lamb was gamboling,
    Upon a pleasant day,
And four grey wolves came shambling,
    And stopped to see it play
      In the sun.
  Said the lamb, "Perhaps I may
  Charm these creatures with my play,
  And they'll let me go away,
      When I've done."

The wolves, they sat asmiling at
    The playful thing, to see
How exceedingly beguiling that
    Its pretty play could be.
      See it hop!
  But its strength began to wane,
  Though it gamboled on in pain,
  Till it finally was fain,
      For to stop.

Oh! then there was a munching,
    Of that tender little thing,
And a crunching and a scrunching,
    As you'ld munch a chicken wing.
      No avail
  Was its cunning, merry play
  For the only thing, they say,
  That was left of it that day,
      Was its tail.
  So with me; when I am done,
  And the critics have begun,
  All they'll leave me of my fun
      'Ll be the tale.

H Pyle




[Illustration]

THE APPLE OF CONTENTMENT


There was a woman once, and she had three daughters. The first daughter
squinted with both eyes, yet the woman loved her as she loved salt, for
she herself squinted with both eyes. The second daughter had one
shoulder higher than the other, and eyebrows as black as soot in the
chimney, yet the woman loved her as well as she loved the other, for she
herself had black eyebrows and one shoulder higher than the other. The
youngest daughter was as pretty as a ripe apple, and had hair as fine as
silk and the color of pure gold, but the woman loved her not at all,
for, as I have said, she herself was neither pretty, nor had she hair of
the color of pure gold. Why all this was so, even Hans Pfifendrummel
cannot tell, though he has read many books and one over.

The first sister and the second sister dressed in their Sunday clothes
every day, and sat in the sun doing nothing, just as though they had
been born ladies, both of them.

As for Christine--that was the name of the youngest girl--as for
Christine, she dressed in nothing but rags, and had to drive the geese
to the hills in the morning and home again in the evening, so that they
might feed on the young grass all day and grow fat.

The first sister and the second sister had white bread (and butter
beside) and as much fresh milk as they could drink; but Christine had to
eat cheese-parings and bread-crusts, and had hardly enough of them to
keep Goodman Hunger from whispering in her ear.

This was how the churn clacked in that house!

Well, one morning Christine started off to the hills with her flock of
geese, and in her hands she carried her knitting, at which she worked to
save time. So she went along the dusty road until, by-and-by, she came
to a place where a bridge crossed the brook, and what should she see
there but a little red cap, with a silver bell at the point of it,
hanging from the alder branch. It was such a nice, pretty little red cap
that Christine thought that she would take it home with her, for she had
never seen the like of it in all of her life before.

So she put it in her pocket, and then off she went with her geese again.
But she had hardly gone two-score of paces when she heard a voice
calling her, "Christine! Christine!"

She looked, and who should she see but a queer little gray man, with a
great head as big as a cabbage and little legs as thin as young
radishes.

"What do you want?" said Christine, when the little man had come to
where she was.

Oh, the little man only wanted his cap again, for without it he could
not go back home into the hill--that was where he belonged.

But how did the cap come to be hanging from the bush? Yes, Christine
would like to know that before she gave it back again.

[Illustration: The little man asks far his cap.]

Well, the little hill-man was fishing by the brook over yonder when a
puff of wind blew his cap into the water, and he just hung it up to dry.
That was all that there was about it; and now would Christine please
give it to him?

Christine did not know how about that; perhaps she would and perhaps she
would not. It was a nice, pretty little cap; what would the little
underground man give her for it? that was the question.

Oh, the little man would give her five thalers for it, and gladly.

No; five thalers was not enough for such a pretty little cap--see, there
was a silver bell hanging to it too.

Well, the little man did not want to be hard at a bargain; he would give
her a hundred thalers for it.

No; Christine did not care for money. What else would he give for this
nice, dear little cap?

"See, Christine," said the little man, "I will give you this for the
cap"; and he showed her something in his hand that looked just like a
bean, only it was as black as a lump of coal.

"Yes, good; but what is that?" said Christine.

"That," said the little man, "is a seed from the apple of contentment.
Plant it, and from it will grow a tree, and from the tree an apple.
Everybody in the world that sees the apple will long for it, but nobody
in the world can pluck it but you. It will always be meat and drink to
you when you are hungry, and warm clothes to your back when you are
cold. Moreover, as soon as you pluck it from the tree, another as good
will grow in its place. _Now_, will you give me my hat?"

Oh yes; Christine would give the little man his cap for such a seed as
that, and gladly enough. So the little man gave Christine the seed, and
Christine gave the little man his cap again. He put the cap on his head,
and--puff!--away he was gone, as suddenly as the light of a candle when
you blow it out.

So Christine took the seed home with her, and planted it before the
window of her room. The next morning when she looked out of the window
she beheld a beautiful tree, and on the tree hung an apple that shone
in the sun as though it were pure gold. Then she went to the tree and
plucked the apple as easily as though it were a gooseberry, and as soon
as she had plucked it another as good grew in its place. Being hungry
she ate it, and thought that she had never eaten anything as good, for
it tasted like pancake with honey and milk.

[Illustration: Christine and the Apple]

By-and-by the oldest sister came out of the house and looked around, but
when she saw the beautiful tree with the golden apple hanging from it
you can guess how she stared.

Presently she began to long and long for the apple as she had never
longed for anything in her life. "I will just pluck it," said she, "and
no one will be the wiser for it." But that was easier said than done.
She reached and reached, but she might as well have reached for the
moon; she climbed and climbed, but she might as well have climbed for
the sun--for either one would have been as easy to get as that which she
wanted. At last she had to give up trying for it, and her temper was
none the sweeter for that, you may be sure.

[Illustration: Christine's Mother and Sisters wish for the Apple.]

After a while came the second sister, and when she saw the golden apple
she wanted it just as much as the first had done. But to want and to get
are very different things, as she soon found, for she was no more able
to get it than the other had been.

Last of all came the mother, and she also strove to pluck the apple. But
it was no use. She had no more luck of her trying than her daughters;
all that the three could do was to stand under the tree and look at the
apple, and wish for it and wish for it.

They are not the only ones who have done the like, with the apple of
contentment hanging just above them.

As for Christine, she had nothing to do but to pluck an apple whenever
she wanted it. Was she hungry? there was the apple hanging in the tree
for her. Was she thirsty? there was the apple. Cold? there was the
apple. So you see, she was the happiest girl betwixt all the seven hills
that stand at the ends of the earth; for nobody in the world can have
more than contentment, and that was what the apple brought her.


II

One day a king came riding along the road, and all of his people with
him. He looked up and saw the apple hanging in the tree, and a great
desire came upon him to have a taste of it. So he called one of the
servants to him, and told him to go and ask whether it could be bought
for a potful of gold.

So the servant went to the house, and knocked on the door--rap! tap!
tap!

"What do you want?" said the mother of the three sisters, coming to the
door.

Oh, nothing much; only a king was out there in the road, and wanted to
know if she would sell the apple yonder for a potful of gold.

Yes, the woman would do that. Just pay her the pot of gold and he might
go and pluck it and welcome.

So the servant gave her the pot of gold, and then he tried to pluck the
apple. First he reached for it, and then he climbed for it, and then he
shook the limb.

But it was no use for him to try; he could no more get it--well--than
_I_ could if I had been in his place.

At last the servant had to go back to the King. The apple was there, he
said, and the woman had sold it, but try and try as he would he could no
more get it than he could get the little stars in the sky.

Then the King told the steward to go and get it for him; but the
steward, though he was a tall man and a strong man, could no more pluck
the apple than the servant.

[Illustration: The King reaches for the Apple]

So he had to go back to the King with an empty fist. No; he could not
gather it, either.

Then the King himself went. He knew that he could pluck it--of course he
could! Well, he tried and tried; but nothing came of his trying, and he
had to ride away at last without, having had so much as a smell of the
apple.

After the King came home, he talked and dreamed and thought of nothing
but the apple; for the more he could not get it the more he wanted
it--that is the way we are made in this world. At last he grew
melancholy and sick for want of that which he could not get. Then he
sent for one who was so wise that he had more in his head than ten men
together. This wise man told him that the only one who could pluck the
fruit of contentment for him was the one to whom the tree belonged.
This was one of the daughters of the woman who had sold the apple to him
for the pot of gold.

When the King heard this he was very glad; he had his horse saddled, and
he and his court rode away, and so came at last to the cottage where
Christine lived. There they found the mother and the elder sisters, for
Christine was away on the hills with her geese.

The King took off his hat and made a fine bow.

The wise man at home had told him this and that; now to which one of her
daughters did the apple-tree belong? so said the King.

"Oh, it is my oldest daughter who owns the tree," said the woman.

So, good! Then if the oldest daughter would pluck the apple for him he
would take her home and marry her and make a queen of her. Only let her
get it for him without delay.

Prut! that would never do. What! was the girl to climb the apple-tree
before the King and all of the court? No! no! Let the King go home, and
she would bring the apple to him all in good time; that was what the
woman said.

Well, the King would do that, only let her make haste, for he wanted it
very much indeed.

As soon as the King had gone, the woman and her daughters sent for the
goose-girl to the hills. Then they told her that the King wanted the
apple yonder, and that she must pluck it for her sister to take to him;
if she did not do as they said they would throw her into the well. So
Christine had to pluck the fruit; and as soon as she had done so the
oldest sister wrapped it up in a napkin and set off with it to the
King's house, as pleased as pleased could be. Rap! tap! tap! she knocked
at the door. Had she brought the apple for the King?

Oh yes, she had brought it. Here it was, all wrapped up in a fine
napkin.

[Illustration: The King talks with the Wise Man:]

After that they did not let her stand outside the door till her toes
were cold, I can tell you. As soon as she had come to the King she
opened her napkin. Believe me or not as you please, all the same, I tell
you that there was nothing in the napkin but a hard round stone. When
the King saw only a stone he was so angry that he stamped like a rabbit
and told them to put the girl out of the house. So they did, and she
went home with a flea in her ear, I can tell you.

Then the King sent his steward to the house where Christine and her
sisters lived.

He told the woman that he had come to find whether she had any other
daughters.

[Illustration: The Kings Steward and Christine.]

Yes; the woman had another daughter, and, to tell the truth, it was she
who owned the tree. Just let the steward go home again and the girl
would fetch the apple in a little while.

As soon as the steward had gone, they sent to the hills for Christine
again. Look! she must pluck the apple for the second sister to take to
the King; if she did not do that they would throw her into the well.

So Christine had to pluck it, and gave it to the second sister, who
wrapped it up in a napkin and set off for the King's house. But she
fared no better than the other, for, when she opened the napkin, there
was nothing in it but a lump of mud. So they packed her home again with
her apron to her eyes.

[Illustration: Christine gives the Apple to the King]

After a while the King's steward came to the house again. Had the woman
no other daughter than these two?

Well, yes, there was one, but she was a poor ragged thing, of no
account, and fit for nothing in the world but to tend the geese.

Where was she?

Oh, she was up on the hills now tending her flock.

But could the steward see her?

Yes, he might see her, but she was nothing but a poor simpleton.

That was all very good, but the steward would like to see her, for that
was what the King had sent him there for.

So there was nothing to do but to send to the hills for Christine.

After a while she came, and the steward asked her if she could pluck the
apple yonder for the King.

Yes; Christine could do that easily enough. So she reached and picked it
as though it had been nothing but a gooseberry on the bush. Then the
steward took off his hat and made her a low bow in spite of her ragged
dress, for he saw that she was the one for whom they had been looking
all this time.

So Christine slipped the golden apple into her pocket, and then she and
the steward set off to the King's house together.

When they had come there everybody began to titter and laugh behind the
palms of their hands to see what a poor ragged goose-girl the steward
had brought home with him. But for that the steward cared not a rap.

"Have you brought the apple?" said the King, as soon as Christine had
come before him.

Yes; here it was; and Christine thrust her hand into her pocket and
brought it forth. Then the King took a great bite of it, and as soon as
he had done so he looked at Christine and thought that he had never seen
such a pretty girl. As for her rags, he minded them no more than one
minds the spots on a cherry; that was because he had eaten of the apple
of contentment.

And were they married? Of course they were! and a grand wedding it was,
I can tell you. It is a pity that you were not there; but though you
were not, Christine's mother and sisters were, and, what is more, they
danced with the others, though I believe they would rather have danced
upon pins and needles.

"Never mind," said they; "we still have the apple of contentment at
home, though we cannot taste of it." But no; they had nothing of the
kind. The next morning it stood before the young Queen Christine's
window, just as it had at her old home, for it belonged to her and to no
one else in all of the world. That was lucky for the King, for he needed
a taste of it now and then as much as anybody else, and no one could
pluck it for him but Christine.

Now, that is all of this story. What does it
  mean? Can you not see? Prut! rub
    your spectacles and look again!


THE END



I. WITH THE BUCCANEERS

_Being an Account of Certain Adventures that Befell Henry Mostyn under
Captain H. Morgan in the Year 1665-66._

I

Although this narration has more particularly to do with the taking of
the Spanish Vice-Admiral in the harbor of Puerto Bello, and of the
rescue therefrom of Le Sieur Simon, his wife and daughter (the
adventure of which was successfully achieved by Captain Morgan, the
famous buccaneer), we shall, nevertheless, premise something of the
earlier history of Master Harry Mostyn, whom you may, if you please,
consider as the hero of the several circumstances recounted in these
pages.

In the year 1664 our hero's father embarked from Portsmouth, in
England, for the Barbadoes, where he owned a considerable sugar
plantation. Thither to those parts of America he transported with
himself his whole family, of whom our Master Harry was the fifth of
eight children--a great lusty fellow as little fitted for the Church
(for which he was designed) as could be. At the time of this story,
though not above sixteen years old, Master Harry Mostyn was as big and
well-grown as many a man of twenty, and of such a reckless and
dare-devil spirit that no adventure was too dangerous or too mischievous
for him to embark upon.

At this time there was a deal of talk in those parts of the Americas
concerning Captain Morgan, and the prodigious successes he was having
pirating against the Spaniards.

This man had once been an indentured servant with Mr. Rolls, a sugar
factor at the Barbadoes. Having served out his time, and being of
lawless disposition, possessing also a prodigious appetite for
adventure, he joined with others of his kidney, and, purchasing a
caraval of three guns, embarked fairly upon that career of piracy the
most successful that ever was heard of in the world.

Master Harry had known this man very well while he was still with Mr.
Rolls, serving as a clerk at that gentleman's sugar wharf, a tall,
broad-shouldered, strapping fellow, with red cheeks, and thick red
lips, and rolling blue eyes, and hair as red as any chestnut. Many knew
him for a bold, gruff-spoken man, but no one at that time suspected
that he had it in him to become so famous and renowned as he afterwards
grew to be.

The fame of his exploits had been the talk of those parts for above a
twelvemonth, when, in the latter part of the year 1665, Captain Morgan,
having made a very successful expedition against the Spaniards into the
Gulf of Campeachy--where he took several important purchases from the
plate fleet--came to the Barbadoes, there to fit out another such
venture, and to enlist recruits.

He and certain other adventurers had purchased a vessel of some five
hundred tons, which they proposed to convert into a pirate by cutting
port-holes for cannon, and running three or four carronades across her
main-deck. The name of this ship, be it mentioned, was the _Good
Samaritan_, as ill-fitting a name as could be for such a craft, which,
instead of being designed for the healing of wounds, was intended to
inflict such devastation as those wicked men proposed.

Here was a piece of mischief exactly fitted to our hero's tastes;
wherefore, having made up a bundle of clothes, and with not above a
shilling in his pocket, he made an excursion into the town to seek for
Captain Morgan. There he found the great pirate established at an
ordinary, with a little court of ragamuffins and swashbucklers gathered
about him, all talking very loud, and drinking healths in raw rum as
though it were sugared water.

And what a fine figure our buccaneer had grown, to be sure! How
different from the poor, humble clerk upon the sugarwharf! What a deal
of gold braid! What a fine, silver-hilted Spanish sword! What a gay
velvet sling, hung with three silver-mounted pistols! If Master Harry's
mind had not been made up before, to be sure such a spectacle of glory
would have determined it.

This figure of war our hero asked to step aside with him, and when they
had come into a corner, proposed to the other what he intended, and
that he had a mind to enlist as a gentleman adventurer upon this
expedition. Upon this our rogue of a buccaneer Captain burst out
a-laughing, and fetching Master Harry a great thump upon the back, swore
roundly that he would make a man of him, and that it was a pity to make
a parson out of so good a piece of stuff.

[Illustration: "THIS FIGURE OF WAR OUR HERO ASKED TO STEP ASIDE WITH
HIM"]

Nor was Captain Morgan less good than his word, for when the _Good
Samaritan_ set sail with a favoring wind for the island of Jamaica,
Master Harry found himself established as one of the adventurers
aboard.

II

Could you but have seen the town of Port Royal as it appeared in the
year 1665 you would have beheld a sight very well worth while looking
upon. There were no fine houses at that time, and no great
counting-houses built of brick, such as you may find nowadays, but a crowd
of board and wattled huts huddled along the streets, and all so gay with
flags and bits of color that Vanity Fair itself could not have been
gayer. To this place came all the pirates and buccaneers that infested
those parts, and men shouted and swore and gambled, and poured out
money like water, and then maybe wound up their merrymaking by dying of
fever. For the sky in these torrid latitudes is all full of clouds
overhead, and as hot as any blanket, and when the sun shone forth it
streamed down upon the smoking sands so that the houses were ovens and
the streets were furnaces; so it was little wonder that men died like
rats in a hole. But little they appeared to care for that; so that
everywhere you might behold a multitude of painted women and Jews and
merchants and pirates, gaudy with red scarfs and gold braid and all
sorts of odds and ends of foolish finery, all fighting and gambling and
bartering for that ill-gotten treasure of the be-robbed Spaniard.

Here, arriving, Captain Morgan found a hearty welcome, and a message
from the Governor awaiting him, the message bidding him attend his
Excellency upon the earliest occasion that offered. Whereupon, taking
our hero (of whom he had grown prodigiously fond) along with him, our
pirate went, without any loss of time, to visit Sir Thomas Modiford,
who was then the royal Governor of all this devil's brew of wickedness.

They found his Excellency seated in a great easy-chair, under the
shadow of a slatted veranda, the floor whereof was paved with brick. He
was clad, for the sake of coolness, only in his shirt, breeches, and
stockings, and he wore slippers on his feet. He was smoking a great
cigarro of tobacco, and a goblet of lime-juice and water and rum stood
at his elbow on a table. Here, out of the glare of the heat, it was all
very cool and pleasant, with a sea-breeze blowing violently in through
the slats, setting them a-rattling now and then, and stirring Sir
Thomas's long hair, which he had pushed back for the sake of coolness.

The purport of this interview, I may tell you, concerned the rescue of
one Le Sieur Simon, who, together with his wife and daughter, was held
captive by the Spaniards.

This gentleman adventurer (Le Sieur Simon) had, a few years before,
been set up by the buccaneers as Governor of the island of Santa
Catherina. This place, though well fortified by the Spaniards, the
buccaneers had seized upon, establishing themselves thereon, and so
infesting the commerce of those seas that no Spanish fleet was safe
from them. At last the Spaniards, no longer able to endure these
assaults against their commerce, sent a great force against the
freebooters to drive them out of their island stronghold. This they
did, retaking Santa Catherina, together with its Governor, his wife,
and daughter, as well as the whole garrison of buccaneers.

This garrison were sent by their conquerors, some to the galleys, some
to the mines, some to no man knows where. The Governor himself--Le
Sieur Simon--was to be sent to Spain, there to stand his trial for
piracy.

The news of all this, I may tell you, had only just been received in
Jamaica, having been brought thither by a Spanish captain, one Don
Roderiguez Sylvia, who was, besides, the bearer of despatches to the
Spanish authorities relating the whole affair.

Such, in fine, was the purport of this interview, and as our hero and
his Captain walked back together from the Governor's house to the
ordinary where they had taken up their inn, the buccaneer assured his
companion that he purposed to obtain those despatches from the Spanish
captain that very afternoon, even if he had to use force to seize them.

All this, you are to understand, was undertaken only because of the
friendship that the Governor and Captain Morgan entertained for Le
Sieur Simon. And, indeed, it was wonderful how honest and how faithful
were these wicked men in their dealings with one another. For you must
know that Governor Modiford and Le Sieur Simon and the buccaneers were
all of one kidney--all taking a share in the piracies of those times,
and all holding by one another as though they were the honestest men in
the world. Hence it was they were all so determined to rescue Le Sieur
Simon from the Spaniards.

III

Having reached his ordinary after his interview with the Governor,
Captain Morgan found there a number of his companions, such as usually
gathered at that place to be in attendance upon him--some, those
belonging to the _Good Samaritan_; others, those who hoped to obtain
benefits from him; others, those ragamuffins who gathered around him
because he was famous, and because it pleased them to be of his court
and to be called his followers. For nearly always your successful
pirate had such a little court surrounding him.

Finding a dozen or more of these rascals gathered there, Captain Morgan
informed them of his present purpose--that he was going to find the
Spanish captain to demand his papers of him, and calling upon them to
accompany him.

With this following at his heels, our buccaneer started off down the
street, his lieutenant, a Cornishman named Bartholomew Davis, upon one
hand and our hero upon the other. So they paraded the streets for the
best part of an hour before they found the Spanish captain. For whether
he had got wind that Captain Morgan was searching for him, or whether,
finding himself in a place so full of his enemies, he had buried
himself in some place of hiding, it is certain that the buccaneers had
traversed pretty nearly the whole town before they discovered that he
was lying at a certain auberge kept by a Portuguese Jew. Thither they
went, and thither Captain Morgan entered with the utmost coolness and
composure of demeanor, his followers crowding noisily in at his heels.

The space within was very dark, being lighted only by the doorway and
by two large slatted windows or openings in the front.

In this dark, hot place--not over-roomy at the best--were gathered
twelve or fifteen villanous-appearing men, sitting at tables and
drinking together, waited upon by the Jew and his wife. Our hero had no
trouble in discovering which of this lot of men was Captain Sylvia, for
not only did Captain Morgan direct his glance full of war upon him, but
the Spaniard was clad with more particularity and with more show of
finery than any of the others who were there.

Him Captain Morgan approached and demanded his papers, whereunto the
other replied with such a jabber of Spanish and English that no man
could have understood what he said. To this Captain Morgan in turn
replied that he must have those papers, no matter what it might cost
him to obtain them, and thereupon drew a pistol from his sling and
presented it at the other's head.

At this threatening action the innkeeper's wife fell a-screaming, and
the Jew, as in a frenzy, besought them not to tear the house down about
his ears.

Our hero could hardly tell what followed, only that all of a sudden
there was a prodigious uproar of combat. Knives flashed everywhere, and
then a pistol was fired so close to his head that he stood like one
stunned, hearing some one crying out in a loud voice, but not knowing
whether it was a friend or a foe who had been shot. Then another
pistol-shot so deafened what was left of Master Harry's hearing that
his ears rang for above an hour afterwards. By this time the whole
place was full of gunpowder smoke, and there was the sound of blows and
oaths and outcrying and the clashing of knives.

As Master Harry, who had no great stomach for such a combat, and no
very particular interest in the quarrel, was making for the door, a
little Portuguese, as withered and as nimble as an ape, came ducking
under the table and plunged at his stomach with a great long knife,
which, had it effected its object, would surely have ended his
adventures then and there.

Finding himself in such danger, Master Harry snatched up a heavy chair,
and, flinging it at his enemy, who was preparing for another attack, he
fairly ran for it out of the door, expecting every instant to feel the
thrust of the blade betwixt his ribs.

A considerable crowd had gathered outside, and others, hearing the
uproar, were coming running to join them. With these our hero stood,
trembling like a leaf, and with cold chills running up and down his
back like water at the narrow escape from the danger that had
threatened him.

Nor shall you think him a coward, for you must remember he was hardly
sixteen years old at the time, and that this was the first affair of
the sort he had encountered. Afterwards, as you shall learn, he showed
that he could exhibit courage enough at a pinch.

While he stood there endeavoring to recover his composure, the while
the tumult continued within, suddenly two men came running almost
together out of the door, a crowd of the combatants at their heels. The
first of these men was Captain Sylvia; the other, who was pursuing him,
was Captain Morgan.

As the crowd about the door parted before the sudden appearing of
these, the Spanish captain, perceiving, as he supposed, a way of escape
opened to him, darted across the street with incredible swiftness
towards an alleyway upon the other side. Upon this, seeing his prey
like to get away from him, Captain Morgan snatched a pistol out of his
sling, and resting it for an instant across his arm, fired at the
flying Spaniard, and that with so true an aim that, though the street
was now full of people, the other went tumbling over and over all of a
heap in the kennel, where he lay, after a twitch or two, as still as a
log.

At the sound of the shot and the fall of the man the crowd scattered
upon all sides, yelling and screaming, and the street being thus pretty
clear, Captain Morgan ran across the way to where his victim lay, his
smoking pistol still in his hand, and our hero following close at his
heels.

Our poor Harry had never before beheld a man killed thus in an instant
who a moment before had been so full of life and activity, for when
Captain Morgan turned the body over upon its back he could perceive at
a glance, little as he knew of such matters, that the man was stone
dead. And, indeed, it was a dreadful sight for him who was hardly more
than a child. He stood rooted for he knew not how long, staring down at
the dead face with twitching fingers and shuddering limbs. Meantime a
great crowd was gathering about them again.

As for Captain Morgan, he went about his work with the utmost coolness
and deliberation imaginable, unbuttoning the waistcoat and the shirt of
the man he had murdered with fingers that neither twitched nor shook.
There were a gold cross and a bunch of silver medals hung by a
whip-cord about the neck of the dead man. This Captain Morgan broke away
with a snap, reaching the jingling baubles to Harry, who took them in
his nerveless hand and fingers that he could hardly close upon what
they held.

The papers Captain Morgan found in a wallet in an inner breast-pocket
of the Spaniard's waistcoat. These he examined one by one, and finding
them to his satisfaction, tied them up again, and slipped the wallet
and its contents into his own pocket.

Then for the first time he appeared to observe Master Harry, who,
indeed, must have been standing the perfect picture of horror and
dismay. Whereupon, bursting out a-laughing, and slipping the pistol he
had used back into its sling again, he fetched poor Harry a great slap
upon the back, bidding him be a man, for that he would see many such
sights as this.

But, indeed, it was no laughing matter for poor Master Harry, for it
was many a day before his imagination could rid itself of the image of
the dead Spaniard's face; and as he walked away down the street with
his companions, leaving the crowd behind them, and the dead body where
it lay for its friends to look after, his ears humming and ringing from
the deafening noise of the pistol-shots fired in the close room, and
the sweat trickling down his face in drops, he knew not whether all
that had passed had been real, or whether it was a dream from which he
might presently awaken.

IV

The papers Captain Morgan had thus seized upon as the fruit of the
murder he had committed must have been as perfectly satisfactory to him
as could be, for having paid a second visit that evening to Governor
Modiford, the pirate lifted anchor the next morning and made sail
towards the Gulf of Darien. There, after cruising about in those waters
for about a fortnight without falling in with a vessel of any sort, at
the end of that time they overhauled a caravel bound from Puerto Bello
to Cartagena, which vessel they took, and finding her loaded with
nothing better than raw hides, scuttled and sunk her, being then about
twenty leagues from the main of Cartagena. From the captain of this
vessel they learned that the plate fleet was then lying in the harbor
of Puerto Bello, not yet having set sail thence, but waiting for the
change of the winds before embarking for Spain. Besides this, which was
a good deal more to their purpose, the Spaniards told the pirates that
the Sieur Simon, his wife, and daughter were confined aboard the
vice-admiral of that fleet, and that the name of the vice-admiral was the
_Santa Maria y Valladolid_.

So soon as Captain Morgan had obtained the information he desired he
directed his course straight for the Bay of Santo Blaso, where he might
lie safely within the cape of that name without any danger of discovery
(that part of the main-land being entirely uninhabited) and yet be
within twenty or twenty-five leagues of Puerto Bello.

Having come safely to this anchorage, he at once declared his
intentions to his companions, which were as follows:

That it was entirely impossible for them to hope to sail their vessel
into the harbor of Puerto Bello, and to attack the Spanish vice-admiral
where he lay in the midst of the armed flota; wherefore, if anything
was to be accomplished, it must be undertaken by some subtle design
rather than by open-handed boldness. Having so prefaced what he had to
say, he now declared that it was his purpose to take one of the ship's
boats and to go in that to Puerto Bello, trusting for some opportunity
to occur to aid him either in the accomplishment of his aims or in the
gaining of some further information. Having thus delivered himself, he
invited any who dared to do so to volunteer for the expedition, telling
them plainly that he would constrain no man to go against his will, for
that at best it was a desperate enterprise, possessing only the
recommendation that in its achievement the few who undertook it would
gain great renown, and perhaps a very considerable booty.

And such was the incredible influence of this bold man over his
companions, and such was their confidence in his skill and cunning,
that not above a dozen of all those aboard hung back from the
undertaking, but nearly every man desired to be taken.

Of these volunteers Captain Morgan chose twenty--among others our
Master Harry--and having arranged with his lieutenant that if nothing
was heard from the expedition at the end of three days he should sail
for Jamaica to await news, he embarked upon that enterprise, which,
though never heretofore published, was perhaps the boldest and the most
desperate of all those that have since made his name so famous. For
what could be a more unparalleled undertaking than for a little open
boat, containing but twenty men, to enter the harbor of the third
strongest fortress of the Spanish mainland with the intention of
cutting out the Spanish vice-admiral from the midst of a whole fleet of
powerfully armed vessels, and how many men in all the world do you
suppose would venture such a thing?

But there is this to be said of that great buccaneer: that if he
undertook enterprises so desperate as this, he yet laid his plans so
well that they never went altogether amiss. Moreover, the very
desperation of his successes was of such a nature that no man could
suspect that he would dare to undertake such things, and accordingly
his enemies were never prepared to guard against his attacks. Aye, had
he but worn the King's colors and served under the rules of honest war,
he might have become as great and as renowned as Admiral Blake himself!

But all that is neither here nor there; what I have to tell you now is
that Captain Morgan in this open boat with his twenty mates reached the
Cape of Salmedina towards the fall of day. Arriving within view of the
harbor they discovered the plate fleet at anchor, with two men-of-war
and an armed galley riding as a guard at the mouth of the harbor,
scarce half a league distant from the other ships. Having spied the
fleet in this posture, the pirates presently pulled down their sails
and rowed along the coast, feigning to be a Spanish vessel from Nombre
de Dios. So hugging the shore, they came boldly within the harbor, upon
the opposite side of which you might see the fortress a considerable
distance away.

Being now come so near to the consummation of their adventure, Captain
Morgan required every man to make an oath to stand by him to the last,
whereunto our hero swore as heartily as any man aboard, although his
heart, I must needs confess, was beating at a great rate at the
approach of what was to happen. Having thus received the oaths of all
his followers, Captain Morgan commanded the surgeon of the expedition
that, when the order was given, he, the medico, was to bore six holes
in the boat, so that, it sinking under them, they might all be
compelled to push forward, with no chance of retreat. And such was the
ascendency of this man over his followers, and such was their awe of
him, that not one of them uttered even so much as a murmur, though what
he had commanded the surgeon to do pledged them either to victory or to
death, with no chance to choose between. Nor did the surgeon question
the orders he had received, much less did he dream of disobeying them.

By now it had fallen pretty dusk, whereupon, spying two fishermen in a
canoe at a little distance, Captain Morgan demanded of them in Spanish
which vessel of those at anchor in the harbor was the vice-admiral, for
that he had despatches for the captain thereof. Whereupon the
fishermen, suspecting nothing, pointed to them a galleon of great size
riding at anchor not half a league distant.

Towards this vessel accordingly the pirates directed their course, and
when they had come pretty nigh, Captain Morgan called upon the surgeon
that now it was time for him to perform the duty that had been laid
upon him. Whereupon the other did as he was ordered, and that so
thoroughly that the water presently came gushing into the boat in great
streams, whereat all hands pulled for the galleon as though every next
moment was to be their last.

And what do you suppose were our hero's emotions at this time? Like all
in the boat, his awe of Captain Morgan was so great that I do believe
he would rather have gone to the bottom than have questioned his
command, even when it was to scuttle the boat. Nevertheless, when he
felt the cold water gushing about his feet (for he had taken off his
shoes and stockings) he became possessed with such a fear of being
drowned that even the Spanish galleon had no terrors for him if he
could only feel the solid planks thereof beneath his feet.

Indeed, all the crew appeared to be possessed of a like dismay, for
they pulled at the oars with such an incredible force that they were
under the quarter of the galleon before the boat was half filled with
water.

Here, as they approached, it then being pretty dark and the moon not
yet having risen, the watch upon the deck hailed them, whereupon
Captain Morgan called out in Spanish that he was Captain Alvarez
Mendazo, and that he brought despatches for the vice-admiral.

But at that moment, the boat being now so full of water as to be
logged, it suddenly tilted upon one side as though to sink beneath
them, whereupon all hands, without further orders, went scrambling up
the side, as nimble as so many monkeys, each armed with a pistol in one
hand and a cutlass in the other, and so were upon deck before the watch
could collect his wits to utter any outcry or to give any other alarm
than to cry out, "Jesu bless us! who are these?" at which words
somebody knocked him down with the butt of a pistol, though who it was
our hero could not tell in the darkness and the hurry.

Before any of those upon deck could recover from their alarm or those
from below come up upon deck, a part of the pirates, under the
carpenter and the surgeon, had run to the gunroom and had taken
possession of the arms, while Captain Morgan, with Master Harry and a
Portuguese called Murillo Braziliano, had flown with the speed of the
wind into the great cabin.

Here they found the captain of the vice-admiral playing at cards with
the Sieur Simon and a friend, Madam Simon and her daughter being
present.

Captain Morgan instantly set his pistol at the breast of the Spanish
captain, swearing with a most horrible fierce countenance that if he
spake a word or made any outcry he was a dead man. As for our hero,
having now got his hand into the game, he performed the same service
for the Spaniard's friend, declaring he would shoot him dead if he
opened his lips or lifted so much as a single finger.

All this while the ladies, not comprehending what had occurred, had sat
as mute as stones; but now having so far recovered themselves as to
find a voice, the younger of the two fell to screaming, at which the
Sieur Simon called out to her to be still, for these were friends who
had come to help them, and not enemies who had come to harm them.

All this, you are to understand, occupied only a little while, for in
less than a minute three or four of the pirates had come into the
cabin, who, together with the Portuguese, proceeded at once to bind the
two Spaniards hand and foot, and to gag them. This being done to our
buccaneer's satisfaction, and the Spanish captain being stretched out
in the corner of the cabin, he instantly cleared his countenance of its
terrors, and bursting forth into a great loud laugh, clapped his hand
to the Sieur Simon's, which he wrung with the best will in the world.
Having done this, and being in a fine humor after this his first
success, he turned to the two ladies. "And this, ladies," said he,
taking our hero by the hand and presenting him, "is a young gentleman
who has embarked with me to learn the trade of piracy. I recommend him
to your politeness."

Think what a confusion this threw our Master Harry into, to be sure,
who at his best was never easy in the company of strange ladies! You
may suppose what must have been his emotions to find himself thus
introduced to the attention of Madam Simon and her daughter, being at
the time in his bare feet, clad only in his shirt and breeches, and
with no hat upon his head, a pistol in one hand and a cutlass in the
other. However, he was not left for long to his embarrassments, for
almost immediately after he had thus far relaxed, Captain Morgan fell
of a sudden serious again, and bidding the Sieur Simon to get his
ladies away into some place of safety, for the most hazardous part of
this adventure was yet to occur, he quitted the cabin with Master Harry
and the other pirates (for you may call him a pirate now) at his heels.

Having come upon deck, our hero beheld that a part of the Spanish crew
were huddled forward in a flock like so many sheep (the others being
crowded below with the hatches fastened upon them), and such was the
terror of the pirates, and so dreadful the name of Henry Morgan, that
not one of those poor wretches dared to lift up his voice to give any
alarm, nor even to attempt an escape by jumping overboard.

At Captain Morgan's orders, these men, together with certain of his own
company, ran nimbly aloft and began setting the sails, which, the night
now having fallen pretty thick, was not for a good while observed by
any of the vessels riding at anchor about them.

Indeed, the pirates might have made good their escape, with at most
only a shot or two from the men-of-war, had it not then been about the
full of the moon, which, having arisen, presently discovered to those
of the fleet that lay closest about them what was being done aboard the
vice-admiral.

At this one of the vessels hailed them, and then after a while, having
no reply, hailed them again. Even then the Spaniards might not
immediately have suspected anything was amiss but only that the
vice-admiral for some reason best known to himself was shifting his
anchorage, had not one of the Spaniards aloft--but who it was Captain
Morgan was never able to discover--answered the hail by crying out that
the vice-admiral had been seized by the pirates.

At this the alarm was instantly given and the mischief done, for
presently there was a tremendous bustle through that part of the fleet
lying nighest the vice-admiral--a deal of shouting of orders, a beating
of drums, and the running hither and thither of the crews.

But by this time the sails of the vice-admiral had filled with a strong
land breeze that was blowing up the harbor, whereupon the carpenter, at
Captain Morgan's orders, having cut away both anchors, the galleon
presently bore away up the harbor, gathering headway every moment with
the wind nearly dead astern. The nearest vessel was the only one that
for the moment was able to offer any hinderance. This ship, having by
this time cleared away one of its guns, was able to fire a parting shot
against the vice-admiral, striking her somewhere forward, as our hero
could see by a great shower of splinters that flew up in the moonlight.

At the sound of the shot all the vessels of the flota not yet disturbed
by the alarm were aroused at once, so that the pirates had the
satisfaction of knowing that they would have to run the gantlet of all
the ships between them and the open sea before they could reckon
themselves escaped.

And, indeed, to our hero's mind it seemed that the battle which
followed must have been the most terrific cannonade that was ever heard
in the world. It was not so ill at first, for it was some while before
the Spaniards could get their guns clear for action, they being not the
least in the world prepared for such an occasion as this. But by-and-by
first one and then another ship opened fire upon the galleon, until it
seemed to our hero that all the thunders of heaven let loose upon them
could not have created a more prodigious uproar, and that it was not
possible that they could any of them escape destruction.

By now the moon had risen full and round, so that the clouds of smoke
that rose in the air appeared as white as snow. The air seemed full of
the hiss and screaming of shot, each one of which, when it struck the
galleon, was magnified by our hero's imagination into ten times its
magnitude from the crash which it delivered and from the cloud of
splinters it would cast up into the moonlight. At last he suddenly
beheld one poor man knocked sprawling across the deck, who, as he
raised his arm from behind the mast, disclosed that the hand was gone
from it, and that the shirt-sleeve was red with blood in the moonlight.
At this sight all the strength fell away from poor Harry, and he felt
sure that a like fate or even a worse must be in store for him.

But, after all, this was nothing to what it might have been in broad
daylight, for what with the darkness of night, and the little
preparation the Spaniards could make for such a business, and the
extreme haste with which they discharged their guns (many not
understanding what was the occasion of all this uproar), nearly all the
shot flew so wide of the mark that not above one in twenty struck that
at which it was aimed.

Meantime Captain Morgan, with the Sieur Simon, who had followed him
upon deck, stood just above where our hero lay behind the shelter of
the bulwark. The captain had lit a pipe of tobacco, and he stood now in
the bright moonlight close to the rail, with his hands behind him,
looking out ahead with the utmost coolness imaginable, and paying no
more attention to the din of battle than though it were twenty leagues
away. Now and then he would take his pipe from his lips to utter an
order to the man at the wheel. Excepting this he stood there hardly
moving at all, the wind blowing his long red hair over his shoulders.

Had it not been for the armed galley the pirates might have got the
galleon away with no great harm done in spite of all this cannonading,
for the man-of-war which rode at anchor nighest to them at the mouth of
the harbor was still so far away that they might have passed it by
hugging pretty close to the shore, and that without any great harm
being done to them in the darkness. But just at this moment, when the
open water lay in sight, came this galley pulling out from behind the
point of the shore in such a manner as either to head our pirates off
entirely or else to compel them to approach so near to the man-of-war
that that latter vessel could bring its guns to bear with more effect.

This galley, I must tell you, was like others of its kind such as you
may find in these waters, the hull being long and cut low to the water
so as to allow the oars to dip freely. The bow was sharp and projected
far out ahead, mounting a swivel upon it, while at the stern a number
of galleries built one above another into a castle gave shelter to
several companies of musketeers as well as the officers commanding
them.

Our hero could behold the approach of this galley from above the
starboard bulwarks, and it appeared to him impossible for them to hope
to escape either it or the man-of-war. But still Captain Morgan
maintained the same composure that he had exhibited all the while, only
now and then delivering an order to the man at the wheel, who, putting
the helm over, threw the bows of the galleon around more to the
larboard, as though to escape the bow of the galley and get into the
open water beyond. This course brought the pirates ever closer and
closer to the man-of-war, which now began to add its thunder to the din
of the battle, and with so much more effect that at every discharge you
might hear the crashing and crackling of splintered wood, and now and
then the outcry or groaning of some man who was hurt. Indeed, had it
been daylight, they must at this juncture all have perished, though, as
was said, what with the night and the confusion and the hurry, they
escaped entire destruction, though more by a miracle than through any
policy upon their own part.

Meantime the galley, steering as though to come aboard of them, had now
come so near that it, too, presently began to open its musketry fire
upon them, so that the humming and rattling of bullets were presently
added to the din of cannonading.

In two minutes more it would have been aboard of them, when in a moment
Captain Morgan roared out of a sudden to the man at the helm to put it
hard a starboard. In response the man ran the wheel over with the
utmost quickness, and the galleon, obeying her helm very readily, came
around upon a course which, if continued, would certainly bring them
into collision with their enemy.

It is possible at first the Spaniards imagined the pirates intended to
escape past their stern, for they instantly began backing oars to keep
them from getting past, so that the water was all of a foam about them;
at the same time they did this they poured in such a fire of musketry
that it was a miracle that no more execution was accomplished than
happened.

As for our hero, methinks for the moment he forgot all about everything
else than as to whether or no his captain's manoeuvre would succeed,
for in the very first moment he divined, as by some instinct, what
Captain Morgan purposed doing.

At this moment, so particular in the execution of this nice design, a
bullet suddenly struck down the man at the wheel. Hearing the sharp
outcry, our Harry turned to see him fall forward, and then to his hands
and knees upon the deck, the blood running in a black pool beneath him,
while the wheel, escaping from his hands, spun over until the spokes
were all of a mist.

In a moment the ship would have fallen off before the wind had not our
hero, leaping to the wheel (even as Captain Morgan shouted an order for
some one to do so), seized the flying spokes, whirling them back again,
and so bringing the bow of the galleon up to its former course.

[Illustration: "OUR HERO, LEAPING TO THE WHEEL, SEIZED THE FLYING
SPOKES"]

In the first moment of this effort he had reckoned of nothing but of
carrying out his captain's designs. He neither thought of cannon-balls
nor of bullets. But now that his task was accomplished, he came
suddenly back to himself to find the galleries of the galleon aflame
with musket-shots, and to become aware with a most horrible sinking of
the spirits that all the shots therefrom were intended for him. He cast
his eyes about him with despair, but no one came to ease him of his
task, which, having undertaken, he had too much spirit to resign from
carrying through to the end, though he was well aware that the very
next instant might mean his sudden and violent death. His ears hummed
and rang, and his brain swam as light as a feather. I know not whether
he breathed, but he shut his eyes tight as though that might save him
from the bullets that were raining about him.

At this moment the Spaniards must have discovered for the first time
the pirates' design, for of a sudden they ceased firing, and began to
shout out a multitude of orders, while the oars lashed the water all
about with a foam. But it was too late then for them to escape, for
within a couple of seconds the galleon struck her enemy a blow so
violent upon the larboard quarter as nearly to hurl our Harry upon the
deck, and then with a dreadful, horrible crackling of wood, commingled
with a yelling of men's voices, the galley was swung around upon her
side, and the galleon, sailing into the open sea, left nothing of her
immediate enemy but a sinking wreck, and the water dotted all over with
bobbing heads and waving hands in the moonlight.

And now, indeed, that all danger was past and gone, there were plenty
to come running to help our hero at the wheel. As for Captain Morgan,
having come down upon the main-deck, he fetches the young helmsman a
clap upon the back. "Well, Master Harry," says he, "and did I not tell
you I would make a man of you?" Whereat our poor Harry fell a-laughing,
but with a sad catch in his voice, for his hands trembled as with an
ague, and were as cold as ice. As for his emotions, God knows he was
nearer crying than laughing, if Captain Morgan had but known it.

Nevertheless, though undertaken under the spur of the moment, I protest
it was indeed a brave deed, and I cannot but wonder how many young
gentlemen of sixteen there are to-day who, upon a like occasion, would
act as well as our Harry.

V

The balance of our hero's adventures were of a lighter sort than those
already recounted, for the next morning, the Spanish captain (a very
polite and well-bred gentleman) having fitted him out with a suit of
his own clothes, Master Harry was presented in a proper form to the
ladies. For Captain Morgan, if he had felt a liking for the young man
before, could not now show sufficient regard for him. He ate in the
great cabin and was petted by all. Madam Simon, who was a fat and
red-faced lady, was forever praising him, and the young miss, who was
extremely well-looking, was as continually making eyes at him.

She and Master Harry, I must tell you, would spend hours together, she
making pretence of teaching him French, although he was so possessed
with a passion of love that he was nigh suffocated with it. She, upon
her part, perceiving his emotions, responded with extreme good-nature
and complacency, so that had our hero been older, and the voyage proved
longer, he might have become entirely enmeshed in the toils of his fair
siren. For all this while, you are to understand, the pirates were
making sail straight for Jamaica, which they reached upon the third day
in perfect safety.

[Illustration: "SHE AND MASTER HARRY WOULD SPEND HOURS TOGETHER"]

In that time, however, the pirates had well-nigh gone crazy for joy;
for when they came to examine their purchase they discovered her cargo
to consist of plate to the prodigious sum of £130,000 in value. 'Twas a
wonder they did not all make themselves drunk for joy. No doubt they
would have done so had not Captain Morgan, knowing they were still in
the exact track of the Spanish fleets, threatened them that the first
man among them who touched a drop of rum without his permission he
would shoot him dead upon the deck. This threat had such effect that
they all remained entirely sober until they had reached Port Royal
Harbor, which they did about nine o'clock in the morning.

And now it was that our hero's romance came all tumbling down about his
ears with a run. For they had hardly come to anchor in the harbor when
a boat came from a man-of-war, and who should come stepping aboard but
Lieutenant Grantley (a particular friend of our hero's father) and his
own eldest brother Thomas, who, putting on a very stern face, informed
Master Harry that he was a desperate and hardened villain who was sure
to end at the gallows, and that he was to go immediately back to his
home again. He told our embryo pirate that his family had nigh gone
distracted because of his wicked and ungrateful conduct. Nor could our
hero move him from his inflexible purpose. "What," says our Harry, "and
will you not then let me wait until our prize is divided and I get my
share?"

"Prize, indeed!" says his brother. "And do you then really think that
your father would consent to your having a share in this terrible
bloody and murthering business?"

And so, after a good deal of argument, our hero was constrained to go;
nor did he even have an opportunity to bid adieu to his inamorata. Nor
did he see her any more, except from a distance, she standing on the
poop-deck as he was rowed away from her, her face all stained with
crying. For himself, he felt that there was no more joy in life;
nevertheless, standing up in the stern of the boat, he made shift,
though with an aching heart, to deliver her a fine bow with the hat he
had borrowed from the Spanish captain, before his brother bade him sit
down again.

And so to the ending of this story, with only this to relate, that our
Master Harry, so far from going to the gallows, became in good time a
respectable and wealthy sugar merchant with an English wife and a fine
family of children, whereunto, when the mood was upon him, he has
sometimes told these adventures (and sundry others not here recounted)
as I have told them unto you.




II. TOM CHIST AND THE TREASURE-BOX

_An Old-time Story of the Days of Captain Kidd._


To tell about Tom Chist, and how he got his name, and how he came to be
living at the little settlement of Henlopen, just inside the mouth of
the Delaware Bay, the story must begin as far back as 1686, when a
great storm swept the Atlantic coast from end to end. During the
heaviest part of the hurricane a bark went ashore on the
Hen-and-Chicken Shoals, just below Cape Henlopen and at the mouth of the
Delaware Bay, and Tom Chist was the only soul of all those on board the
ill-fated vessel who escaped alive.

This story must first be told, because it was on account of the strange
and miraculous escape that happened to him at that time that he gained
the name that was given to him.

Even as late as that time of the American colonies, the little
scattered settlement at Henlopen, made up of English, with a few Dutch
and Swedish people, was still only a spot upon the face of the great
American wilderness that spread away, with swamp and forest, no man
knew how far to the westward. That wilderness was not only full of wild
beasts, but of Indian savages, who every fall would come in wandering
tribes to spend the winter along the shores of the fresh-water lakes
below Henlopen. There for four or five months they would live upon fish
and clams and wild ducks and geese, chipping their arrow-heads, and
making their earthenware pots and pans under the lee of the sand-hills
and pine woods below the Capes.

Sometimes on Sundays, when the Rev. Hillary Jones would be preaching in
the little log church back in the woods, these half-clad red savages
would come in from the cold, and sit squatting in the back part of the
church, listening stolidly to the words that had no meaning for them.

But about the wreck of the bark in 1686. Such a wreck as that which
then went ashore on the Hen-and-Chicken Shoals was a godsend to the
poor and needy settlers in the wilderness where so few good things ever
came. For the vessel went to pieces during the night, and the next
morning the beach was strewn with wreckage--boxes and barrels, chests
and spars, timbers and planks, a plentiful and bountiful harvest to be
gathered up by the settlers as they chose, with no one to forbid or
prevent them.

The name of the bark, as found painted on some of the water-barrels and
sea-chests, was the _Bristol Merchant_, and she no doubt hailed from
England.

As was said, the only soul who escaped alive off the wreck was Tom
Chist.

A settler, a fisherman named Matt Abrahamson, and his daughter Molly,
found Tom. He was washed up on the beach among the wreckage, in a great
wooden box which had been securely tied around with a rope and lashed
between two spars--apparently for better protection in beating through
the surf. Matt Abrahamson thought he had found something of more than
usual value when he came upon this chest; but when he cut the cords and
broke open the box with his broadaxe, he could not have been more
astonished had he beheld a salamander instead of a baby of nine or ten
months old lying half smothered in the blankets that covered the bottom
of the chest.

Matt Abrahamson's daughter Molly had had a baby who had died a month or
so before. So when she saw the little one lying there in the bottom of
the chest, she cried out in a great loud voice that the Good Man had
sent her another baby in place of her own.

The rain was driving before the hurricane-storm in dim, slanting
sheets, and so she wrapped up the baby in the man's coat she wore and
ran off home without waiting to gather up any more of the wreckage.

It was Parson Jones who gave the foundling his name. When the news came
to his ears of what Matt Abrahamson had found, he went over to the
fisherman's cabin to see the child. He examined the clothes in which
the baby was dressed. They were of fine linen and handsomely stitched,
and the reverend gentleman opined that the foundling's parents must
have been of quality. A kerchief had been wrapped around the baby's
neck and under its arms and tied behind, and in the corner, marked with
very fine needlework, were the initials T.C.

"What d'ye call him, Molly?" said Parson Jones. He was standing, as he
spoke, with his back to the fire, warming his palms before the blaze.
The pocket of the great-coat he wore bulged out with a big case-bottle
of spirits which he had gathered up out of the wreck that afternoon.
"What d'ye call him, Molly?"

"I'll call him Tom, after my own baby."

"That goes very well with the initial on the kerchief," said Parson
Jones. "But what other name d'ye give him? Let it be something to go
with the C."

"I don't know," said Molly.

"Why not call him 'Chist,' since he was born in a chist out of the sea?
'Tom Chist'--the name goes off like a flash in the pan." And so "Tom
Chist" he was called and "Tom Chist" he was christened.

So much for the beginning of the history of Tom Chist. The story of
Captain Kidd's treasure-box does not begin until the late spring of
1699.

That was the year that the famous pirate captain, coming up from the
West Indies, sailed his sloop into the Delaware Bay, where he lay for
over a month waiting for news from his friends in New York.

For he had sent word to that town asking if the coast was clear for him
to return home with the rich prize he had brought from the Indian seas
and the coast of Africa, and meantime he lay there in the Delaware Bay
waiting for a reply. Before he left he turned the whole of Tom Chist's
life topsy-turvy with something that he brought ashore.

By that time Tom Chist had grown into a strong-limbed, thick-jointed
boy of fourteen or fifteen years of age. It was a miserable dog's life
he lived with old Matt Abrahamson, for the old fisherman was in his
cups more than half the time, and when he was so there was hardly a day
passed that he did not give Tom a curse or a buffet or, as like as not,
an actual beating. One would have thought that such treatment would
have broken the spirit of the poor little foundling, but it had just
the opposite effect upon Tom Chist, who was one of your stubborn,
sturdy, stiff-willed fellows who only grow harder and more tough the
more they are ill-treated. It had been a long time now since he had
made any outcry or complaint at the hard usage he suffered from old
Matt. At such times he would shut his teeth and bear whatever came to
him, until sometimes the half-drunken old man would be driven almost
mad by his stubborn silence. Maybe he would stop in the midst of the
beating he was administering, and, grinding his teeth, would cry out:
"Won't ye say naught? Won't ye say naught? Well, then, I'll see if I
can't make ye say naught." When things had reached such a pass as this
Molly would generally interfere to protect her foster-son, and then she
and Tom would together fight the old man until they had wrenched the
stick or the strap out of his hand. Then old Matt would chase them
out-of-doors and around and around the house for maybe half an hour until
his anger was cool, when he would go back again, and for a time the
storm would be over.

Besides his foster-mother, Tom Chist had a very good friend in Parson
Jones, who used to come over every now and then to Abrahamson's hut
upon the chance of getting a half-dozen fish for breakfast. He always
had a kind word or two for Tom, who during the winter evenings would go
over to the good man's house to learn his letters, and to read and
write and cipher a little, so that by now he was able to spell the
words out of the Bible and the almanac, and knew enough to change
tuppence into four ha'pennies.

This is the sort of boy Tom Chist was, and this is the sort of life he
led.

In the late spring or early summer of 1699 Captain Kidd's sloop sailed
into the mouth of the Delaware Bay and changed the whole fortune of his
life.

And this is how you come to the story of Captain Kidd's treasure-box.

II

Old Matt Abrahamson kept the flat-bottomed boat in which he went
fishing some distance down the shore, and in the neighborhood of the
old wreck that had been sunk on the Shoals. This was the usual
fishing-ground of the settlers, and here Old Matt's boat generally lay
drawn up on the sand.

There had been a thunder-storm that afternoon, and Tom had gone down
the beach to bale out the boat in readiness for the morning's fishing.

It was full moonlight now, as he was returning, and the night sky was
full of floating clouds. Now and then there was a dull flash to the
westward, and once a muttering growl of thunder, promising another
storm to come.

All that day the pirate sloop had been lying just off the shore back of
the Capes, and now Tom Chist could see the sails glimmering pallidly in
the moonlight, spread for drying after the storm. He was walking up the
shore homeward when he became aware that at some distance ahead of him
there was a ship's boat drawn up on the little narrow beach, and a
group of men clustered about it. He hurried forward with a good deal of
curiosity to see who had landed, but it was not until he had come close
to them that he could distinguish who and what they were. Then he knew
that it must be a party who had come off the pirate sloop. They had
evidently just landed, and two men were lifting out a chest from the
boat. One of them was a negro, naked to the waist, and the other was a
white man in his shirt-sleeves, wearing petticoat breeches, a Monterey
cap upon his head, a red bandanna handkerchief around his neck, and
gold ear-rings in his ears. He had a long, plaited queue hanging down
his back, and a great sheath-knife dangling from his side. Another man,
evidently the captain of the party, stood at a little distance as they
lifted the chest out of the boat. He had a cane in one hand and a
lighted lantern in the other, although the moon was shining as bright
as day. He wore jack-boots and a handsome laced coat, and he had a
long, drooping mustache that curled down below his chin. He wore a
fine, feathered hat, and his long black hair hung down upon his
shoulders.

All this Tom Chist could see in the moonlight that glinted and twinkled
upon the gilt buttons of his coat.

They were so busy lifting the chest from the boat that at first they
did not observe that Tom Chist had come up and was standing there. It
was the white man with the long, plaited queue and the gold ear-rings
that spoke to him. "Boy, what do you want here, boy?" he said, in a
rough, hoarse voice. "Where d'ye come from?" And then dropping his end
of the chest, and without giving Tom time to answer, he pointed off
down the beach, and said, "You'd better be going about your own
business, if you know what's good for you; and don't you come back, or
you'll find what you don't want waiting for you."

Tom saw in a glance that the pirates were all looking at him, and then,
without saying a word, he turned and walked away. The man who had
spoken to him followed him threateningly for some little distance, as
though to see that he had gone away as he was bidden to do. But
presently he stopped, and Tom hurried on alone, until the boat and the
crew and all were dropped away behind and lost in the moonlight night.
Then he himself stopped also, turned, and looked back whence he had
come.

There had been something very strange in the appearance of the men he
had just seen, something very mysterious in their actions, and he
wondered what it all meant, and what they were going to do. He stood
for a little while thus looking and listening. He could see nothing,
and could hear only the sound of distant talking. What were they doing
on the lonely shore thus at night? Then, following a sudden impulse, he
turned and cut off across the sand-hummocks, skirting around inland,
but keeping pretty close to the shore, his object being to spy upon
them, and to watch what they were about from the back of the low
sand-hills that fronted the beach.

He had gone along some distance in his circuitous return when he became
aware of the sound of voices that seemed to be drawing closer to him as
he came towards the speakers. He stopped and stood listening, and
instantly, as he stopped, the voices stopped also. He crouched there
silently in the bright, glimmering moonlight, surrounded by the silent
stretches of sand, and the stillness seemed to press upon him like a
heavy hand. Then suddenly the sound of a man's voice began again, and
as Tom listened he could hear some one slowly counting. "Ninety-one,"
the voice began, "ninety-two, ninety-three, ninety-four, ninety-five,
ninety-six, ninety-seven, ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one hundred, one
hundred and one"--the slow, monotonous count coming nearer and nearer
to him--"one hundred and two, one hundred and three, one hundred and
four," and so on in its monotonous reckoning.

Suddenly he saw three heads appear above the sand-hill, so close to him
that he crouched down quickly with a keen thrill, close beside the
hummock near which he stood. His first fear was that they might have
seen him in the moonlight; but they had not, and his heart rose again
as the counting voice went steadily on. "One hundred and twenty," it
was saying--"and twenty-one, and twenty-two, and twenty-three, and
twenty-four," and then he who was counting came out from behind the
little sandy rise into the white and open level of shimmering
brightness.

[Illustration: "'... AND TWENTY-ONE AND TWENTY-TWO'"]

It was the man with the cane whom Tom had seen some time before--the
captain of the party who had landed. He carried his cane under his arm
now, and was holding his lantern close to something that he held in his
hand, and upon which he looked narrowly as he walked with a slow and
measured tread in a perfectly straight line across the sand, counting
each step as he took it. "And twenty-five, and twenty-six, and
twenty-seven, and twenty-eight, and twenty-nine, and thirty."

Behind him walked two other figures; one was the half-naked negro, the
other the man with the plaited queue and the ear-rings, whom Tom had
seen lifting the chest out of the boat. Now they were carrying the
heavy box between them, laboring through the sand with shuffling tread
as they bore it onward.

As he who was counting pronounced the word "thirty," the two men set
the chest down on the sand with a grunt, the white man panting and
blowing and wiping his sleeve across his forehead. And immediately he
who counted took out a slip of paper and marked something down upon it.
They stood there for a long time, during which Tom lay behind the
sand-hummock watching them, and for a while the silence was uninterrupted.
In the perfect stillness Tom could hear the washing of the little waves
beating upon the distant beach, and once the far-away sound of a laugh
from one of those who stood by the ship's boat.

One, two, three minutes passed, and then the men picked up the chest
and started on again; and then again the other man began his counting.
"Thirty and one, and thirty and two, and thirty and three, and thirty
and four"--he walked straight across the level open, still looking
intently at that which he held in his hand--"and thirty and five, and
thirty and six, and thirty and seven," and so on, until the three
figures disappeared in the little hollow between the two sand-hills on
the opposite side of the open, and still Tom could hear the sound of
the counting voice in the distance.

Just as they disappeared behind the hill there was a sudden faint flash
of light; and by-and-by, as Tom lay still listening to the counting, he
heard, after a long interval, a far-away muffled rumble of distant
thunder. He waited for a while, and then arose and stepped to the top
of the sand-hummock behind which he had been lying. He looked all about
him, but there was no one else to be seen. Then he stepped down from
the hummock and followed in the direction which the pirate captain and
the two men carrying the chest had gone. He crept along cautiously,
stopping now and then to make sure that he still heard the counting
voice, and when it ceased he lay down upon the sand and waited until it
began again.

Presently, so following the pirates, he saw the three figures again in
the distance, and, skirting around back of a hill of sand covered with
coarse sedge-grass, he came to where he overlooked a little open level
space gleaming white in the moonlight.

The three had been crossing the level of sand, and were now not more
than twenty-five paces from him. They had again set down the chest,
upon which the white man with the long queue and the gold ear-rings had
seated to rest himself, the negro standing close beside him. The moon
shone as bright as day and full upon his face. It was looking directly
at Tom Chist, every line as keen cut with white lights and black
shadows as though it had been carved in ivory and jet. He sat perfectly
motionless, and Tom drew back with a start, almost thinking he had been
discovered. He lay silent, his heart beating heavily in his throat; but
there was no alarm, and presently he heard the counting begin again,
and when he looked once more he saw they were going away straight
across the little open. A soft, sliding hillock of sand lay directly in
front of them. They did not turn aside, but went straight over it, the
leader helping himself up the sandy slope with his cane, still counting
and still keeping his eyes fixed upon that which he held in his hand.
Then they disappeared again behind the white crest on the other side.

So Tom followed them cautiously until they had gone almost half a mile
inland. When next he saw them clearly it was from a little sandy rise
which looked down like the crest of a bowl upon the floor of sand
below. Upon this smooth, white floor the moon beat with almost dazzling
brightness.

The white man who had helped to carry the chest was now kneeling,
busied at some work, though what it was Tom at first could not see. He
was whittling the point of a stick into a long wooden peg, and when,
by-and-by, he had finished what he was about, he arose and stepped to
where he who seemed to be the captain had stuck his cane upright into
the ground as though to mark some particular spot. He drew the cane out
of the sand, thrusting the stick down in its stead. Then he drove the
long peg down with a wooden mallet which the negro handed to him. The
sharp rapping of the mallet upon the top of the peg sounded loud in the
perfect stillness, and Tom lay watching and wondering what it all
meant.

The man, with quick-repeated blows, drove the peg farther and farther
down into the sand until it showed only two or three inches above the
surface. As he finished his work there was another faint flash of
light, and by-and-by another smothered rumble of thunder, and Tom as he
looked out towards the westward, saw the silver rim of the round and
sharply outlined thundercloud rising slowly up into the sky and pushing
the other and broken drifting clouds before it.

The two white men were now stooping over the peg, the negro man
watching them. Then presently the man with the cane started straight
away from the peg, carrying the end of a measuring-line with him, the
other end of which the man with the plaited queue held against the top
of the peg. When the pirate captain had reached the end of the
measuring-line he marked a cross upon the sand, and then again they
measured out another stretch of space.

So they measured a distance five times over, and then, from where Tom
lay, he could see the man with the queue drive another peg just at the
foot of a sloping rise of sand that swept up beyond into a tall white
dune marked sharp and clear against the night sky behind. As soon as
the man with the plaited queue had driven the second peg into the
ground they began measuring again, and so, still measuring, disappeared
in another direction which took them in behind the sand-dune, where Tom
no longer could see what they were doing.

The negro still sat by the chest where the two had left him, and so
bright was the moonlight that from where he lay Tom could see the glint
of it twinkling in the whites of his eyeballs.

Presently from behind the hill there came, for the third time, the
sharp rapping sound of the mallet driving still another peg, and then
after a while the two pirates emerged from behind the sloping whiteness
into the space of moonlight again.

They came direct to where the chest lay, and the white man and the
black man lifting it once more, they walked away across the level of
open sand, and so on behind the edge of the hill and out of Tom's
sight.

III

Tom Chist could no longer see what the pirates were doing, neither did
he dare to cross over the open space of sand that now lay between them
and him. He lay there speculating as to what they were about, and
meantime the storm cloud was rising higher and higher above the
horizon, with louder and louder mutterings of thunder following each
dull flash from out the cloudy, cavernous depths. In the silence he
could hear an occasional click as of some iron implement, and he opined
that the pirates were burying the chest, though just where they were at
work he could neither see nor tell. Still he lay there watching and
listening, and by-and-by a puff of warm air blew across the sand, and a
thumping tumble of louder thunder leaped from out the belly of the
storm cloud, which every minute was coming nearer and nearer. Still Tom
Chist lay watching.

Suddenly, almost unexpectedly, the three figures reappeared from behind
the sand-hill, the pirate captain leading the way, and the negro and
white man following close behind him. They had gone about half-way
across the white, sandy level between the hill and the hummock behind
which Tom Chist lay, when the white man stopped and bent over as though
to tie his shoe.

This brought the negro a few steps in front of his companion.

That which then followed happened so suddenly, so unexpectedly, so
swiftly, that Tom Chist had hardly time to realize what it all meant
before it was over. As the negro passed him the white man arose
suddenly and silently erect, and Tom Chist saw the white moonlight
glint upon the blade of a great dirk-knife which he now held in his
hand. He took one, two silent, catlike steps behind the unsuspecting
negro. Then there was a sweeping flash of the blade in the pallid
light, and a blow, the thump of which Tom could distinctly hear even
from where he lay stretched out upon the sand. There was an instant
echoing yell from the black man, who ran stumbling forward, who
stopped, who regained his footing, and then stood for an instant as
though rooted to the spot.

Tom had distinctly seen the knife enter his back, and even thought that
he had seen the glint of the point as it came out from the breast.

Meantime the pirate captain had stopped, and now stood with his hand
resting upon his cane looking impassively on.

Then the black man started to run. The white man stood for a while
glaring after him; then he too started after his victim upon the run.
The black man was not very far from Tom when he staggered and fell. He
tried to rise, then fell forward again, and lay at length. At that
instant the first edge of the cloud cut across the moon, and there was
a sudden darkness; but in the silence Tom heard the sound of another
blow and a groan, and then presently a voice calling to the pirate
captain that it was all over.

He saw the dim form of the captain crossing the level sand, and then,
as the moon sailed out from behind the cloud, he saw the white man
standing over a black figure that lay motionless upon the sand.

Then Tom Chist scrambled up and ran away, plunging down into the hollow
of sand that lay in the shadows below. Over the next rise he ran, and
down again into the next black hollow, and so on over the sliding,
shifting ground, panting and gasping. It seemed to him that he could
hear footsteps following, and in the terror that possessed him he
almost expected every instant to feel the cold knife-blade slide
between his own ribs in such a thrust from behind as he had seen given
to the poor black man.

So he ran on like one in a nightmare. His feet grew heavy like lead, he
panted and gasped, his breath came hot and dry in his throat. But still
he ran and ran until at last he found himself in front of old Matt
Abrahamson's cabin, gasping, panting, and sobbing for breath, his knees
relaxed and his thighs trembling with weakness.

As he opened the door and dashed into the darkened cabin (for both Matt
and Molly were long ago asleep in bed) there was a flash of light, and
even as he slammed to the door behind him there was an instant peal of
thunder, heavy as though a great weight had been dropped upon the roof
of the sky, so that the doors and windows of the cabin rattled.

IV

Then Tom Chist crept to bed, trembling, shuddering, bathed in sweat,
his heart beating like a trip-hammer, and his brain dizzy from that
long, terror-inspired race through the soft sand in which he had
striven to outstrip he knew not what pursuing horror.

For a long, long time he lay awake, trembling and chattering with
nervous chills, and when he did fall asleep it was only to drop into
monstrous dreams in which he once again saw ever enacted, with various
grotesque variations, the tragic drama which his waking eyes had beheld
the night before.

Then came the dawning of the broad, wet daylight, and before the rising
of the sun Tom was up and out-of-doors to find the young day dripping
with the rain of overnight.

His first act was to climb the nearest sandhill and to gaze out towards
the offing where the pirate ship had been the day before.

It was no longer there.

Soon afterwards Matt Abrahamson came out of the cabin and he called to
Tom to go get a bite to eat, for it was time for them to be away
fishing.

All that morning the recollection of the night before hung over Tom
Chist like a great cloud of boding trouble. It filled the confined area
of the little boat and spread over the entire wide spaces of sky and
sea that surrounded them. Not for a moment was it lifted. Even when he
was hauling in his wet and dripping line with a struggling fish at the
end of it a recurrent memory of what he had seen would suddenly come
upon him, and he would groan in spirit at the recollection. He looked
at Matt Abrahamson's leathery face, at his lantern jaws cavernously and
stolidly chewing at a tobacco leaf, and it seemed monstrous to him that
the old man should be so unconscious of the black cloud that wrapped
them all about.

When the boat reached the shore again he leaped scrambling to the
beach, and as soon as his dinner was eaten he hurried away to find the
Dominie Jones.

He ran all the way from Abrahamson's hut to the Parson's house, hardly
stopping once, and when he knocked at the door he was panting and
sobbing for breath.

The good man was sitting on the back-kitchen door-step smoking his long
pipe of tobacco out into the sunlight, while his wife within was
rattling about among the pans and dishes in preparation of their
supper, of which a strong, porky smell already filled the air.

Then Tom Chist told his story, panting, hurrying, tumbling one word
over another in his haste, and Parson Jones listened, breaking every
now and then into an ejaculation of wonder. The light in his pipe went
out and the bowl turned cold.

"And I don't see why they should have killed the poor black man," said
Tom, as he finished his narrative.

"Why, that is very easy enough to understand," said the good reverend
man. "'Twas a treasure-box they buried!"

In his agitation Mr. Jones had risen from his seat and was now stumping
up and down, puffing at his empty tobacco-pipe as though it were still
alight.

"A treasure-box!" cried out Tom.

"Aye, a treasure-box! And that was why they killed the poor black man.
He was the only one, d'ye see, besides they two who knew the place
where 'twas hid, and now that they've killed him out of the way,
there's nobody but themselves knows. The villains--Tut, tut, look at
that now!" In his excitement the dominie had snapped the stem of his
tobacco-pipe in two.

"Why, then," said Tom, "if that is so, 'tis indeed a wicked, bloody
treasure, and fit to bring a curse upon anybody who finds it!"

"'Tis more like to bring a curse upon the soul who buried it," said
Parson Jones, "and it may be a blessing to him who finds it. But tell
me, Tom, do you think you could find the place again where 'twas hid?"

"I can't tell that," said Tom, "'twas all in among the sand-humps, d'ye
see, and it was at night into the bargain. Maybe we could find the
marks of their feet in the sand," he added.

"'Tis not likely," said the reverend gentleman, "for the storm last
night would have washed all that away."

"I could find the place," said Tom, "where the boat was drawn up on the
beach."

"Why, then, that's something to start from, Tom," said his friend. "If
we can find that, then maybe we can find whither they went from there."

"If I was certain it was a treasure-box," cried out Tom Chist, "I would
rake over every foot of sand betwixt here and Henlopen to find it."

"'Twould be like hunting for a pin in a haystack," said the Rev. Hilary
Jones.

As Tom walked away home, it seemed as though a ton's weight of gloom
had been rolled away from his soul. The next day he and Parson Jones
were to go treasure-hunting together; it seemed to Tom as though he
could hardly wait for the time to come.

V

The next afternoon Parson Jones and Tom Chist started off together upon
the expedition that made Tom's fortune forever. Tom carried a spade
over his shoulder and the reverend gentleman walked along beside him
with his cane.

As they jogged along up the beach they talked together about the only
thing they could talk about--the treasure-box. "And how big did you say
'twas?" quoth the good gentleman.

"About so long," said Tom Chist, measuring off upon the spade, "and
about so wide, and this deep."

"And what if it should be full of money, Tom?" said the reverend
gentleman, swinging his cane around and around in wide circles in the
excitement of the thought, as he strode along briskly. "Suppose it
should be full of money, what then?"

"By Moses!" said Tom Chist, hurrying to keep up with his friend, "I'd
buy a ship for myself, I would, and I'd trade to Injy and to Chiny to
my own boot, I would. Suppose the chist was all full of money, sir, and
suppose we should find it; would there be enough in it, d'ye suppose,
to buy a ship?"

"To be sure there would be enough, Tom; enough and to spare, and a good
big lump over."

"And if I find it 'tis mine to keep, is it, and no mistake?"

"Why, to be sure it would be yours!" cried out the Parson, in a loud
voice. "To be sure it would be yours!" He knew nothing of the law, but
the doubt of the question began at once to ferment in his brain, and he
strode along in silence for a while. "Whose else would it be but yours
if you find it?" he burst out. "Can you tell me that?"

"If ever I have a ship of my own," said Tom Chist, "and if ever I sail
to Injy in her, I'll fetch ye back the best chist of tea, sir, that
ever was fetched from Cochin Chiny."

Parson Jones burst out laughing. "Thankee, Tom," he said; "and I'll
thankee again when I get my chist of tea. But tell me, Tom, didst thou
ever hear of the farmer girl who counted her chickens before they were
hatched?"

It was thus they talked as they hurried along up the beach together,
and so came to a place at last where Tom stopped short and stood
looking about him. "'Twas just here," he said, "I saw the boat last
night. I know 'twas here, for I mind me of that bit of wreck yonder,
and that there was a tall stake drove in the sand just where yon stake
stands."

Parson Jones put on his barnacles and went over to the stake towards
which Tom pointed. As soon as he had looked at it carefully, he called
out: "Why, Tom, this hath been just drove down into the sand. 'Tis a
brand-new stake of wood, and the pirates must have set it here
themselves as a mark, just as they drove the pegs you spoke about down
into the sand."

Tom came over and looked at the stake. It was a stout piece of oak
nearly two inches thick; it had been shaped with some care, and the top
of it had been painted red. He shook the stake and tried to move it,
but it had been driven or planted so deeply into the sand that he could
not stir it. "Aye, sir," he said, "it must have been set here for a
mark, for I'm sure 'twas not here yesterday or the day before." He
stood looking about him to see if there were other signs of the
pirates' presence. At some little distance there was the corner of
something white sticking up out of the sand. He could see that it was a
scrap of paper, and he pointed to it, calling out: "Yonder is a piece
of paper, sir. I wonder if they left that behind them?"

It was a miraculous chance that placed that paper there. There was only
an inch of it showing, and if it had not been for Tom's sharp eyes, it
would certainly have been overlooked and passed by. The next wind-storm
would have covered it up, and all that afterwards happened never would
have occurred. "Look sir," he said, as he struck the sand from it, "it
hath writing on it."

"Let me see it," said Parson Jones. He adjusted the spectacles a little
more firmly astride of his nose as he took the paper in his hand and
began conning it. "What's all this?" he said; "a whole lot of figures
and nothing else." And then he read aloud, "'Mark--S.S.W. by S.' What
d'ye suppose that means, Tom?"

"I don't know, sir," said Tom. "But maybe we can understand it better
if you read on."

"Tis all a great lot of figures," said Parson Jones, "without a grain
of meaning in them so far as I can see, unless they be sailing
directions." And then he began reading again: "'Mark--S.S.W. by S. 40,
72, 91, 130, 151, 177, 202, 232, 256, 271'--d'ye see, it must be
sailing directions--'299, 335, 362, 386, 415, 446, 469, 491, 522, 544,
571, 598'--what a lot of them there be--'626, 652, 676, 695, 724, 851,
876, 905, 940, 967. Peg. S.E. by E. 269 foot. Peg. S.S.W. by S. 427
foot. Peg. Dig to the west of this six foot.'"

"What's that about a peg?" exclaimed Tom. "What's that about a peg? And
then there's something about digging, too!" It was as though a sudden
light began shining into his brain. He felt himself growing quickly
very excited. "Read that over again, sir," he cried. "Why, sir, you
remember I told you they drove a peg into the sand. And don't they say
to dig close to it? Read it over again, sir--read it over again!"

"Peg?" said the good gentleman. "To be sure it was about a peg. Let's
look again. Yes, here it is. 'Peg S.E. by E. 269 foot.'"

"Aye!" cried out Tom Chist again, in great excitement. "Don't you
remember what I told you, sir, 269 foot? Sure that must be what I saw
'em measuring with the line." Parson Jones had now caught the flame of
excitement that was blazing up so strongly in Tom's breast. He felt as
though some wonderful thing was about to happen to them. "To be sure,
to be sure!" he called out, in a great big voice. "And then they
measured out 427 foot south-southwest by south, and then they drove
another peg, and then they buried the box six foot to the west of it.
Why, Tom--why, Tom Chist! if we've read this aright, thy fortune is
made."

Tom Chist stood staring straight at the old gentleman's excited face,
and seeing nothing but it in all the bright infinity of sunshine. Were
they, indeed, about to find the treasure-chest? He felt the sun very
hot upon his shoulders, and he heard the harsh, insistent jarring of a
tern that hovered and circled with forked tail and sharp white wings in
the sunlight just above their heads; but all the time he stood staring
into the good old gentleman's face.

It was Parson Jones who first spoke. "But what do all these figures
mean?" And Tom observed how the paper shook and rustled in the tremor
of excitement that shook his hand. He raised the paper to the focus of
his spectacles and began to read again. "'Mark 40, 72, 91--'"

"Mark?" cried out Tom, almost screaming. "Why, that must mean the stake
yonder; that must be the mark." And he pointed to the oaken stick with
its red tip blazing against the white shimmer of sand behind it.

"And the 40 and 72 and 91," cried the old gentleman, in a voice equally
shrill--"why, that must mean the number of steps the pirate was
counting when you heard him."

"To be sure that's what they mean!" cried Tom Chist. "That is it, and
it can be nothing else. Oh, come, sir--come, sir; let us make haste and
find it!"

"Stay! stay!" said the good gentleman, holding up his hand; and again
Tom Chist noticed how it trembled and shook. His voice was steady
enough, though very hoarse, but his hand shook and trembled as though
with a palsy. "Stay! stay! First of all, we must follow these
measurements. And 'tis a marvellous thing," he croaked, after a little
pause, "how this paper ever came to be here."

"Maybe it was blown here by the storm," suggested Tom Chist.

"Like enough; like enough," said Parson Jones. "Like enough, after the
wretches had buried the chest and killed the poor black man, they were
so buffeted and bowsed about by the storm that it was shook out of the
man's pocket, and thus blew away from him without his knowing aught of
it."

"But let us find the box!" cried out Tom Chist, flaming with his
excitement.

"Aye, aye," said the good man; "only stay a little, my boy, until we
make sure what we're about. I've got my pocket-compass here, but we
must have something to measure off the feet when we have found the peg.
You run across to Tom Brooke's house and fetch that measuring-rod he
used to lay out his new byre. While you're gone I'll pace off the
distance marked on the paper with my pocket-compass here."

VI

Tom Chist was gone for almost an hour, though he ran nearly all the way
and back, upborne as on the wings of the wind. When he returned,
panting, Parson Jones was nowhere to be seen, but Tom saw his footsteps
leading away inland, and he followed the scuffling marks in the smooth
surface across the sand-humps and down into the hollows, and by-and-by
found the good gentleman in a spot he at once knew as soon as he laid
his eyes upon it.

It was the open space where the pirates had driven their first peg, and
where Tom Chist had afterwards seen them kill the poor black man. Tom
Chist gazed around as though expecting to see some sign of the tragedy,
but the space was as smooth and as undisturbed as a floor, excepting
where, midway across it, Parson Jones who was now stooping over
something on the ground, had trampled it all around about.

When Tom Chist saw him, he was still bending over, scraping the sand
away from something he had found.

It was the first peg!

Inside of half an hour they had found the second and third pegs, and
Tom Chist stripped off his coat, and began digging like mad down into
the sand, Parson Jones standing over him watching him. The sun was
sloping well towards the west when the blade of Tom Chist's spade
struck upon something hard.

If it had been his own heart that he had hit in the sand his breast
could hardly have thrilled more sharply.

It was the treasure-box!

Parson Jones himself leaped down into the hole, and began scraping away
the sand with his hands as though he had gone crazy. At last, with some
difficulty, they tugged and hauled the chest up out of the sand to the
surface, where it lay covered all over with the grit that clung to it.

It was securely locked and fastened with a padlock, and it took a good
many blows with the blade of the spade to burst the bolt. Parson Jones
himself lifted the lid.

Tom Chist leaned forward and gazed down into the open box. He would not
have been surprised to have seen it filled full of yellow gold and
bright jewels. It was filled half full of books and papers, and half
full of canvas bags tied safely and securely around and around with
cords of string.

Parson Jones lifted out one of the bags, and it jingled as he did so.
It was full of money.

He cut the string, and with trembling, shaking hands handed the bag to
Tom, who, in an ecstasy of wonder and dizzy with delight, poured out
with swimming sight upon the coat spread on the ground a cataract of
shining silver money that rang and twinkled and jingled as it fell in a
shining heap upon the coarse cloth.

Parson Jones held up both hands into the air, and Tom stared at what he
saw, wondering whether it was all so, and whether he was really awake.
It seemed to him as though he was in a dream.

There were two-and-twenty bags in all in the chest: ten of them full of
silver money, eight of them full of gold money, three of them full of
gold-dust, and one small bag with jewels wrapped up in wad cotton and
paper.

[Illustration: "'TIS ENOUGH,' CRIED OUT PARSON JONES, 'TO MAKE US BOTH
RICH MEN'"]

"'Tis enough," cried out Parson Jones, "to make us both rich men as
long as we live."

The burning summer sun, though sloping in the sky, beat down upon them
as hot as fire; but neither of them noticed it. Neither did they notice
hunger nor thirst nor fatigue, but sat there as though in a trance,
with the bags of money scattered on the sand around them, a great pile
of money heaped upon the coat, and the open chest beside them. It was
an hour of sundown before Parson Jones had begun fairly to examine the
books and papers in the chest.

Of the three books, two were evidently log-books of the pirates who had
been lying off the mouth of the Delaware Bay all this time. The other
book was written in Spanish, and was evidently the log-book of some
captured prize.

It was then, sitting there upon the sand, the good old gentleman
reading in his high, cracking voice, that they first learned from the
bloody records in those two books who it was who had been lying inside
the Cape all this time, and that it was the famous Captain Kidd. Every
now and then the reverend gentleman would stop to exclaim, "Oh, the
bloody wretch!" or, "Oh, the desperate, cruel villains!" and then would
go on reading again a scrap here and a scrap there.

And all the while Tom Chist sat and listened, every now and then
reaching out furtively and touching the heap of money still lying upon
the coat.

One might be inclined to wonder why Captain Kidd had kept those bloody
records. He had probably laid them away because they so incriminated
many of the great people of the colony of New York that, with the books
in evidence, it would have been impossible to bring the pirate to
justice without dragging a dozen or more fine gentlemen into the dock
along with him. If he could have kept them in his own possession, they
would doubtless have been a great weapon of defence to protect him from
the gallows. Indeed, when Captain Kidd was finally brought to
conviction and hung, he was not accused of his piracies, but of
striking a mutinous seaman upon the head with a bucket and accidentally
killing him. The authorities did not dare try him for piracy. He was
really hung because he was a pirate, and we know that it was the
log-books that Tom Chist brought to New York that did the business for him;
he was accused and convicted of manslaughter for killing of his own
ship-carpenter with a bucket.

So Parson Jones, sitting there in the slanting light, read through
these terrible records of piracy, and Tom, with the pile of gold and
silver money beside him, sat and listened to him.

What a spectacle, if any one had come upon them! But they were alone,
with the vast arch of sky empty above them and the wide white stretch
of sand a desert around them. The sun sank lower and lower, until there
was only time to glance through the other papers in the chest.

They were nearly all goldsmiths' bills of exchange drawn in favor of
certain of the most prominent merchants of New York. Parson Jones, as
he read over the names, knew of nearly all the gentlemen by hearsay.
Aye, here was this gentleman; he thought that name would be among 'em.
What? Here is Mr. So-and-so. Well, if all they say is true, the villain
has robbed one of his own best friends. "I wonder," he said, "why the
wretch should have hidden these papers so carefully away with the other
treasures, for they could do him no good?" Then, answering his own
question: "Like enough because these will give him a hold over the
gentlemen to whom they are drawn so that he can make a good bargain for
his own neck before he gives the bills back to their owners. I tell you
what it is, Tom," he continued, "it is you yourself shall go to New
York and bargain for the return of these papers. 'Twill be as good as
another fortune to you."

The majority of the bills were drawn in favor of one Richard
Chillingsworth, Esquire. "And he is," said Parson Jones; "one of the
richest men in the province of New York. You shall go to him with the
news of what we have found."

"When shall I go?" said Tom Chist.

"You shall go upon the very first boat we can catch," said the Parson.
He had turned, still holding the bills in his hand, and was now
fingering over the pile of money that yet lay tumbled out upon the
coat. "I wonder, Tom," said he, "if you could spare me a score or so of
these doubloons?"

"You shall have fifty score, if you choose," said Tom, bursting with
gratitude and with generosity in his newly found treasure.

"You are as fine a lad as ever I saw, Tom," said the Parson, "and I'll
thank you to the last day of my life."

Tom scooped up a double handful of silver money. "Take it, sir," he
said, "and you may have as much more as you want of it."

He poured it into the dish that the good man made of his hands, and the
Parson made a motion as though to empty it into his pocket. Then he
stopped, as though a sudden doubt had occurred to him. "I don't know
that 'tis fit for me to take this pirate money, after all," he said.

"But you are welcome to it," said Tom.

Still the Parson hesitated. "Nay," he burst out, "I'll not take it;
'tis blood-money." And as he spoke he chucked the whole double handful
into the now empty chest, then arose and dusted the sand from his
breeches. Then, with a great deal of bustling energy, he helped to tie
the bags again and put them all back into the chest.

They reburied the chest in the place whence they had taken it, and then
the Parson folded the precious paper of directions, placed it carefully
in his wallet, and his wallet in his pocket.

"Tom," he said, for the twentieth time, "your fortune has been made
this day."

And Tom Chist, as he rattled in his breeches pocket the half-dozen
doubloons he had kept out of his treasure, felt that what his friend
had said was true.

    *    *    *    *    *

As the two went back homeward across the level space of sand, Tom Chist
suddenly stopped stock still and stood looking about him. "'Twas just
here," he said, digging his heel down into the sand, "that they killed
the poor black man."

"And here he lies buried for all time," said Parson Jones; and as he
spoke he dug his cane down into the sand. Tom Chist shuddered. He would
not have been surprised if the ferrule of the cane had struck something
soft beneath that level surface. But it did not, nor was any sign of
that tragedy ever seen again. For, whether the pirates had carried away
what they had done and buried it elsewhere, or whether the storm in
blowing the sand had completely levelled off and hidden all sign of
that tragedy where it was enacted, certain it is that it never came to
sight again--at least so far as Tom Chist and the Reverend Hillary
Jones ever knew.

VII

This is the story of the treasure-box. All that remains now is to
conclude the story of Tom Chist, and to tell of what came of him in the
end.

He did not go back again to live with old Matt Abrahamson. Parson Jones
had now taken charge of him and his fortunes, and Tom did not have to
go back to the fisherman's hut.

Old Abrahamson talked a great deal about it, and would come in his cups
and harangue good Parson Jones, making a vast protestation of what he
would do to Tom--if he ever caught him--for running away. But Tom on
all these occasions kept carefully out of his way, and nothing came of
the old man's threatenings.

Tom used to go over to see his foster-mother now and then, but always
when the old man was from home. And Molly Abrahamson used to warn him
to keep out of her father's way. "He's in as vile a humor as ever I
see, Tom," she said; "he sits sulking all day long, and 'tis my belief
he'd kill ye if he caught ye."

Of course Tom said nothing, even to her, about the treasure, and he and
the reverend gentleman kept the knowledge thereof to themselves. About
three weeks later Parson Jones managed to get him shipped aboard of a
vessel bound for New York town, and a few days later Tom Chist landed
at that place. He had never been in such a town before, and he could
not sufficiently wonder and marvel at the number of brick houses, at
the multitude of people coming and going along the fine, hard, earthen
sidewalk, at the shops and the stores where goods hung in the windows,
and, most of all, the fortifications and the battery at the point, at
the rows of threatening cannon, and at the scarlet-coated sentries
pacing up and down the ramparts. All this was very wonderful, and so
were the clustered boats riding at anchor in the harbor. It was like a
new world, so different was it from the sand-hills and the sedgy levels
of Henlopen.

Tom Chist took up his lodgings at a coffeehouse near to the town-hall,
and thence he sent by the post-boy a letter written by Parson Jones to
Master Chillingsworth. In a little while the boy returned with a
message, asking Tom to come up to Mr. Chillingsworth's house that
afternoon at two o'clock.

Tom went thither with a great deal of trepidation, and his heart fell
away altogether when he found it a fine, grand brick house, three
stories high, and with wrought-iron letters across the front.

The counting-house was in the same building; but Tom, because of Mr.
Jones's letter, was conducted directly into the parlor, where the great
rich man was awaiting his coming. He was sitting in a leather-covered
arm-chair, smoking a pipe of tobacco, and with a bottle of fine old
Madeira close to his elbow.

Tom had not had a chance to buy a new suit of clothes yet, and so he
cut no very fine figure in the rough dress he had brought with him from
Henlopen. Nor did Mr. Chillingsworth seem to think very highly of his
appearance, for he sat looking sideways at Tom as he smoked.

"Well, my lad," he said; "and what is this great thing you have to tell
me that is so mightily wonderful? I got what's-his-name--Mr. Jones's--
letter, and now I am ready to hear what you have to say."

But if he thought but little of his visitor's appearance at first, he
soon changed his sentiments towards him, for Tom had not spoken twenty
words when Mr. Chillingsworth's whole aspect changed. He straightened
himself up in his seat, laid aside his pipe, pushed away his glass of
Madeira, and bade Tom take a chair. He listened without a word as Tom
Chist told of the buried treasure, of how he had seen the poor negro
murdered, and of how he and Parson Jones had recovered the chest again.
Only once did Mr. Chillingsworth interrupt the narrative. "And to
think," he cried, "that the villain this very day walks about New York
town as though he were an honest man, ruffling it with the best of us!
But if we can only get hold of these log-books you speak of. Go on;
tell me more of this."

When Tom Chist's narrative was ended, Mr. Chillingsworth's bearing was
as different as daylight is from dark. He asked a thousand questions,
all in the most polite and gracious tone imaginable, and not only urged
a glass of his fine old Madeira upon Tom, but asked him to stay to
supper. There was nobody to be there, he said, but his wife and
daughter.

Tom, all in a panic at the very thought of the two ladies, sturdily
refused to stay even for the dish of tea Mr. Chillingsworth offered
him.

He did not know that he was destined to stay there as long as he should
live.

"And now," said Mr. Chillingsworth, "tell me about yourself."

"I have nothing to tell, your honor," said Tom, "except that I was
washed up out of the sea."

"Washed up out of the sea!" exclaimed Mr. Chillingsworth. "Why, how was
that? Come, begin at the beginning, and tell me all."

Thereupon Tom Chist did as he was bidden, beginning at the very
beginning and telling everything just as Molly Abrahamson had often
told it to him. As he continued, Mr. Chillingsworth's interest changed
into an appearance of stronger and stronger excitement. Suddenly he
jumped up out of his chair and began to walk up and down the room.

"Stop! stop!" he cried out at last, in the midst of something Tom was
saying. "Stop! stop! Tell me; do you know the name of the vessel that
was wrecked, and from which you were washed ashore?"

"I've heard it said," said Tom Chist, "'twas the _Bristol Merchant_."

"I knew it! I knew it!" exclaimed the great man, in a loud voice,
flinging his hands up into the air. "I felt it was so the moment you
began the story. But tell me this, was there nothing found with you
with a mark or a name upon it?"

"There was a kerchief," said Tom, "marked with a T and a C."

"Theodosia Chillingsworth!" cried out the merchant. "I knew it! I knew
it! Heavens! to think of anything so wonderful happening as this! Boy!
boy! dost thou know who thou art? Thou art my own brother's son. His
name was Oliver Chillingsworth, and he was my partner in business, and
thou art his son." Then he ran out into the entryway, shouting and
calling for his wife and daughter to come.

So Tom Chist--or Thomas Chillingsworth, as he now was to be called--did
stay to supper, after all.

This is the story, and I hope you may like it. For Tom Chist became
rich and great, as was to be supposed, and he married his pretty cousin
Theodosia (who had been named for his own mother, drowned in the
_Bristol Merchant_).

He did not forget his friends, but had Parson Jones brought to New York
to live.

As to Molly and Matt Abrahamson, they both enjoyed a pension of ten
pounds a year for as long as they lived; for now that all was well with
him, Tom bore no grudge against the old fisherman for all the drubbings
he had suffered.

The treasure-box was brought on to New York, and if Tom Chist did not
get all the money there was in it (as Parson Jones had opined he would)
he got at least a good big lump of it. And it is my belief that those
log-books did more to get Captain Kidd arrested in Boston town and
hanged in London than anything else that was brought up against him.




III. THE GHOST OF CAPTAIN BRAND

_Being a Narrative of Certain Extraordinary Adventures that Befell
Barnaby True, Esquire, of the Town of New York, in the Year 1753._


I

It is not so easy to tell why discredit should be cast upon a man
because of something his grandfather may have done amiss, but the
world, which is never over-nice in its discrimination as to where to
lay the blame, is often pleased to make the innocent suffer instead of
the guilty.

Barnaby True was a good, honest boy, as boys go, but yet was he not
ever allowed altogether to forget that his grandfather had been that
very famous pirate, Captain William Brand, who, after so many
marvellous adventures (if one may believe the catchpenny stories and
ballads that were writ about him), was murdered in Jamaica by Captain
John Malyoe, the commander of his own consort, the _Adventure_ galley.

It hath never been denied, that ever I heard, that up to the time of
Captain Brand's being commissioned against the South Sea pirates, he
had always been esteemed as honest, reputable a sea-captain as could
be. When he started out upon that adventure it was with a ship, the
_Royal Sovereign_, fitted out by some of the most decent merchants of
New York. Governor Van Dam himself had subscribed to the adventure, and
himself had signed Captain Brand's commission. So, if the unfortunate
man went astray, he must have had great temptation to do so; many
others behaving no better when the opportunity offered in these
far-away seas, when so many rich purchases might very easily be taken and
no one the wiser.

To be sure those stories and ballads made our captain to be a most
wicked, profane wretch; and if he were, why God knows he suffered and
paid for it, for he laid his bones in Jamaica, and never saw his home
or his wife or his daughter after he had sailed away on the _Royal
Sovereign_ on that long, misfortunate voyage, leaving his family behind
him in New York to the care of strangers.

At the time when Captain Brand so met his fate in Port Royal Harbor he
had increased his flotilla to two vessels--the _Royal Sovereign_ (which
was the vessel that had been fitted out for him in New York, a fine
brigantine and a good sailer), and the _Adventure_ galley, which he had
captured somewhere in the South Seas. This latter vessel he placed in
command of a certain John Malyoe whom he had picked up no one knows
where--a young man of very good family in England, who had turned
red-handed pirate. This man, who took no more thought of a human life than
he would of a broom straw, was he who afterwards murdered Captain
Brand, as you shall presently hear.

With these two vessels, the _Royal Sovereign_ and the _Adventure_,
Captain Brand and Captain Malyoe swept the Mozambique Channel as clear
as a boatswain's whistle, and after three years of piracy, having
gained a great booty of gold and silver and pearls, sailed straight for
the Americas, making first the island of Jamaica and the harbor of Port
Royal, where they dropped anchor to wait for news from home.

But by this time the authorities had been so stirred up against our
pirates that it became necessary for them to hide their booty until
such time as they might make their peace with the Admiralty Courts at
home. So one night Captain Brand and Captain Malyoe, with two others of
the pirates, went ashore with two great chests of treasure, which they
buried somewhere on the banks of the Cobra River near the place where
the old Spanish fort had stood.

What happened after the treasure was thus buried no one may tell. 'Twas
said that Captain Brand and Captain Malyoe fell a-quarrelling and that
the upshot of the matter was that Captain Malyoe shot Captain Brand
through the head, and that the pirate who was with him served Captain
Brand's companion after the same fashion with a pistol bullet through
the body.

After that the two murderers returned to their vessel, the _Adventure_
galley, and sailed away, carrying the bloody secret of the buried
treasure with them.

[Illustration: "CAPTAIN MALYOE SHOT CAPTAIN BRAND THROUGH THE HEAD"]

But this double murder of Captain Brand and his companion happened, you
are to understand, some twenty years before the time of this story, and
while our hero was but one year old. So now to our present history.

It is a great pity that any one should have a grandfather who ended his
days in such a sort as this; but it was no fault of Barnaby True's, nor
could he have done anything to prevent it, seeing he was not even born
into the world at the time that his grandfather turned pirate, and that
he was only one year old when Captain Brand so met his death on the
Cobra River. Nevertheless, the boys with whom he went to school never
tired of calling him "Pirate," and would sometimes sing for his benefit
that famous catchpenny ballad beginning thus:

"Oh! my name was Captain Brand,
  A-sailing,
  And a-sailing;
Oh! my name was Captain Brand,
  A-sailing free.
Oh! my name was Captain Brand,
And I sinned by sea and land,
For I broke God's just command,
  A-sailing free."

'Twas a vile thing to sing at the grandson of so unfortunate a man, and
oftentimes Barnaby True would double up his little fists and would
fight his tormentors at great odds, and would sometimes go back home
with a bloody nose or a bruised eye to have his poor mother cry over
him and grieve for him.

Not that his days were all of teasing and torment, either; for if his
comrades did sometimes treat him so, why then there were other times
when he and they were as great friends as could be, and used to go
a-swimming together in the most amicable fashion where there was a bit of
sandy strand below the little bluff along the East River above Fort
George.

There was a clump of wide beech-trees at that place, with a fine shade
and a place to lay their clothes while they swam about, splashing with
their naked white bodies in the water. At these times Master Barnaby
would bawl as lustily and laugh as loud as though his grandfather had
been the most honest ship-chandler in the town, instead of a
bloody-handed pirate who had been murdered in his sins.

Ah! It is a fine thing to look back to the days when one was a boy!
Barnaby may remember how, often, when he and his companions were
paddling so in the water, the soldiers off duty would come up from the
fort and would maybe join them in the water, others, perhaps, standing
in their red coats on the shore, looking on and smoking their pipes of
tobacco.

Then there were other times when maybe the very next day after our hero
had fought with great valor with his fellows he would go a-rambling
with them up the Bouwerie Road with the utmost friendliness; perhaps to
help them steal cherries from some old Dutch farmer, forgetting in such
an adventure what a thief his own grandfather had been.

But to resume our story.

When Barnaby True was between sixteen and seventeen years old he was
taken into employment in the counting-house of his stepfather, Mr.
Roger Hartright, the well-known West Indian merchant, a most
respectable man and one of the kindest and best of friends that anybody
could have in the world.

This good gentleman had courted the favor of Barnaby's mother for a
long time before he had married her. Indeed, he had so courted her
before she had ever thought of marrying Jonathan True. But he not
venturing to ask her in marriage, and she being a brisk, handsome
woman, she chose the man who spoke out his mind, and so left the silent
lover out in the cold. But so soon as she was a widow and free again,
Mr. Hartright resumed his wooing, and so used to come down every
Tuesday and Friday evening to sit and talk with her. Among Barnaby
True's earliest memories was a recollection of the good, kind gentleman
sitting in old Captain Brand's double-nailed arm-chair, the sunlight
shining across his knees, over which he had spread a great red silk
handkerchief, while he sipped a dish of tea with a dash of rum in it.
He kept up this habit of visiting the Widow True for a long time before
he could fetch himself to the point of asking anything more particular
of her, and so Barnaby was nigh fourteen years old before Mr. Hartright
married her, and so became our hero's dear and honored foster-father.

It was the kindness of this good man that not only found a place for
Barnaby in the counting-house, but advanced him so fast that, against
our hero was twenty-one years old, he had made four voyages as
supercargo to the West Indies in Mr. Hartright's ship, the _Belle
Helen_, and soon after he was twenty-one undertook a fifth.

Nor was it in any such subordinate position as mere supercargo that he
sailed upon these adventures, but rather as the confidential agent of
Mr. Hartright, who, having no likelihood of children of his own, was
jealous to advance our hero to a position of trust and responsibility
in the counting-house, and so would have him know all the particulars
of the business and become more intimately acquainted with the
correspondents and agents throughout those parts of the West Indies
where the affairs of the house were most active. He would give to
Barnaby the best sort of letters of introduction, so that the
correspondents of Mr. Hartright throughout those parts, seeing how that
gentleman had adopted our hero's interests as his own, were always at
considerable pains to be very polite and obliging in showing every
attention to him.

Especially among these gentlemen throughout the West Indies may be
mentioned Mr. Ambrose Greenfield, a merchant of excellent standing who
lived at Kingston, Jamaica. This gentleman was very particular to do
all that he could to make our hero's stay in these parts as agreeable
and pleasant to him as might be. Mr. Greenfield is here spoken of with
a greater degree of particularity than others who might as well be
remarked upon, because, as the reader shall presently discover for
himself, it was through the offices of this good friend that our hero
first became acquainted, not only with that lady who afterwards figured
with such conspicuousness in his affairs, but also with a man who,
though graced with a title, was perhaps the greatest villain who ever
escaped a just fate upon the gallows.

So much for the history of Barnaby True up to the beginning of this
story, without which you shall hardly be able to understand the purport
of those most extraordinary adventures that afterwards befell him, nor
the logic of their consequence after they had occurred.

II

Upon the occasion of our hero's fifth voyage into the West Indies he
made a stay of some six or eight weeks at Kingston, in the island of
Jamaica, and it was at that time that the first of those extraordinary
adventures befell him, concerning which this narrative has to relate.

It was Barnaby's habit, when staying at Kingston, to take lodging with
a very decent, respectable widow, by name Mrs. Anne Bolles, who, with
three extremely agreeable and pleasant daughters, kept a very clean and
well-served house for the accommodation of strangers visiting that
island.

One morning as he sat sipping his coffee, clad only in loose cotton
drawers and a jacket of the same material, and with slippers upon his
feet (as is the custom in that country, where every one endeavors to
keep as cool as may be), Miss Eliza, the youngest of the three
daughters--a brisk, handsome miss of sixteen or seventeen--came
tripping into the room and handed him a sealed letter, which she
declared a stranger had just left at the door, departing incontinently
so soon as he had eased himself of that commission. You may conceive of
Barnaby's astonishment when he opened the note and read the remarkable
words that here follow:

"_Mr. Barnaby True._

"Sir,--Though you don't know me, I know you,
and I tell you this: if you will be at Pratt's Ordinary
on Friday next at eight o'clock in the evening, and
will accompany the man who shall say to you, '_The
Royal Sovereign is come in_' you shall learn of something
the most to your advantage that ever befell you.
Sir, keep this note and give it to him who shall address
those words to you, so to certify that you are
the man he seeks. Sir, this is the most important thing
that can concern you, so you will please say nothing
to nobody about it."

Such was the wording of the note which was writ in as cramped and
villanous handwriting as our hero ever beheld, and which, excepting his
own name, was without address, and which possessed no superscription
whatever.

The first emotion that stirred Barnaby True was one of extreme and
profound astonishment; the second thought that came into his mind was
that maybe some witty fellow--of whom he knew a good many in that
place, and wild, mad rakes they were as ever the world beheld--was
attempting to play off a smart, witty jest upon him. Indeed, Miss Eliza
Bolles, who was of a lively, mischievous temper, was not herself above
playing such a prank should the occasion offer. With this thought in
his mind Barnaby inquired of her with a good deal of particularity
concerning the appearance and condition of the man who had left the
note, to all of which Miss replied with so straight a face and so
candid an air that he could no longer suspect her of being concerned in
any trick against him, and so eased his mind of any such suspicion. The
bearer of the note, she informed him, was a tall, lean man, with a red
neckerchief tied around his neck and with copper buckles to his shoes,
and he had the appearance of a sailor-man, having a great queue of red
hair hanging down his back. But, Lord! what was such a description as
that in a busy seaport town full of scores of men to fit such a
likeness? Accordingly, our hero put the note away into his wallet,
determining to show it to his good friend Mr. Greenfield that evening,
and to ask his advice upon it.

This he did, and that gentleman's opinion was the same as his: to wit,
that some wag was minded to play off a hoax upon him, and that the
matter of the letter was all nothing but smoke.

III

Nevertheless, though Barnaby was thus confirmed in his opinion as to
the nature of the communication he had received, he yet determined in
his own mind that he would see the business through to the end and so
be at Pratt's Ordinary, as the note demanded, upon the day and at the
time appointed therein.

Pratt's Ordinary was at that time a very fine and famous place of its
sort, with good tobacco and the best rum in the West Indies, and had a
garden behind it that, sloping down to the harbor front, was planted
pretty thick with palms and ferns, grouped into clusters with flowers
and plants. Here were a number of tables, some in little grottos, like
our Vauxhall in New York, with red and blue and white paper lanterns
hung among the foliage. Thither gentlemen and ladies used sometimes to
go of an evening to sit and drink lime-juice and sugar and water (and
sometimes a taste of something stronger), and to look out across the
water at the shipping and so to enjoy the cool of the day.

Thither, accordingly, our hero went a little before the time appointed
in the note, and, passing directly through the Ordinary and to the
garden beyond, chose a table at the lower end and close to the water's
edge, where he could not readily be seen by any one coming into the
place, and yet where he could easily view whoever should approach.
Then, ordering some rum and water and a pipe of tobacco, he composed
himself to watch for the arrival of those witty fellows whom he
suspected would presently come thither to see the end of their prank
and to enjoy his confusion.

The spot was pleasant enough, for the land breeze, blowing strong and
cool, set the leaves of the palm-tree above his head to rattling and
clattering continually against the darkness of the sky, where, the moon
then being half full, they shone every now and then like blades of
steel. The waves, also, were splashing up against the little
landing-place at the foot of the garden, sounding mightily pleasant in the
dusk of the evening, and sparkling all over the harbor where the moon
caught the edges of the water. A great many vessels were lying at anchor in
their ridings, with the dark, prodigious form of a man-of-war looming
up above them in the moonlight.

There our hero sat for the best part of an hour, smoking his pipe of
tobacco and sipping his rum and water, yet seeing nothing of those whom
he suspected might presently come thither to laugh at him.

It was not far from half after the hour when a row-boat came suddenly
out of the night and pulled up to the landing-place at the foot of the
garden, and three or four men came ashore in the darkness. They landed
very silently and walked up the garden pathway without saying a word,
and, sitting down at an adjacent table, ordered rum and water and began
drinking among themselves, speaking every now and then a word or two in
a tongue that Barnaby did not well understand, but which, from certain
phrases they let fall, he suspected to be Portuguese. Our hero paid no
great attention to them, till by-and-by he became aware that they had
fallen to whispering together and were regarding him very curiously. He
felt himself growing very uneasy under this observation, which every
moment grew more and more particular, and he was just beginning to
suspect that this interest concerning himself might have somewhat more
to do with him than mere idle curiosity, when one of the men, who was
plainly the captain of the party, suddenly says to him, "How now,
messmate; won't you come and have a drop of drink with us?"

At this address Barnaby instantly began to be aware that the affair he
had come upon was indeed no jest, as he had supposed it to be, but that
he had walked into what promised to be a very pretty adventure.
Nevertheless, not wishing to be too hasty in his conclusions, he
answered very civilly that he had drunk enough already, and that more
would only heat his blood.

"Well," says the stranger, "I may be mistook, but I believe you are Mr.
Barnaby True."

"You are right, sir, and that is my name," acknowledged Barnaby. "But
still I cannot guess how that may concern you, nor why it should be a
reason for my drinking with you." "That I will presently tell you,"
says the stranger, very composedly. "Your name concerns me because I
was sent here to tell Mr. Barnaby True that '_the Royal Sovereign is
come in_.'"

To be sure our hero's heart jumped into his throat at those words. His
pulse began beating at a tremendous rate, for here, indeed, was an
adventure suddenly opening to him such as a man may read about in a
book, but which he may hardly expect to befall him in the real
happenings of his life. Had he been a wiser and an older man he might
have declined the whole business, instead of walking blindly into that
of which he could see neither the beginning nor the ending; but being
barely one-and-twenty years of age, and possessing a sanguine temper
and an adventurous disposition that would have carried him into almost
anything that possessed a smack of uncertainty or danger, he contrived
to say, in a pretty easy tone (though God knows how it was put on for
the occasion):

"Well, if that be so, and if the _Royal Sovereign_ is indeed come in,
why, then, I'll join you, since you are so kind as to ask me."
Therewith he arose and went across to the other table, carrying his
pipe with him, and sat down and began smoking, with all the appearance
of ease he could command upon the occasion.

At this the other burst out a-laughing. "Indeed," says he, "you are a
cool blade, and a chip of the old block. But harkee, young gentleman,"
and here he fell serious again. "This is too weighty a business to
chance any mistake in a name. I believe that you are, as you say, Mr.
Barnaby True; but, nevertheless, to make perfectly sure, I must ask you
first to show me a note that you have about you and which you are
instructed to show to me."

"Very well," said Barnaby; "I have it here safe and sound, and you
shall see it." And thereupon and without more ado he drew out his
wallet, opened it, and handed the other the mysterious note which he
had kept carefully by him ever since he had received it. His
interlocutor took the paper, and drawing to him the candle, burning
there for the convenience of those who would smoke tobacco, began
immediately reading it.

This gave Barnaby True a moment or two to look at him. He was a tall,
lean man with a red handkerchief tied around his neck, with a queue of
red hair hanging down his back, and with copper buckles on his shoes,
so that Barnaby True could not but suspect that he was the very same
man who had given the note to Miss Eliza Bolles at the door of his
lodging-house.

"'Tis all right and straight and as it should be," the other said,
after he had so examined the note. "And now that the paper is read"
(suiting his action to his words), "I'll just burn it for safety's
sake."

And so he did, twisting it up and setting it to the flame of the
candle. "And now," he said, continuing his address, "I'll tell you what
I am here for. I was sent to ask if you're man enough to take your life
in your hands and to go with me in that boat down yonder at the foot of
the garden. Say 'Yes,' and we'll start away without wasting more time,
for the devil is ashore here at Jamaica--though you don't know what
that means--and if he gets ahead of us, why then we may whistle for
what we are after, for all the good 'twill do us. Say 'No,' and I go
away, and I promise you you shall never be troubled more in this sort
of a way. So now speak up plain, young gentleman, and tell us what is
your wish in this business, and whether you will adventure any further
or no."

If our hero hesitated it was not for long, and when he spoke up it was
with a voice as steady as could be.

"To be sure I'm man enough to go with you," says he; "and if you mean
me any harm I can look out for myself; and if I can't, then here is
something can look out for me." And therewith he lifted up the flap of
his pocket and showed the butt of a pistol he had fetched with him when
he had set out from his lodging-house that evening.

At this the other burst out a-laughing for a second time. "Come," says
he; "you are indeed of right mettle, and I like your spirit. All the
same, no one in all the world means you less ill than I, and so, if you
have to use that barker, 'twill not be upon us who are your friends,
but only upon one who is more wicked than the devil himself. So now if
you are prepared and have made up your mind and are determined to see
this affair through to the end, 'tis time for us to be away."
Whereupon, our hero indicating his acquiescence, his interlocutor and
the others (who had not spoken a single word for all this time), rose
together from the table, and the stranger having paid the scores of
all, they went down together to the boat that lay plainly awaiting
their coming at the bottom of the garden.

Thus coming to it, our hero could see that it was a large yawl-boat
manned by half a score of black men for rowers, and that there were two
lanterns in the stern-sheets, and three or four shovels.

The man who had conducted the conversation with Barnaby True for all
this time, and who was, as has been said, plainly the captain of the
expedition, stepped immediately down into the boat; our hero followed,
and the others followed after him; and instantly they were seated the
boat shoved off and the black men began pulling straight out into the
harbor, and so, at some distance away, around under the stern of the
man-of-war.

Not a word was spoken after they had thus left the shore, and they
might all have been so many spirits for the silence of the party.
Barnaby True was too full of his own thoughts to talk (and serious
enough thoughts they were by this time, with crimps to trepan a man at
every turn, and press-gangs to carry him off so that he might never be
heard of again). As for the others, they did not seem to choose to say
anything now that they had been fairly embarked upon their enterprise,
and so the crew pulled away for the best part of an hour, the leader of
the expedition directing the course of the boat straight across the
harbor, as though towards the mouth of the Cobra River. Indeed, this
was their destination, as Barnaby could after a while see for himself,
by the low point of land with a great, long row of cocoanut-palms
growing upon it (the appearance of which he knew very well), which
by-and-by began to loom up from the dimness of the moonlight. As they
approached the river they found the tide was running very violently, so
that it gurgled and rippled alongside the boat as the crew of black men
pulled strongly against it. Thus rowing slowly against the stream they
came around what appeared to be either a point of land or an islet
covered with a thick growth of mangrove-trees; though still no one
spoke a single word as to their destination, or what was the business
they had in hand.

The night, now that they had come close to the shore, appeared to be
full of the noises of running tide-water, and the air was heavy with
the smell of mud and marsh. And over all was the whiteness of the
moonlight, with a few stars pricking out here and there in the sky; and
everything was so strange and mysterious and so different from anything
that he had experienced before that Barnaby could not divest himself of
the feeling that it was all a dream from which at any moment he might
awaken. As for the town and the Ordinary he had quitted such a short
time before, so different were they from this present experience, it
was as though they might have concerned another life than that which he
was then enjoying.

Meantime, the rowers bending to the oars, the boat drew slowly around
into the open water once more. As it did so the leader of the
expedition of a sudden called out in a loud, commanding voice, whereat
the black men instantly ceased rowing and lay on their oars, the boat
drifting onward into the night.

At the same moment of time our hero became aware of another boat coming
down the river towards where they lay. This other boat, approaching
thus strangely through the darkness, was full of men, some of them
armed; for even in the distance Barnaby could not but observe that the
light of the moon glimmered now and then as upon the barrels of muskets
or pistols. This threw him into a good deal of disquietude of mind, for
whether they or this boat were friends or enemies, or as to what was to
happen next, he was altogether in the dark.

Upon this point, however, he was not left very long in doubt, for the
oarsmen of the approaching boat continuing to row steadily onward till
they had come pretty close to Barnaby and his companions, a man who sat
in the stern suddenly stood up, and as they passed by shook a cane at
Barnaby's companion with a most threatening and angry gesture. At the
same moment, the moonlight shining full upon him, Barnaby could see him
as plain as daylight--a large, stout gentleman with a round red face,
and clad in a fine, laced coat of red cloth. In the stern of the boat
near by him was a box or chest about the bigness of a middle-sized
travelling-trunk, but covered all over with cakes of sand and dirt. In
the act of passing, the gentleman, still standing, pointed at this
chest with his cane--an elegant gold-headed staff--and roared out in a
loud voice: "Are you come after this, Abram Dowling? Then come and take
it." And thereat, as he sat down again, burst out a-laughing as though
what he had said was the wittiest jest conceivable.

Either because he respected the armed men in the other boat, or else
for some reason best known to himself, the Captain of our hero's
expedition did not immediately reply, but sat as still as any stone.
But at last, the other boat having drifted pretty far away, he suddenly
found words to shout out after it: "Very well, Jack Malyoe! Very well,
Jack Malyoe! You've got the better of us once more. But next time is
the third, and then it'll be our turn, even if William Brand must come
back from the grave to settle with you himself."

But to this my fine gentleman in t'other boat made no reply except to
burst out once more into a great fit of laughter.

There was, however, still another man in the stern of the enemy's
boat--a villanous, lean man with lantern-jaws, and the top of his head as
bald as an apple. He held in his hand a great pistol, which he
flourished about him, crying out to the gentleman beside him, "Do but
give me the word, your honor, and I'll put another bullet through the
son of a sea cook." But the other forbade him, and therewith the boat
presently melted away into the darkness of the night and was gone.

This happened all in a few seconds, so that before our hero understood
what was passing he found the boat in which he still sat drifting
silently in the moonlight (for no one spoke for awhile) and the oars of
the other boat sounding farther and farther away into the distance.

By-and-by says one of those in Barnaby's boat, in Spanish, "Where shall
you go now?"

At this the leader of the expedition appeared suddenly to come back to
himself and to find his tongue again. "Go?" he roared out. "Go to the
devil! Go? Go where you choose! Go? Go back again--that's where well
go!" And therewith he fell a-cursing and swearing, frothing at the lips
as though he had gone clean crazy, while the black men, bending once
more to their oars, rowed back again across the harbor as fast as ever
they could lay oars to the water.

They put Barnaby True ashore below the old custom-house, but so
bewildered and amazed by all that had happened, and by what he had
seen, and by the names he had heard spoken, that he was only half
conscious of the familiar things among which he suddenly found himself
transported. The moonlight and the night appeared to have taken upon
them a new and singular aspect, and he walked up the street towards his
lodging like one drunk or in a dream. For you must remember that "John
Malyoe" was the captain of the _Adventure_ galley--he who had shot
Barnaby's own grandfather--and "Abram Dowling," I must tell you, had
been the gunner of the _Royal Sovereign_--he who had been shot at the
same time that Captain Brand met his tragical end. And yet these names
he had heard spoken--the one from one boat, and the other from the
other, so that he could not but wonder what sort of beings they were
among whom he had fallen.

As to that box covered all over with mud, he could only offer a
conjecture as to what it contained and as to what the finding of it
signified.

But of this our hero said nothing to any one, nor did he tell any one
what he suspected, for, though he was so young in years, he possessed a
continent disposition inherited from his father (who had been one of
ten children born to a poor but worthy Presbyterian minister of
Bluefield, Connecticut), so it was that not even to his good friend Mr.
Greenfield did Barnaby say a word as to what had happened to him, going
about his business the next day as though nothing of moment had
occurred.

But he was not destined yet to be done with those beings among whom he
had fallen that night; for that which he supposed to be the ending of
the whole affair was only the beginning of further adventures that were
soon to befall him.

IV

Mr. Greenfield lived in a fine brick house just outside of the town, on
the Mona Road. His family consisted of a wife and two daughters--
handsome, lively young ladies with very fine, bright teeth that shone
whenever they laughed, and with a-plenty to say for themselves. To this
pleasant house Barnaby True was often asked to a family dinner, after
which he and his good kind host would maybe sit upon the veranda,
looking out towards the mountain, smoking their cigarros while the
young ladies laughed and talked, or played upon the guitar and sang.

A day or two before the _Belle Helen_ sailed from Kingston, upon her
return voyage to New York, Mr. Greenfield stopped Barnaby True as he
was passing through the office, and begged him to come to dinner that
night. (For within the tropics, you are to know, they breakfast at
eleven o'clock and take dinner in the cool of the evening, because of
the heat, and not at mid-day, as we do in more temperate latitudes). "I
would," says Mr. Greenfield, "have you meet Sir John Malyoe and Miss
Marjorie, who are to be your chief passengers for New York, and for
whom the state cabin and the two state-rooms are to be fitted as here
ordered"--showing a letter--"for Sir John hath arranged," says Mr.
Greenfield, "for the Captain's own state-room."

Then, not being aware of Barnaby True's history, nor that Captain Brand
was his grandfather, the good gentleman--calling Sir John "Jack"
Malyoe--goes on to tell our hero what a famous pirate he had been, and
how it was he who had shot Captain Brand over t'other side of the
harbor twenty years before. "Yes," says he, "'tis the same Jack Malyoe,
though grown into repute and importance now, as who would not who hath
had the good-fortune to fall heir to a baronetcy and a landed estate?"

And so it befell that same night that Barnaby True once again beheld
the man who had murdered his own grandfather, meeting him this time
face to face.

That time in the harbor he had seen Sir John Malyoe at a distance and
in the darkness; now that he beheld him closer, it seemed to him that
he had never seen a countenance more distasteful to him in all his
life. Not that the man was altogether ugly, for he had a good enough
nose and a fine double chin; but his eyes stood out from his face and
were red and watery, and he winked them continually, as though they
were always a-smarting. His lips were thick and purple-red, and his
cheeks mottled here and there with little clots of veins.

When he spoke, his voice rattled in his throat to such a degree that it
made one wish to clear one's own throat to listen to him. So, what with
a pair of fat, white hands, and that hoarse voice, and his swollen
face, and his thick lips a-sticking out, it appeared to Barnaby True he
had never beheld a countenance that pleased him so little.

But if Sir John Malyoe suited our hero's taste so ill, the
granddaughter was in the same degree pleasing to him. She had a thin,
fair skin, red lips, and yellow hair--though it was then powdered
pretty white for the occasion--and the bluest eyes that ever he beheld
in all of his life. A sweet, timid creature, who appeared not to dare
so much as to speak a word for herself without looking to that great
beast, her grandfather, for leave to do so, for she would shrink and
shudder whenever he would speak of a sudden to her or direct a glance
upon her. When she did pluck up sufficient courage to say anything, it
was in so low a voice that Barnaby was obliged to bend his head to hear
her; and when she smiled she would as like as not catch herself short
and look up as though to see if she did amiss to be cheerful.

As for Sir John, he sat at dinner and gobbled and ate and drank,
smacking his lips all the while, but with hardly a word of civility
either to Mr. Greenfield or to Mrs. Greenfield or to Barnaby True; but
wearing all the while a dull, sullen air, as though he would say, "Your
damned victuals and drink are no better than they should be, but, such
as they are, I must eat 'em or eat nothing."

It was only after dinner was over and the young lady and the two misses
off in a corner together that Barnaby heard her talk with any degree of
ease. Then, to be sure, her tongue became loose enough, and she
prattled away at a great rate; though hardly above her breath. Then of
a sudden her grand-father called out, in his hoarse, rattling voice,
that it was time to go, upon which she stopped short in what she was
saying and jumped up from her chair, looking as frightened as though he
were going to strike her with that gold-headed cane of his that he
always carried with him.

Barnaby True and Mr. Greenfield both went out to see the two into their
coach, where Sir John's man stood holding the lantern. And who should
he be, to be sure, but that same lean villain with bald head who had
offered to shoot the Captain of Barnaby's expedition out on the harbor
that night! For one of the circles of light shining up into his face,
Barnaby True knew him the moment he clapped eyes upon him. Though he
could not have recognized our hero, he grinned at him in the most
impudent, familiar fashion, and never so much as touched his hat either
to him or to Mr. Greenfield; but as soon as his master and his young
mistress had entered the coach, banged to the door and scrambled up on
the seat alongside the driver, and so away without a word, but with
another impudent grin, this time favoring both Barnaby and the old
gentleman.

Such were Sir John Malyoe and his man, and the ill opinion our hero
conceived of them was only confirmed by further observation.

The next day Sir John Malyoe's travelling-cases began to come aboard
the _Belle Helen_, and in the afternoon that same lean, villanous
man-servant comes skipping across the gangplank as nimble as a goat, with
two black men behind him lugging a great sea-chest. "What!" he cries
out, "and so you is the supercargo, is you? Why, to be sure, I thought
you was more account when I saw you last night a-sitting talking with
his honor like his equal. Well, no matter," says he, "'tis something to
have a brisk, genteel young fellow for a supercargo. So come, my
hearty, lend a hand and help me set his honor's cabin to rights."

What a speech was this to endure from such a fellow! What with our
hero's distaste for the villain, and what with such odious familiarity,
you may guess into what temper so impudent an address must have cast
him. Says he, "You'll find the steward in yonder, and he'll show you
the cabin Sir John is to occupy." Therewith he turned and walked away
with prodigious dignity, leaving the other standing where he was.

As he went below to his own state-room he could not but see, out of the
tail of his eye, that the fellow was still standing where he had left
him, regarding him with a most evil, malevolent countenance, so that he
had the satisfaction of knowing that he had an enemy aboard for that
voyage who was not very likely to forgive or forget what he must regard
as so mortifying a slight as that which Barnaby had put upon him.

The next day Sir John Malyoe himself came aboard, accompanied by his
granddaughter, and followed by his man, and he followed again by four
black men, who carried among them two trunks, not large in size, but
vastly heavy in weight. Towards these two trunks Sir John and his
follower devoted the utmost solicitude and care to see that they were
properly carried into the cabin he was to occupy. Barnaby True was
standing in the saloon as they passed close by him; but though Sir John
looked hard at him and straight in the face, he never so much as spoke
a single word to our hero, or showed by a look or a sign that he had
ever met him before. At this the serving-man, who saw it all with eyes
as quick as a cat's, fell to grinning and chuckling to see Barnaby in
his turn so slighted.

The young lady, who also saw it, blushed as red as fire, and thereupon
delivered a courtesy to poor Barnaby, with a most sweet and gracious
affability.

There were, besides Sir John and the young lady, but two other
passengers who upon this occasion took the voyage to New York: the
Reverend Simon Styles, master of a flourishing academy at Spanish Town,
and his wife. This was a good, worthy couple of an extremely quiet
disposition, saying little or nothing, but contented to sit in the
great cabin by the hour together reading in some book or other. So,
what with the retiring humor of the worthy pair, and what with Sir John
Malyoe's fancy for staying all the time shut up in his own cabin with
those two trunks he held so precious, it fell upon Barnaby True in
great part to show that attention to the young lady that the
circumstances demanded. This he did with a great deal of satisfaction
to himself--as any one may suppose who considers a spirited young man
of one-and-twenty years of age and a sweet and beautiful young miss of
seventeen or eighteen thrown thus together day after day for above two
weeks.

Accordingly, the weather being very fair and the ship driving freely
along before a fine breeze, and they having no other occupation than to
sit talking together all day, gazing at the blue sea and the bright sky
overhead, it is not difficult to conceive of what was to befall.

But oh, those days when a man is young and, whether wisely or no,
fallen into such a transport of passion as poor Barnaby True suffered
at that time! How often during that voyage did our hero lie awake in
his berth at night, tossing this way and that without finding any
refreshment of sleep--perhaps all because her hand had touched his, or
because she had spoken some word to him that had possessed him with a
ravishing disquietude?

All this might not have befallen him had Sir John Malyoe looked after
his granddaughter instead of locking himself up day and night in his
own cabin, scarce venturing out except to devour his food or maybe to
take two or three turns across the deck before returning again to the
care of those chests he appeared to hold so much more precious than his
own flesh and blood.

Nor was it to be supposed that Barnaby would take the pains to consider
what was to become of it all, for what young man so situated as he but
would be perfectly content to live so agreeably in a fool's paradise,
satisfying himself by assigning the whole affair to the future to take
care of itself. Accordingly, our hero endeavored, and with pretty good
success, to put away from him whatever doubts might arise in his own
mind concerning what he was about, satisfying himself with making his
conversation as agreeable to his companion as it lay in his power to
do.

So the affair continued until the end of the whole business came with a
suddenness that promised for a time to cast our hero into the utmost
depths of humiliation and despair.

At that time the _Belle Helen_ was, according to Captain Manly's
reckoning, computed that day at noon, bearing about five-and-fifty
leagues northeast-by-east off the harbor of Charleston, in South
Carolina.

Nor was our hero likely to forget for many years afterwards even the
smallest circumstance of that occasion. He may remember that it was a
mightily sweet, balmy evening, the sun not having set above half an
hour before, and the sky still suffused with a good deal of brightness,
the air being extremely soft and mild. He may remember with the utmost
nicety how they were leaning over the rail of the vessel looking out
towards the westward, she fallen mightily quiet as though occupied with
very serious thoughts.

Of a sudden she began, without any preface whatever, to speak to
Barnaby about herself and her affairs, in a most confidential manner,
such as she had never used to him before. She told him that she and her
grandfather were going to New York that they might take passage thence
to Boston, in Massachusetts, where they were to meet her cousin Captain
Malyoe, who was stationed in garrison at that place. Continuing, she
said that Captain Malyoe was the next heir to the Devonshire estate,
and that she and he were to be married in the fall.

You may conceive into what a confusion of distress such a confession as
this, delivered so suddenly, must have cast poor Barnaby. He could
answer her not a single word, but stood staring in another direction
than hers, endeavoring to compose himself into some equanimity of
spirit. For indeed it was a sudden, terrible blow, and his breath came
as hot and dry as ashes in his throat. Meanwhile the young lady went on
to say, though in a mightily constrained voice, that she had liked him
from the very first moment she had seen him, and had been very happy
for these days she had passed in his society, and that she would always
think of him as a dear friend who had been very kind to her, who had so
little pleasure in her life.

At last Barnaby made shift to say, though in a hoarse and croaking
voice, that Captain Malyoe must be a very happy man, and that if he
were in Captain Malyoe's place he would be the happiest man in the
world. Thereupon, having so found his voice, he went on to tell her,
though in a prodigious confusion and perturbation of spirit, that he
too loved her, and that what she had told him struck him to the heart,
and made him the most miserable, unhappy wretch in the whole world.

She exhibited no anger at what he said, nor did she turn to look at
him, but only replied, in a low voice, that he should not talk so, for
that it could only be a pain to them both to speak of such things, and
that whether she would or no, she must do everything her grandfather
bade her, he being indeed a terrible man.

To this poor Barnaby could only repeat that he loved her with all his
heart, that he had hoped for nothing in his love, but that he was now
the most miserable man in the world.

It was at this moment, so momentous to our hero, that some one who had
been hiding unseen nigh them for all the while suddenly moved away, and
Barnaby, in spite of the gathering darkness, could perceive that it was
that villain man-servant of Sir John Malyoe's. Nor could he but know
that the wretch must have overheard all that had been said.

As he looked he beheld this fellow go straight to the great cabin,
where he disappeared with a cunning leer upon his face, so that our
hero could not but be aware that the purpose of the eavesdropper must
be to communicate all that he had overheard to his master. At this
thought the last drop of bitterness was added to his trouble, for what
could be more distressing to any man of honor than to possess the
consciousness that such a wretch should have overheard so sacred a
conversation as that which he had enjoyed with the young lady. She,
upon her part, could not have been aware that the man had listened to
what she had been saying, for she still continued leaning over the
rail, and Barnaby remained standing by her side, without moving, but so
distracted by a tumult of many passions that he knew not how or where
to look.

After a pretty long time of this silence, the young lady looked up to
see why her companion had not spoken for so great a while, and at that
very moment Sir John Malyoe comes flinging out of the cabin without his
hat, but carrying his gold-headed cane. He ran straight across the deck
towards where Barnaby and the young lady stood, swinging his cane this
way and that with a most furious and threatening countenance, while the
informer, grinning like an ape, followed close at his heels. As Sir
John approached them, he cried out in so loud a voice that all on deck
might have heard him, "You hussy!" (And all the time, you are to
remember, he was swinging his cane as though he would have struck the
young lady, who, upon her part, shrank back from him almost upon the
deck as though to escape such a blow.) "You hussy! What do you do here,
talking with a misbred Yankee supercargo not fit for a gentlewoman to
wipe her feet upon, and you stand there and listen to his fool talk! Go
to your room, you hussy"--only 'twas something worse he called her this
time--"before I lay this cane across you!"

You may suppose into what fury such words as these, spoken in Barnaby's
hearing, not to mention that vile slur set upon himself, must have cast
our hero. To be sure he scarcely knew what he did, but he put his hand
against Sir John Malyoe's breast and thrust him back most violently,
crying out upon him at the same time for daring so to threaten a young
lady, and that for a farthing he would wrench the stick out of his hand
and throw it overboard.

A little farther and Sir John would have fallen flat upon the deck with
the push Barnaby gave him. But he contrived, by catching hold of the
rail, to save his balance. Whereupon, having recovered himself, he came
running at our hero like a wild beast, whirling his cane about, and I
do believe would have struck him (and God knows then what might have
happened) had not his man-servant caught him and held him back.

"Keep back!" cried out our hero, still mighty hoarse. "Keep back! If
you strike me with that stick I'll fling you overboard!"

By this time, what with the sound of loud voices and the stamping of
feet, some of the crew and others aboard were hurrying up to the scene
of action. At the same time Captain Manly and the first mate, Mr.
Freesden, came running out of the cabin. As for our hero, having got
set agoing, he was not to be stopped so easily.

"And who are you, anyhow," he cries, his voice mightily hoarse even in
his own ears, "to threaten to strike me! You may be a bloody pirate,
and you may shoot a man from behind, as you shot poor Captain Brand on
the Cobra River, but you won't dare strike me face to face. I know who
you are and what you are!"

As for Sir John Malyoe, had he been struck of a sudden by palsy, he
could not have stopped more dead short in his attack upon our hero.
There he stood, his great, bulging eyes staring like those of a fish,
his face as purple as a cherry. As for Master Informer, Barnaby had the
satisfaction of seeing that he had stopped his grinning by now and was
holding his master's arm as though to restrain him from any further act
of violence.

By this time Captain Manly had come bustling up and demanded to know
what all the disturbance meant. Whereupon our hero cried out, still in
the extremity of passion:

"The villain insulted me and insulted the young lady; he threatened to
strike me with his cane. But he sha'n't strike me. I know who he is and
what he is. I know what he's got in his cabin in those two trunks, and
I know where he found it, and whom it belongs to."

At this Captain Manly clapped his hand upon our hero's shoulder and
fell to shaking him so that he could hardly stand, crying out to him
the while to be silent. Says he: "How do you dare, an officer of this
ship, to quarrel with a passenger of mine! Go straight to your cabin,
and stay there till I give you leave to come out again."

At this Master Barnaby came somewhat back to himself. "But he
threatened to strike me with his cane," he says, "and that I won't
stand from any man!"

"No matter for that," says Captain Manly, very sternly. "Go to your
cabin, as I bid you, and stay there till I tell you to come out again,
and when we get to New York I'll take pains to inform your step-father
of how you have behaved. I'll have no such rioting as this aboard my
ship."

By this time, as you may suppose, the young lady was gone. As for Sir
John Malyoe, he stood in the light of a lantern, his face that had been
so red now gone as white as ashes, and if a look could kill, to be sure
he would have destroyed Barnaby True where he stood.

It was thus that the events of that memorable day came to a conclusion.
How little did any of the actors of the scene suspect that a portentous
Fate was overhanging them, and was so soon to transform all their
present circumstances into others that were to be perfectly different!

And how little did our hero suspect what was in store for him upon the
morrow, as with hanging head he went to his cabin, and shutting the
door upon himself, and flinging himself down upon his berth, there
yielded himself over to the profoundest depths of humiliation and
despair.

V

From his melancholy meditations Barnaby, by-and-by and in spite of
himself, began dropping off into a loose slumber, disturbed by
extravagant dreams of all sorts, in which Sir John Malyoe played some
important and malignant part.

From one of these dreams he was aroused to meet a new and startling
fate, by hearing the sudden and violent explosion of a pistol-shot ring
out as though in his ears. This was followed immediately by the sound
of several other shots exchanged in rapid succession as coming from the
deck above. At the same instant a blow of such excessive violence shook
the _Belle Helen_ that the vessel heeled over before it, and Barnaby
was at once aware that another craft--whether by accident or with
intention he did not know--must have run afoul of them.

Upon this point, and as to whether or not the collision was designed,
he was, however, not left a moment in doubt, for even as the _Belle
Helen_ righted to her true keel, there was the sound of many footsteps
running across the deck and down into the great cabin. Then proceeded a
prodigious uproar of voices, together with the struggling of men's
bodies being tossed about, striking violently against the partitions
and bulkheads. At the same instant arose a screaming of women's voices,
and one voice, that of Sir John Malyoe, crying out as in the greatest
extremity: "You villains! You damned villains!" and with that the
sudden detonation of a pistol fired into the close space of the great
cabin.

Long before this time Barnaby was out in the middle of his own cabin.
Taking only sufficient time to snatch down one of the pistols that hung
at the head of his berth, he flung out into the great cabin, to find it
as black as night, the lantern slung there having been either blown out
or dashed out into darkness. All was as black as coal, and the gloom
was filled with a hubbub of uproar and confusion, above which sounded
continually the shrieking of women's voices. Nor had our hero taken
above a couple of steps before he pitched headlong over two or three
men struggling together upon the deck, falling with a great clatter and
the loss of his pistol, which, however, he regained almost immediately.

What all the uproar portended he could only guess, but presently
hearing Captain Manly's voice calling out, "You bloody pirate, would
you choke me to death?" he became immediately aware of what had
befallen the _Belle Helen_, and that they had been attacked by some of
those buccaneers who at that time infested the waters of America in
prodigious numbers.

It was with this thought in his mind that, looking towards the
companionway, he beheld, outlined against the darkness of the night
without, the form of a man's figure, standing still and motionless as a
statue in the midst of all this tumult, and thereupon, as by some
instinct, knew that that must be the master-maker of all this devil's
brew. Therewith, still kneeling upon the deck, he covered the bosom of
that figure point-blank, as he supposed, with his pistol, and instantly
pulled the trigger.

In the light of the pistol fire, Barnaby had only sufficient
opportunity to distinguish a flat face wearing a large pair of
mustachios, a cocked hat trimmed with gold lace, a red scarf, and brass
buttons. Then the darkness, very thick and black, again swallowed
everything.

But if our hero failed to clearly perceive the countenance towards
which he had discharged his weapon, there was one who appeared to have
recognized some likeness in it, for Sir John Malyoe's voice, almost at
Barnaby's elbow, cried out thrice in loud and violent tones, "William
Brand! William Brand! William Brand!" and thereat came the sound of
some heavy body falling down upon the deck.

This was the last that our hero may remember of that notable attack,
for the next moment whether by accident or design he never knew, he
felt himself struck so terrible a blow upon the side of the head, that
he instantly swooned dead away and knew no more.

VI

When Barnaby True came back to his senses again, it was to become aware
that he was being cared for with great skill and nicety, that his head
had been bathed with cold water, and that a bandage was being bound
about it as carefully as though a chirurgeon was attending to him.

He had been half conscious of people about him, but could not
immediately recall what had happened to him, nor until he had opened
his eyes to find himself in a perfectly strange cabin of narrow
dimensions but extremely well fitted and painted with white and gold.
By the light of a lantern shining in his eyes, together with the gray
of the early day through the deadlight, he could perceive that two men
were bending over him--one, a negro in a striped shirt, with a yellow
handkerchief around his head and silver ear-rings in his ears; the
other, a white man, clad in a strange, outlandish dress of a foreign
make, with great mustachios hanging down below his chin, and with gold
ear-rings in his ears.

It was this last who was attending to Barnaby's hurt with such extreme
care and gentleness.

All this Barnaby saw with his first clear consciousness after his
swoon. Then remembering what had befallen him, and his head beating as
though it would split asunder, he shut his eyes again, contriving with
great effort to keep himself from groaning aloud, and wondering as to
what sort of pirates these could be, who would first knock a man in the
head so terrible a blow as that which he had suffered, and then take
such care to fetch him back to life again, and to make him easy and
comfortable.

Nor did he open his eyes again, but lay there marvelling thus until the
bandage was properly tied about his head and sewed together. Then once
more he opened his eyes and looked up to ask where he was.

Upon hearing him speak, his attendants showed excessive signs of joy,
nodding their heads and smiling at him as though to reassure him. But
either because they did not choose to reply, or else because they could
not speak English, they made no answer, excepting by those signs and
gestures. The white man, however, made several motions that our hero
was to arise, and, still grinning and nodding his head, pointed as
though towards a saloon beyond. At the same time the negro held up our
hero's coat and beckoned for him to put it on. Accordingly Barnaby,
seeing that it was required of him to quit the place in which he then
lay, arose, though with a good deal of effort, and permitted the negro
to help him on with his coat, though feeling mightily dizzy and much
put about to keep upon his legs--his head beating fit to split asunder
and the vessel rolling and pitching at a great rate, as though upon a
heavy cross-sea.

So, still sick and dizzy, he went out into what he found was, indeed, a
fine saloon beyond, painted in white and gilt like the cabin he had
just quitted. This saloon was fitted in the most excellent taste
imaginable. A table extended the length of the room, and a quantity of
bottles, and glasses clear as crystal, were arranged in rows in a
hanging rack above.

But what most attracted our hero's attention was a man sitting with his
back to him, his figure clad in a rough pea-jacket, and with a red
handkerchief tied around his throat. His feet were stretched under the
table out before him, and he was smoking a pipe of tobacco with all the
ease and comfort imaginable. As Barnaby came in he turned round, and,
to the profound astonishment of our hero, presented to him in the light
of the lantern, the dawn shining pretty strong through the skylight,
the face of that very man who had conducted the mysterious expedition
that night across Kingston Harbor to the Cobra River.

VII

This man looked steadily at Barnaby True for above half a minute and
then burst out a-laughing. And, indeed, Barnaby, standing there with
the bandage about his head, must have looked a very droll picture of
that astonishment he felt so profoundly at finding who was this pirate
into whose hands he had fallen. "Well," says the other, "and so you be
up at last, and no great harm done, I'll be bound. And how does your
head feel by now, my young master?"

To this Barnaby made no reply, but, what with wonder and the dizziness
of his head, seated himself at the table over against his interlocutor,
who pushed a bottle of rum towards him, together with a glass from the
hanging rack. He watched Barnaby fill his glass, and so soon as he had
done so began immediately by saying: "I do suppose you think you were
treated mightily ill to be so handled last night. Well, so you were
treated ill enough, though who hit you that crack upon the head I know
no more than a child unborn. Well, I am sorry for the way you were
handled, but there is this much to say, and of that you may feel well
assured, that nothing was meant to you but kindness, and before you are
through with us all you will believe that without my having to tell you
so."

Here he helped himself to a taste of grog, and sucking in his lips went
on again with what he had to say. "Do you remember," says he, "that
expedition of ours in Kingston Harbor, and how we were all of us balked
that night?" then, without waiting for Barnaby's reply: "And do you
remember what I said to that villain Jack Malyoe that night as his boat
went by us? I says to him, 'Jack Malyoe,' says I, 'you've got the
better of us once again, but next time it will be our turn, even if
William Brand himself has to come back from the grave to settle with
you.'"

"I remember something of the sort," said Barnaby, "but I profess I am
all in the dark as to what you are driving at."

At this the other burst out in a great fit of laughing. "Very well,
then," said he, "this night's work is only the ending of what was so
ill begun there. Look yonder"--pointing to a corner of the cabin--"and
then maybe you will be in the dark no longer." Barnaby turned his head
and there beheld in the corner of the saloon those very two
travelling-cases that Sir John Malyoe had been so particular to keep in his
cabin and under his own eyes through all the voyage from Jamaica.

"I'll show you what is in 'em," says the other, and thereupon arose,
and Barnaby with him, and so went over to where the two
travelling-cases stood.

Our hero had a strong enough suspicion as to what the cases contained.
But, Lord! what were suspicions to what his two eyes beheld when that
man lifted the lid of one of them--the locks thereof having already
been forced--and, flinging it back, displayed to Barnaby's astonished
and bedazzled sight a great treasure of gold and silver, some of it
tied up in leathern bags, to be sure, but so many of the coins, big and
little, yellow and white, lying loose in the cases as to make our hero
think that a great part of the treasures of the Indies lay there before
him.

"Well, and what do you think of that?" said the other. "Is it not
enough for a man to turn pirate for?" and thereupon burst out
a-laughing and clapped down the lid again. Then suddenly turning serious:
"Come Master Barnaby," says he. "I am to have some very sober talk with
you, so fill up your glass again and then we will heave at it."

Nor even in after years, nor in the light of that which afterwards
occurred, could Barnaby repeat all that was said to him upon that
occasion, for what with the pounding and beating of his aching head,
and what with the wonder of what he had seen, he was altogether in the
dark as to the greater part of what the other told him. That other
began by saying that Barnaby, instead of being sorry that he was
William Brand's grandson, might thank God for it; that he (Barnaby) had
been watched and cared for for twenty years in more ways than he would
ever know; that Sir John Malyoe had been watched also for all that
while, and that it was a vastly strange thing that Sir John Malyoe's
debts in England and Barnaby's coming of age should have brought them
so together in Jamaica--though, after all, it was all for the best, as
Barnaby himself should presently see, and thank God for that also. For
now all the debts against that villain Jack Malyoe were settled in
full, principal and interest, to the last penny, and Barnaby was to
enjoy it the most of all. Here the fellow took a very comfortable sip
of his grog, and then went on to say with a very cunning and knowing
wink of the eye that Barnaby was not the only passenger aboard, but
that there was another in whose company he would be glad enough, no
doubt, to finish the balance of the voyage he was now upon. So now, if
Barnaby was sufficiently composed, he should be introduced to that
other passenger. Thereupon, without waiting for a reply, he
incontinently arose and, putting away the bottle of rum and the
glasses, went across the saloon--Barnaby watching him all the while
like a man in a dream--and opened the door of a cabin like that which
Barnaby had occupied a little while before. He was gone only for a
moment, for almost immediately he came out again ushering a lady before
him.

By now the daylight in the cabin was grown strong and clear, so that
the light shining full upon her face, Barnaby True knew her the instant
she appeared.

It was Miss Marjorie Malyoe, very white, but strangely composed,
showing no terror, either in her countenance or in her expression.

    *    *    *    *    *

It would not be possible for the writer to give any clear idea of the
circumstances of the days that immediately followed, and which, within
a week, brought Barnaby True and the enchanting object of his
affections at once to the ending of their voyage, and of all these
marvellous adventures. For when, in after times, our hero would
endeavor to revive a memory of the several occurrences that then
transpired, they all appeared as though in a dream or a bewitching
phantasm.

All that he could recall were long days of delicious enjoyment followed
by nights of dreaming. But how enchanting those days! How exquisite the
distraction of those nights!

Upon occasions he and his charmer might sit together under the shade of
the sail for an hour at a stretch, he holding her hand in his and
neither saying a single word, though at times the transports of poor
Barnaby's emotions would go far to suffocate him with their rapture. As
for her face at such moments, it appeared sometimes to assume a
transparency as though of a light shining from behind her countenance.

The vessel in which they found themselves was a brigantine of good size
and build, but manned by a considerable crew, the most strange and
outlandish in their appearance that Barnaby had ever beheld. For some
were white, some were yellow, and some were black, and all were tricked
out with gay colors, and gold ear-rings in their ears, and some with
long mustachios, and others with handkerchiefs tied around their heads.
And all these spoke together a jargon of which Barnaby True could not
understand a single word, but which might have been Portuguese from one
or two phrases he afterwards remembered. Nor did this outlandish crew,
of God knows what sort of men, address any of their conversation either
to Barnaby or to the young lady. They might now and then have looked at
him and her out of the corners of their yellow eyes, but that was all;
otherwise they were, indeed, like the creatures of a dream. Only he who
was commander of this strange craft, when he would come down into the
saloon to mix a glass of grog or to light a pipe of tobacco, would
maybe favor Barnaby with a few words concerning the weather or
something of the sort, and then to go on deck again about his business.

Indeed, it may be affirmed with pretty easy security that no such
adventure as this ever happened before; for here were these two
innocent young creatures upon board of a craft that no one, under such
circumstances as those recounted above, could doubt was a pirate or
buccaneer, the crew whereof had seen no one knows what wicked deeds;
yet they two as remote from all that and as profoundly occupied with
the transports of their passion and as innocent in their satisfaction
thereof as were Corydon and Phyllis beside their purling streams and
flowery meads, with nymphs and satyrs caracoling about them.

VIII

It is probable that the polite reader of this veracious narrative,
instead of considering it as the effort of the author to set before him
a sober and well-digested history, has been all this while amusing
himself by regarding it only as a fanciful tale designed for his
entertainment. If this be so, the writer may hardly hope to convince
him that what is to follow is a serious narrative of that which, though
never so ingenuous in its recapitulation, is an altogether inexplicable
phenomenon. Accordingly, it is with extraordinary hesitation that the
scribe now invites the confidence of his reader in the succinct truth
of that which he has to relate. It is in brief as follows:

That upon the last night of this part of his voyage, Barnaby True was
awakened from slumber by flashes of lightning shining into his cabin,
and by the loud pealing of approaching thunder. At the same time
observing the sound of footsteps moving back and forth as in great
agitation overhead, and the loud shouting of orders, he became aware
that a violent squall of wind must be approaching the vessel. Being
convinced of this he arose from his berth, dressed quickly, and hurried
upon deck, where he found a great confusion of men running hither and
thither and scrambling up and down the rigging like monkeys, while the
Captain, and one whom he had come to know as the Captain's mate, were
shouting out orders in a strange foreign jargon.

A storm was indeed approaching with great rapidity, a prodigious circle
of rain and clouds whirling overhead like smoke, while the lightning,
every now and then, flashed with intense brightness, followed by loud
peals of thunder.

By these flashes of lightning Barnaby observed that they had made land
during the night, for in the sudden glare of bright light he beheld a
mountainous headland and a long strip of sandy beach standing out
against the blackness of the night beyond. So much he was able to
distinguish, though what coast it might be he could not tell, for
presently another flash falling from the sky, he saw that the shore was
shut out by the approaching downfall of rain.

This rain came presently streaming down upon them with a great gust of
wind and a deal of white foam across the water. This violent gale of
wind suddenly striking the vessel, careened it to one side so that for
a moment it was with much ado that he was able to keep his feet at all.
Indeed, what with the noise of the tempest through the rigging and the
flashes of lightning and the pealing of the thunder and the clapping of
an unfurled sail in the darkness, and the shouting of orders in a
strange language by the Captain of the craft, who was running up and
down like a bedlamite, it was like pandemonium with all the devils of
the pit broke loose into the night.

It was at this moment, and Barnaby True was holding to the back-stays,
when a sudden, prolonged flash of lightning came after a continued
space of darkness. So sharp and heavy was this shaft that for a moment
the night was as bright as day, and in that instant occurred that which
was so remarkable that it hath afforded the title of this story itself.
For there, standing plain upon the deck and not far from the
companionway, as though he had just come up from below, our hero beheld
a figure the face of which he had seen so imperfectly once before by
the flash of his own pistol in the darkness. Upon this occasion,
however, the whole figure was stamped out with intense sharpness
against the darkness, and Barnaby beheld, as clear as day, a great
burly man, clad in a tawdry tinsel coat, with a cocked hat with gold
braid upon his head. His legs, with petticoat breeches and cased in
great leathern sea-boots pulled up to his knees, stood planted wide
apart as though to brace against the slant of the deck. The face our
hero beheld to be as white as dough, with fishy eyes and a bony
forehead, on the side of which was a great smear as of blood.

All this, as was said, stood out as sharp and clear as daylight in that
one flash of lightning, and then upon the instant was gone again, as
though swallowed up into the darkness, while a terrible clap of thunder
seemed to split the very heavens overhead and a strong smell as of
brimstone filled the air around about.

At the same moment some voice cried out from the darkness, "William
Brand, by God!"

Then, the rain clapping down in a deluge, Barnaby leaped into the
saloon, pursued by he knew not what thoughts. For if that was indeed
the image of old William Brand that he had seen once before and now
again, then the grave must indeed have gaped and vomited out its dead
into the storm of wind and lightning; for what he beheld that moment,
he hath ever averred, he saw as clear as ever he saw his hand before
his face.

This is the last account of which there is any record when the figure
of Captain William Brand was beheld by the eyes of a living man. It
must have occurred just off the Highlands below the Sandy Hook, for the
next morning when Barnaby True came upon deck it was to find the sun
shining brightly and the brigantine riding upon an even keel, at anchor
off Staten Island, three or four cable-lengths distance from a small
village on the shore, and the town of New York in plain sight across
the water.

'Twas the last place in the world he had expected to see.

IX

And, indeed, it did seem vastly strange to lie there alongside Staten
Island all that day, with New York town in plain sight across the water
and yet so impossible to reach. For whether he desired to escape or no,
Barnaby True could not but observe that both he and the young lady were
so closely watched that they might as well have been prisoners, tied
hand and foot and laid in the hold, so far as any hope of getting away
was concerned.

Throughout that day there was a vast deal of mysterious coming and
going aboard the brigantine, and in the afternoon a sail-boat went up
to the town, carrying the Captain of the brigantine and a great load in
the stern covered over with a tarpaulin. What was so taken up to the
town Barnaby did not then guess, nor did he for a moment suspect of
what vast importance it was to be for him.

About sundown the small boat returned, fetching the pirate Captain of
the brigantine back again. Coming aboard and finding Barnaby on deck,
the other requested him to come down into the saloon for he had a few
serious words to say to him. In the saloon they found the young lady
sitting, the broad light of the evening shining in through the
skylight, and making it all pretty bright within.

The Captain commanded Barnaby to be seated, whereupon he chose a place
alongside the young lady. So soon as he had composed himself the
Captain began very seriously, with a preface somewhat thus: "Though you
may think me the Captain of this brigantine, Master Barnaby True, I am
not really so, but am under orders of a superior whom I have obeyed in
all these things that I have done." Having said so much as this, he
continued his address to say that there was one thing yet remaining for
him to do, and that the greatest thing of all.

He said that this was something that both Barnaby and the young lady
were to be called upon to perform, and he hoped that they would do
their part willingly; but that whether they did it willingly or no, do
it they must, for those also were the orders he had received.

You may guess how our hero was disturbed by this prologue. He had found
the young lady's hand beneath the table and he now held it very closely
in his own; but whatever might have been his expectations as to the
final purport of the communications the other was about to favor him
with, his most extreme expectations could not have equalled that which
was demanded of him.

"My orders are these," said his interlocutor, continuing: "I am to take
you and the young lady ashore, and to see that you are married before I
quit you, and to that end a very good, decent, honest minister who
lives ashore yonder in the village was chosen and hath been spoken to,
and is now, no doubt, waiting for you to come. That is the last thing I
am set to do; so now I will leave you and her young ladyship alone
together for five minutes to talk it over, but be quick about it, for
whether willing or not, this thing must be done."

Thereupon he incontinently went away, as he had promised, leaving those
two alone together, our hero like one turned into stone, and the young
lady, her face turned away, as red as fire, as Barnaby could easily
distinguish by the fading light.

Nor can I tell what Barnaby said to her, nor what words or arguments he
used, for so great was the distraction of his mind and the tumult of
his emotions that he presently discovered that he was repeating to her
over and over again that God knew he loved her, and that with all his
heart and soul, and that there was nothing in all the world for him but
her. After which, containing himself sufficiently to continue his
address, he told her that if she would not have it as the man had said,
and if she were not willing to marry him as she was bidden to do, he
would rather die a thousand, aye, ten thousand, deaths than lend
himself to forcing her to do such a thing as this. Nevertheless, he
told her she must speak up and tell him yes or no, and that God knew he
would give all the world if she would say "yes."

All this and much more he said in such a tumult that he was hardly
aware of what he was speaking, and she sitting there, as though her
breath stifled her. Nor did he know what she replied to him, only that
she would marry him. Therewith he took her into his arms and for the
first time set his lips to hers, in such a transport of ecstasy that
everything seemed to his sight as though he were about to swoon.

So when the Captain returned to the saloon he found Barnaby sitting
there holding her hand, she with her face turned away, and he so full
of joy that the promise of heaven could not have made him happier.

The yawl-boat belonging to the brigantine was ready and waiting
alongside when they came upon deck, and immediately they descended to
it and took their seats. Reaching the shore, they landed, and walked up
the village street in the twilight, she clinging to our hero's arm as
though she would faint away. The Captain of the brigantine and two
other men aboard accompanied them to the minister's house, where they
found the good man waiting for them, smoking his pipe in the warm
evening, and walking up and down in front of his own door. He
immediately conducted them into the house, where, his wife having
fetched a candle, and two others from the village being present, the
good, pious man having asked several questions as to their names and
their age and where they were from, and having added his blessing, the
ceremony was performed, and the certificate duly signed by those
present from the village--the men who had come ashore from the
brigantine alone refusing to set their hands to any paper.

The same sail-boat that had taken the Captain up to the town was
waiting for Barnaby and the young lady as they came down to the
landing-place. There the Captain of the brigantine having wished them
godspeed, and having shaken Barnaby very heartily by the hand, he
helped to push off the boat, which with the slant of the wind presently
sailed swiftly away, dropping the shore and those strange beings, and
the brigantine in which they sailed, alike behind them into the night.

They could hear through the darkness the creaking of the sails being
hoisted aboard of the pirate vessel; nor did Barnaby True ever set eyes
upon it or the crew again, nor, so far as the writer is informed, did
anybody else.

X

It was nigh midnight when they made Mr. Hartright's wharf at the foot
of Beaver Street. There Barnaby and the boatmen assisted the young lady
ashore, and our hero and she walked up through the now silent and
deserted street to Mr. Hartright's house.

You may conceive of the wonder and amazement of our hero's dear
step-father when aroused by Barnaby's continued knocking at the street
door, and clad in a dressing-gown and carrying a lighted candle in his
hand, he unlocked and unbarred the door, and so saw who it was had aroused
him at such an hour of the night, and beheld the young and beautiful
lady whom Barnaby had brought home with him.

The first thought of the good man was that the _Belle Helen_ had come
into port; nor did Barnaby undeceive him as he led the way into the
house, but waited until they were all safe and sound together before he
should unfold his strange and wonderful story.

"This was left for you by two foreign sailors this afternoon, Barnaby,"
the good man said, as he led the way through the hall, holding up the
candle at the same time, so that Barnaby might see an object that stood
against the wainscoting by the door of the dining-room.

It was with difficulty that our hero could believe his eyes when he
beheld one of the treasure-chests that Sir John Malyoe had fetched with
such particularity from Jamaica.

He bade his step-father hold the light nigher, and then, his mother
having come down-stairs by this time, he flung back the lid and
displayed to the dazzled sight of all the great treasure therein
contained.

You are to suppose that there was no sleep for any of them that night,
for what with Barnaby's narrative of his adventures, and what with the
thousand questions asked of him, it was broad daylight before he had
finished the half of all that he had to relate.

The next day but one brought the _Belle Helen_ herself into port, with
the terrible news not only of having been attacked at night by pirates,
but also that Sir John Malyoe was dead. For whether it was the sudden
fright that overset him, or whether it was the strain of passion that
burst some blood-vessel upon his brain, it is certain that when the
pirates quitted the _Belle Helen_, carrying with them the young lady
and Barnaby and the travelling-trunks, they left Sir John Malyoe lying
in a fit upon the floor, frothing at the mouth and black in the face,
as though he had been choked. It was in this condition that he was
raised and taken to his berth, where, the next morning about two
o'clock, he died, without once having opened his eyes or spoken a
single word.

As for the villain man-servant, no one ever saw him afterwards; though
whether he jumped overboard, or whether the pirates who so attacked the
ship had carried him away bodily, who shall say?

Mr. Hartright had been extremely perplexed as to the ownership of the
chest of treasure that had been left by those men for Barnaby, but the
news of the death of Sir John Malyoe made the matter very easy for him
to decide. For surely if that treasure did not belong to Barnaby, there
could be no doubt but that it belonged to his wife--she being Sir John
Malyoe's legal heir. Thus it was that he satisfied himself, and thus
that great fortune (in actual computation amounting to upward of
sixty-three thousand pounds) fell to Barnaby True, the grandson of that
famous pirate William Brand.

As for the other case of treasure, it was never heard of again, nor
could Barnaby decide whether it was divided as booty among the pirates,
or whether they had carried it away with them to some strange and
foreign land, there to share it among themselves.

It is thus we reach the conclusion of our history, with only this to
observe, that whether that strange appearance of Captain Brand was
indeed a ghostly and spiritual visitation, or whether he was present on
those two occasions in flesh and blood, he was, as has been said, never
heard of again.




IV. A TRUE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL AT NEW HOPE


_At the time of the beginning of the events about to be narrated--which
the reader is to be informed occurred between the years 1740 and 1742--
there stood upon the high and rugged crest of Pick-a-Neck-a-Sock Point
(or Pig and Sow Point, as it had come to be called) the wooden ruins of
a disused church, known throughout those parts as the Old Free Grace
Meeting-house._

_This humble edifice had been erected by a peculiar religious sect
calling themselves the Free Grace Believers, the radical tenet of whose
creed was a denial of the existence of such a place as Hell, and an
affirmation of the universal mercy of God, to the intent that all souls
should enjoy eternal happiness in the life to come._

_For this dangerous heresy the Free Grace Believers were expelled from
the Massachusetts Colony, and, after sundry peregrinations, settled at
last in the Providence Plantations, upon Pick-a-Neck-a-Sock Point,
coadjacent to the town of New Hope. There they built themselves a small
cluster of huts, and a church wherein to worship; and there for a while
they dwelt, earning a precarious livelihood from the ungenerous soil
upon which they had established themselves._

_As may be supposed, the presence of so strange a people was
entertained with no great degree of complaisance by the vicinage, and
at last an old deed granting Pick-a-Neck-a-Sock to Captain Isaiah
Applebody was revived by the heirs of that renowned Indian-fighter,
whereupon the Free Grace Believers were warned to leave their bleak and
rocky refuge for some other abiding-place. Accordingly, driven forth
into the world again, they embarked in the snow[1] "Good Companion," of
Bristol, for the Province of Pennsylvania, and were afterwards heard of
no more in those parts. Their vacated houses crumbled away into ruins,
and their church tottered to decay._

[Footnote 1: A two-masted square-rigged vessel.]

_So at the beginning of these events, upon the narrative of which the
author now invites the reader to embark together with himself._

I

HOW THE DEVIL HAUNTED THE MEETING-HOUSE

At the period of this narrative the settlement of New Hope had grown
into a very considerable seaport town, doing an extremely handsome
trade with the West Indies in cornmeal and dried codfish for sugar,
molasses, and rum.

Among the more important citizens of this now wealthy and elegant
community, the most notable was Colonel William Belford--a magnate at
once distinguished and honored in the civil and military affairs of the
colony. This gentleman was an illegitimate son of the Earl of
Clandennie by the daughter of a surgeon of the Sixty-seventh Regiment
of Scots, and he had inherited a very considerable fortune upon the
death of his father, from which he now enjoyed a comfortable
competency.

Our Colonel made no little virtue of the circumstances of his exalted
birth. He was wont to address his father's memory with a sobriety that
lent to the fact of his illegitimacy a portentous air of seriousness,
and he made no secret of the fact that he was the friend and the
confidential correspondent of the present Earl of Clandennie. In his
intercourse with the several Colonial governors he assumed an attitude
of authority that only his lineage could have supported him in
maintaining, and, possessing a large and commanding presence, he bore
himself with a continent reserve that never failed to inspire with awe
those whom he saw fit to favor with his conversation.

This noble and distinguished gentleman possessed in a brother an exact
and perfect opposite to himself. Captain Obadiah Belford was a West
Indian, an inhabitant of Kingston in the island of Jamaica. He was a
cursing, swearing, hard-drinking renegado from virtue; an acknowledged
dealer in negro slaves, and reputed to have been a buccaneer, if not an
out-and-out pirate, such as then infested those tropical latitudes in
prodigious numbers. He was not unknown in New Hope, which he had
visited upon several occasions for a week or so at a time. During each
period he lodged with his brother, whose household he scandalized by
such freaks as smoking his pipe of tobacco in the parlor, offering
questionable pleasantries to the female servants, and cursing and
swearing in the hallways with a fecundity and an ingenuity that would
have put the most godless sailor about the docks to the blush.

Accordingly, it may then be supposed into what a dismay it threw
Colonel Belford when one fine day he received a letter from Captain
Obadiah, in which our West Indian desperado informed his brother that
he proposed quitting those torrid latitudes in which he had lived for
so long a time, and that he intended thenceforth to make his home in
New Hope.

Addressing Colonel Belford as "My dear Billy," he called upon that
gentleman to rejoice at this determination, and informed him that he
proposed in future to live "as decent a limb of grace as ever broke
loose from hell," and added that he was going to fetch as a present for
his niece Belinda a "dam pirty little black girl" to carry her
prayer-book to church for her.

Accordingly, one fine morning, in pursuance of this promise, our West
Indian suddenly appeared at New Hope with a prodigious quantity of
chests and travelling-cases, and with so vociferous an acclamation that
all the town knew of his arrival within a half-hour of that event.

When, however, he presented himself before Colonel Belford, it was to
meet with a welcome so frigid and an address so reserved that a douche
of cold water could not have quenched his verbosity more entirely. For
our great man had no notion to submit to the continued infliction of
the West Indian's presence. Accordingly, after the first words of
greeting had passed, he addressed Captain Obadiah in a strain somewhat
after this fashion:

"Indeed, I protest, my dear brother Obadiah, it is with the heartiest
regrets in the world that I find myself obliged to confess that I
cannot offer you a home with myself and my family. It is not alone that
your manners displease me--though, as an elder to a younger, I may say
to you that we of these more northern latitudes do not entertain the
same tastes in such particulars as doubtless obtain in the West Indies--but
the habits of my household are of such a nature that I could not
hope to form them to your liking. I can, however, offer as my advice
that you may find lodgings at the Blue Lion Tavern, which doubtless
will be of a sort exactly to fit your inclinations. I have made
inquiries, and I am sure you will find the very best apartments to be
obtained at that excellent hostelry placed at your disposal."

To this astounding address our West Indian could, for a moment, make no
other immediate reply than to open his eyes and to glare upon Colonel
Belford, so that, what with his tall, lean person, his long neck, his
stooping shoulders, and his yellow face stained upon one side an indigo
blue by some premature explosion of gunpowder--what with all this and a
prodigious hooked beak of a nose, he exactly resembled some hungry
predatory bird of prey meditating a pounce upon an unsuspecting victim.
At last, finding his voice, and rapping the ferrule of his ivory-headed
cane upon the floor to emphasize his declamation, he cried out: "What!
What! What! Is this the way to offer a welcome to a brother new
returned to your house? Why, ---- ----! who are you? Am not I your
brother, who could buy you out twice over and have enough left to live
in velvet? Why! Why!--Very well, then, have it your own way; but if I
don't grind your face into the mud and roll you into the dirt my name
is not Obadiah Belford!" Thereupon, striving to say more but finding no
fit words for the occasion, he swung upon his heel and incontinently
departed, banging the door behind him like a clap of thunder, and
cursing and swearing so prodigiously as he strode away down the street
that an infernal from the pit could scarcely have exceeded the fury of
his maledictions.

However, he so far followed Colonel Belford's advice that he took up
his lodgings at the Blue Lion Tavern, where, in a little while, he had
gathered about him a court of all such as chose to take advantage of
his extravagant bounty.

Indeed, he poured out his money with incredible profusion, declaring,
with many ingenious and self-consuming oaths, that he could match
fortunes with the best two men in New Hope, and then have enough left
to buy up his brother from his hair to his boot-leathers. He made no
secret of the rebuff he had sustained from Colonel Belford, for his
grievance clung to him like hot pitch--itching the more he meddled with
it. Sometimes his fury was such that he could scarcely contain himself.
Upon such occasions, cursing and swearing like an infernal, he would
call Heaven to witness that he would live in New Hope if for no other
reason than to bring shame to his brother, and he would declare again
and again, with incredible variety of expletives, that he would grind
his brother's face into the dirt for him.

[Illustration: "HE WOULD SHOUT OPPROBRIOUS WORDS AFTER THE OTHER IN THE
STREETS"]

Accordingly he set himself assiduously at work to tease and torment the
good man with every petty and malicious trick his malevolence could
invent. He would shout opprobrious words after the other in the
streets, to the entertainment of all who heard him; he would parade up
and down before Colonel Belford's house singing obstreperous and
unseemly songs at the top of his voice; he would even rattle the
ferrule of his cane against the palings of the fence, or throw a stone
at Madam Belford's cat in the wantonness of his malice.

Meantime he had purchased a considerable tract of land, embracing Pig
and Sow Point, and including the Old Free Grace Meeting-House. Here, he
declared, it was his intention to erect a house for himself that should
put his brother's wooden shed to shame. Accordingly he presently began
the erection of that edifice, so considerable in size and occupying so
commanding a situation that it was the admiration of all those parts,
and was known to fame as Belford's Palace. This magnificent residence
was built entirely of brick, and Captain Obadiah made it a boast that
the material therefor was brought all the way around from New York in
flats. In the erection of this elegant structure all the carpenters and
masons in the vicinage were employed, so that it grew up with an
amazing rapidity. Meantime, upon the site of the building, rum and
Hollands were kept upon draught for all comers, so that the place was
made the common resort and the scene for the orgies of all such of the
common people as possessed a taste for strong waters, many coming from
so far away as Newport to enjoy our Captain's prodigality.

Meantime he himself strutted about the streets in his red coat trimmed
with gilt braid, his hat cocked upon one side of his bony head,
pleasing himself with the belief that he was the object of universal
admiration, and swelling with a vast and consummate self-satisfaction
as he boasted, with strident voice and extravagant enunciation, of the
magnificence of the palace he was building.

At the same time, having, as he said, shingles to spare, he patched and
repaired the Old Free Grace Meeting-House, so that its gray and hoary
exterior, while rejuvenated as to the roof and walls, presented in a
little while an appearance as of a sudden eruption of bright yellow
shingles upon its aged hide. Nor would our Captain offer any other
explanation for so odd a freak of fancy than to say that it pleased him
to do as he chose with his own.

At last, the great house having been completed, and he himself having
entered into it and furnished it to his satisfaction, our Captain
presently began entertaining his friends therein with a profuseness of
expenditure and an excess of extravagance that were the continued
admiration of the whole colony. In more part the guests whom Captain
Obadiah thus received with so lavish an indulgence were officers or
government officials from the garrisons of Newport or of Boston, with
whom, by some means or other, he had scraped an acquaintance. At times
these gay gentlemen would fairly take possession of the town, parading
up and down the street under conduct of their host, staring ladies out
of countenance with the utmost coolness and effrontery, and offering
loud and critical remarks concerning all that they beheld about them,
expressing their opinions with the greatest freedom and jocularity.

Nor were the orgies at Belford's Palace limited to such extravagances
as gaming and dicing and drinking, for sometimes the community would be
scandalized by the presence of gayly dressed and high-colored ladies,
who came, no one knew whence, to enjoy the convivialities at the great
house on the hill, and concerning whom it pleased the respectable folk
of New Hope to entertain the gravest suspicion.

At first these things raised such a smoke that nothing else was to be
seen, but by-and-by other strange and singular circumstances began to
be spoken of--at first among the common people, and then by others. It
began to be whispered and then to be said that the Old Free Grace
Meeting-House out on the Point was haunted by the Devil.

The first information concerning this dreadful obsession arose from a
fisherman, who, coming into the harbor of a nightfall after a stormy
day, had, as he affirmed, beheld the old meeting-house all of a blaze
of light. Some time after, a tinker, making a short-cut from Stapleton
by way of the old Indian road, had a view of a similar but a much more
remarkable manifestation. This time, as the itinerant most solemnly
declared, the meeting-house was not only seen all alight, but a bell
was ringing as a signal somewhere off across the darkness of the water,
where, as he protested, there suddenly appeared a red star, that,
blazing like a meteor with a surpassing brightness for a few seconds,
was presently swallowed up into inky darkness again. Upon another
occasion a fiddler, returning home after midnight from Sprowle's Neck,
seeing the church alight, had, with a temerity inflamed by rum,
approached to a nearer distance, whence, lying in the grass, he had, he
said, at the stroke of midnight, beheld a multitude of figures emerge
from the building, crying most dolorously, and then had heard a voice,
as of a lost spirit, calling aloud, "Six-and-twenty, all told!" whereat
the light in the church was instantly extinguished into an impenetrable
darkness.

It was said that when Captain Obadiah himself was first apprised of the
suspicions entertained of the demoniacal possession of the old
meeting-house, he had fixed upon his venturesome informant so threatening
and ominous a gaze that the other could move neither hand nor foot under
the malignant fury of his observation. Then, at last, clearing his
countenance of its terrors, he had burst into a great, loud laugh,
crying out: "Well, what then? Why not? You must know that the Devil and
I have been very good friends in times past. I saw a deal of him in the
West Indies, and I must tell you that I built up the old meeting-house
again so that he and I could talk together now and then about old times
without having a lot of ----, dried, codfish-eating, rum-drinking
Yankee bacon-chewers to listen to every word we had to say to each
other. If you must know, it was only last night that the ghost of
Jezebel and I danced a fandango together in the graveyard up yonder,
while the Devil himself sat cross-legged on old Daniel Root's tombstone
and blew on a dry, dusty shank-bone by way of a flute. And now" (here
he swore a terrific oath) "you know the worst that is to be known, with
only this to say: if ever a man sets foot upon Pig and Sow Point again
after nightfall to interfere with the Devil's sport and mine, hell
suffer for it as sure as fire can burn or brimstone can scorch. So put
that in your pipe and smoke it."

These terrible words, however extravagant, were, to be sure, in the
nature of a direct confirmation of the very worst suspicion that could
have been entertained concerning this dolorous affair. But if any
further doubt lingered as to the significance of such malevolent
rumors, Captain Obadiah himself soon put an end to the same.

The Reverend Josiah Pettibones was used of a Saturday to take supper at
Colonel Belford's elegant residence. It was upon such an occasion and
the reverend gentleman and his honored host were smoking a pipe of
tobacco together in the library, when there fell a loud and importunate
knocking at the house door, and presently the servant came ushering no
less a personage than Captain Obadiah himself. After directing a most
cunning, mischievous look at his brother, Captain Obadiah addressed
himself directly to the Reverend Mr. Pettibones, folding his hands with
a most indescribable air of mock humility. "Sir," says he--"Reverend
sir, you see before you a humble and penitent sinner, who has fallen so
desperately deep into iniquities that he knows not whether even so
profound piety as yours can elevate him out of the pit in which he
finds himself. Sir, it has got about the town that the Devil has taken
possession of my old meeting-house, and, alas! I have to confess--_that
it is the truth_." Here our Captain hung his head down upon his breast
as though overwhelmed with the terrible communication he had made.

"What is this that I hear?" cried the reverend gentleman. "Can I
believe my ears?"

"Believe your ears!" exclaimed Colonel Belford. "To be sure you cannot
believe your ears. Do you not see that this is a preposterous lie, and
that he is telling it to you to tease and to mortify me?"

At this Captain Obadiah favored his brother with a look of exaggerated
and sanctimonious humility. "Alas, brother," he cried out, "for
accusing me so unjustly! Fie upon you! Would you check a penitent in
his confession? But you must know that it is to this gentleman that I
address myself, and not to you." Then directing his discourse once more
to the Reverend Mr. Pettibones, he resumed his address thus: "Sir, you
must know that while I was in the West Indies I embarked, among other
things, in one of those ventures against the Spanish Main of which you
may have heard."

"Do you mean piracy?" asked the Reverend Pettibones; and Captain
Obadiah nodded his head.

"'Tis a lie!" cried Colonel Belford, smacking his hand upon the table.
"He never possessed spirit enough for anything so dangerous as piracy
or more mischievous than slave-trading."

"Sir," quoth Captain Obadiah to the reverend gentleman, "again I say
'tis to you I address my confession. Well, sir, one day we sighted a
Spanish caravel very rich ladened with a prodigious quantity of plate,
but were without so much as a capful of wind to fetch us up with her.
'I would,' says I, 'offer the Devil my soul for a bit of a breeze to
bring us alongside.' 'Done,' says a voice beside me, and--alas that I
must confess it!--there I saw a man with a very dark countenance, whom
I had never before beheld aboard of our ship. 'Sign this,' says he,
'and the breeze is yours!' 'What is it upon the pen?' says I. "'Tis
blood,' says he. Alas, sir! what was a poor wretch so tempted as I to
do?"

"And did you sign?" asked Mr. Pettibones, all agog to hear the
conclusion of so strange a narration.

"Woe is me, sir, that I should have done so!" quoth Captain Obadiah,
rolling his eyes until little but the whites of them were to be seen.

"And did you catch the Spanish ship?"

"That we did, sir, and stripped her as clean as a whistle."

"'Tis all a prodigious lie!" cried Colonel Belford, in a fury. "Sir,
can you sit so complacently and be made a fool of by so extravagant a
fable?"

"Indeed it is unbelievable," said Mr. Pettibones.

At this faint reply, Captain Obadiah burst out laughing; then renewing
his narrative--"Indeed, sir," he declared, "you may believe me or not,
as you please. Nevertheless, I may tell you that, having so obtained my
prize, and having time to think coolly over the bargain I had made, I
says to myself, says I: 'Obediah Belford! Obadiah Belford, here is a
pretty pickle you are in. 'Tis time you quit these parts and lived
decent, or else you are damned to all eternity.' And so I came hither
to New Hope, reverend sir, hoping to end my days in quiet. Alas, sir!
would you believe it? scarce had I finished my fine new house up at the
Point when hither comes that evil being to whom I had sold my sorrowful
soul. 'Obadiah,' says he, 'Obadiah Belford, I have a mind to live in
New Hope also,' 'Where?' says I. 'Well,' says he, 'you may patch up the
old meetinghouse; 'twill serve my turn for a while.' 'Well,' thinks I
to myself, 'there can be no harm in that,' And so I did as he bade me--
and would not you do as much for one who had served you as well? Alas,
your reverence! there he is now, and I cannot get rid of him, and 'tis
over the whole town that he has the meeting-house in possession."

"Tis an incredible story!" cried the Reverend Pettibones.

"'Tis a lie from beginning to end!" cried the Colonel.

"And now how shall I get myself out of my pickle?" asked Captain
Obadiah.

"Sir," said Mr. Pettibones, "if what you tell me is true, 'tis beyond
my poor powers to aid you."

"Alas!" cried Captain Obadiah. "Alas! alas! Then, indeed, I'm damned!"
And therewith flinging his arms into the air as though in the extremity
of despair, he turned and incontinently departed, rushing forth out of
the house as though stung by ten thousand furies.

It was the most prodigious piece of gossip that ever fell in the way of
the Reverend Josiah, and for a fortnight he carried it with him
wherever he went. "'Twas the most unbelievable tale I ever heard," he
would cry. "And yet where there is so much smoke there must be some
fire. As for the poor wretch, if ever I saw a lost soul I beheld him
standing before me there in Colonel Belford's library." And then he
would conclude: "Yes, yes, 'tis incredible and past all belief. But if
it be true in ever so little a part, why, then there is justice in
this--that the Devil should take possession of the sanctuary of that
very heresy that would not only have denied him the power that every
other Christian belief assigns to him, but would have destroyed that
infernal habitation that hath been his dwelling-place for all
eternity."

As for Captain Belford, if he desired privacy for himself upon Pig and
Sow Point, he had taken the very best means to prevent the curious from
spying upon him there after nightfall.

II

HOW THE DEVIL STOLE THE COLLECTOR'S SNUFFBOX

Lieutenant Thomas Goodhouse was the Collector of Customs in the town of
New Hope. He was a character of no little notoriety in those parts,
enjoying the reputation of being able to consume more pineapple rum
with less effect upon his balance than any other man in the community.
He possessed the voice of a stentor, a short, thick-set,
broad-shouldered person, a face congested to a violent carnation, and red
hair of such a color as to add infinitely to the consuming fire of his
countenance.

The Custom Office was a little white frame building with green
shutters, and overhanging the water as though to topple into the tide.
Here at any time of the day betwixt the hours of ten in the morning and
of five in the afternoon the Collector was to be found at his desk
smoking his pipe of tobacco, the while a thin, phthisical clerk bent
with unrelaxing assiduity over a multitude of account-books and papers
accumulated before him.

For his post of Collectorship of the Royal Customs, Lieutenant
Goodhouse was especially indebted to the patronage of Colonel Belford.
The worthy Collector had, some years before, come to that gentleman
with a written recommendation from the Earl of Clandennie of a very
unusual sort. It was the Lieutenant's good-fortune to save the life of
the Honorable Frederick Dunburne, second son of the Earl--a wild,
rakish, undisciplined youth, much given to such mischievous enterprises
as the twisting off of door-knockers, the beating of the watch, and the
carrying away of tavern signs.

Having been a very famous swimmer at Eton, the Honorable Frederick
undertook while at the Cowes to swim a certain considerable distance
for a wager. In the midst of this enterprise he was suddenly seized
with a cramp, and would inevitably have drowned had not the Lieutenant,
who happened in a boat close at hand, leaped overboard and rescued the
young gentleman from the watery grave in which he was about to be
engulfed, thus restoring him once more to the arms of his grateful
family.

For this fortunate act of rescue the Earl of Clandennie presented to
his son's preserver a gold snuffbox filled with guineas, and inscribed
with the following legend:

"To Lieutenant Thomas Goodhouse,
who, under the Ruling of Beneficent Providence,
was the Happy Preserver of a Beautiful and
Precious Life of Virtuous Precocity,
this Box is presented by the Father of Him whom He
saved as a grateful acknowledgment of His
Services.

Thomas Monkhouse Dunburne, Viscount of
Dunburne and Earl of Clandennie.

_August 17, 1752._"

Having thus satisfied the immediate demands of his gratitude, it is
very possible that the Earl of Clandennie did not choose to assume so
great a responsibility as the future of his son's preserver entailed.
Nevertheless, feeling that something should be done for him, he
obtained for Lieutenant Goodhouse a passage to the Americas, and wrote
him a strong letter of recommendation to Colonel Belford. That
gentleman, desiring to please the legitimate head of his family, used
his influence so successfully that the Lieutenant was presently granted
the position of Collector of Customs in the place of Captain Maull, who
had lately deceased.

The Lieutenant, somewhat to the surprise of his patrons, filled his new
official position as Collector not only with vigor, but with a not
unbecoming dignity. He possessed an infinite appreciation of the
responsibilities of his office, and he was more jealous to collect
every farthing of the royal duties than he would have been had those
moneys been gathered for his own emolument.

Under the old Collectorship of Captain Maull, it was no unusual thing
for a barraco of superfine Hollands, a bolt of silk cloth, or a keg of
brandy to find its way into the house of some influential merchant or
Colonial dignitary. But in no such manner was Lieutenant Goodhouse
derelict in his duties. He would have sacrificed his dearest friendship
or his most precious attachment rather than fail in his duties to the
Crown. In the intermission of his duties it might please him to relax
into the softer humors of conviviality, but at ten o'clock in the
morning, whatever his condition of sobriety, he assumed at once all the
sterner panoply of a Collector of the Royal Customs.

Thus he set his virtues against his vices, and struck an even balance
between them. When most unsteady upon his legs he most asserted his
integrity, declaring that not a gill or a thread came into his port
without paying its duty, and calling Heaven to witness that it had been
his hand that had saved the life of a noble young gentleman. Thereupon,
perhaps, drawing forth the gleaming token of his prowess--the gold
snuffbox--from his breeches-pocket, and holding it tight in his brown
and hairy fist, he would first offer his interlocutor a pinch of
rappee, and would then call upon him to read the inscription engraved
upon the lid of the case, demanding to know whether it mattered a fig
if a man did drink a drop too much now and then, provided he collected
every farthing of the royal revenues, and had been the means of saving
the son of the Earl of Clandennie.

Never for an instant upon such an occasion would he permit his precious
box to quit his possession. It was to him an emblem of those virtues
that no one knew but himself, wherefore the more he misdoubted his own
virtuousness the more valuable did the token of that rectitude become
in his eyes. "Yes, you may look at it," he would say, "but damme if you
shall handle it. I would not," he would cry, "let the Devil himself
take it out of my hands."

The talk concerning the impious possession of the Old Free Grace
Meeting-House was at its height when the official consciousness of the
Collector, who was just then laboring under his constitutional
infirmity, became suddenly seized with an irrepressible alarm. He
declared that he smoked something worse than the Devil upon Pig and Sow
Point, and protested that it was his opinion that Captain Obadiah was
doing a bit of free-trade upon his own account, and that dutiable goods
were being smuggled in at night under cover of these incredible
stories. He registered a vow, sealing it with the most solemn
protestations, and with a multiplicity of ingenious oaths that only a
mind stimulated by the heat of intoxication could have invented, that
he would make it his business, upon the first occasion that offered, to
go down to Pig and Sow Point and to discover for himself whether it was
the Devil or smugglers that had taken possession of the Old Free Grace
Meeting-House. Thereupon, hauling out his precious snuffbox and rapping
upon the lid, he offered a pinch around. Then calling attention to the
inscription, he demanded to know whether a man who had behaved so well
upon that occasion had need to be afraid of a whole churchful of
devils. "I would," he cried, "offer the Devil a pinch, as I have
offered it to you. Then I would bid him read this and tell me whether
he dared to say that black was the white of my eye."

Nor were those words a vain boast upon the Collector's part, for,
before a week had passed, it being reported that there had been a
renewal of manifestations at the old church, the Collector, finding
nobody with sufficient courage to accompany him, himself entered into a
small boat and rowed down alone to Pig and Sow Point to investigate,
for his own satisfaction, those appearances that so agitated the
community.

It was dusk when the Collector departed upon that memorable and
solitary expedition, and it was entirely dark before he had reached its
conclusion. He had taken with him a bottle of Extra Reserve rum to
drive, as he declared, the chill out of his bones. Accordingly it
seemed to him to be a surprisingly brief interval before he found
himself floating in his boat under the impenetrable shadow of the rocky
promontory. The profound and infinite gloom of night overhung him with
a portentous darkness, melting only into a liquid obscurity as it
touched and dissolved into the stretch of waters across the bay. But
above, on the high and rugged shoulder of the Point, the Collector,
with dulled and swimming vision, beheld a row of dim and lurid lights,
whereupon, collecting his faculties, he opined that the radiance he
beheld was emitted from the windows of the Old Free Grace
Meeting-House.

Having made fast his boat with a drunken gravity, the Collector walked
directly, though with uncertain steps, up the steep and rugged path
towards that mysterious illumination. Now and then he stumbled over the
stones and cobbles that lay in his way, but he never quite lost his
balance, neither did he for a moment remit his drunken gravity. So with
a befuddled and obstinate perseverance he reached at last to the
conclusion of his adventure and of his fate.

The old meeting-house was two stories in height, the lower story having
been formerly used by the Free Grace Believers as a place wherein to
celebrate certain obscure mysteries appertaining to their belief. The
upper story, devoted to the more ordinary worship of their Sunday
meetings, was reached by a tall, steep flight of steps that led from
the ground to a covered porch which sheltered the doorway.

The Collector paused only long enough to observe that the shutters of
the lower story were tight shut and barred, and that the dull and lurid
light shone from the windows above. Then he directly mounted the steps
with a courage and a perfect assurance that can only be entirely
enjoyed by one in his peculiar condition of inebriety.

He paused to knock at the door, and it appeared to him that his
knuckles had hardly fallen upon the panel before the valve was flung
suddenly open. An indescribable and heavy odor fell upon him and for
the moment overpowered his senses, and he found himself standing face
to face with a figure prodigiously and portentously tall.

Even at this unexpected apparition the Collector lost possession of no
part of his courage. Rather he stiffened himself to a more stubborn and
obstinate resolution. Steadying himself for his address, "I know very
well," quoth he, "who you are. You are the Divil, I dare say, but damme
if you shall do business here without paying your duties to King
George. I may drink a drop too much," he cried, "but I collect my
duties--every farthing of 'em." Then drawing forth his snuffbox, he
thrust it under the nose of the being to whom he spake. "Take a pinch
and read that," he roared, "but don't handle it, for I wouldn't take
all hell to let it out of my hand."

The being whom he addressed had stood for all this while as though
bereft of speech and of movement, but at these last words he appeared
to find his voice, for he gave forth a strident bellow of so dreadful
and terrible a sort that the Collector, brave as he found himself,
stepped back a pace or two before it. The next instant he was struck
upon the wrist as though by a bolt of lightning, and the snuffbox,
describing a yellow circle against the light of the door, disappeared
into the darkness of the night beyond. Ere he could recover himself
another blow smote him upon the breast, and he fell headlong from the
platform, as through infinite space.

    *    *    *    *    *

The next day the Collector did not present himself at the office at his
accustomed hour, and the morning wore along without his appearing at
his desk. By noon serious alarm began to take possession of the
community, and about two o'clock, the tide being then set out pretty
strong, Mr. Tompkins, the consumptive clerk, and two sailors from the
_Sarah Goodrich_, then lying at Mr. Hoppins's wharf, went down in a
yawl-boat to learn, if possible, what had befallen him. They coasted
along the Point for above a half-hour before they discovered any
vestige of the missing Collector. Then at last they saw him lying at a
little distance upon a cobbled strip of beach, where, judging from his
position and from the way he had composed himself to rest, he appeared
to have been overcome by liquor.

At this place Mr. Tompkins put ashore, and making the best of his way
over the slippery stones exposed at low water, came at last to where
his chief was lying. The Collector was reposing with one arm over his
eyes, as though to shelter them from the sun, but as soon as Mr.
Tompkins had approached close enough to see his countenance, he uttered
a great cry that was like a scream. For, by the blue and livid lips
parted at the corners to show the yellow teeth, from the waxy whiteness
of the fat and hairy hands--in short, from the appearance of the whole
figure, he was aware in an instant that the Collector was dead.

His cry brought the two sailors running. They, with the utmost coolness
imaginable, turned the Collector over, but discovered no marks of
violence upon him, till of a sudden one of them called attention to the
fact that his neck was broke. Upon this the other opined that he had
fallen among the rocks and twisted his neck.

The two mariners then made an investigation of his pockets, the clerk
standing by the while paralyzed with horror, his face the color of
dough, his scalp creeping, and his hands and fingers twitching as
though with the palsy. For there was something indescribably dreadful
in the spectacle of those living hands searching into the dead's
pockets, and he would freely have given a week's pay if he had never
embarked upon the expedition for the recovery of his chief.

In the Collector's pockets they found a twist of tobacco, a red
bandanna handkerchief of violent color, a purse meagrely filled with
copper coins and silver pieces, a silver watch still ticking with a
loud and insistent iteration, a piece of tarred string, and a
clasp-knife.

The snuffbox which the Lieutenant had regarded with such prodigious
pride as the one emblem of his otherwise dubious virtue was gone.

III

THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN OF QUALITY

The Honorable Frederick Dunburne, second son of the Earl of Clandennie,
having won some six hundred pounds at écarté at a single sitting at
Pintzennelli's, embarked with his two friends, Captain Blessington and
Lord George Fitzhope, to conclude the night with a round of final
dissipation in the more remote parts of London. Accordingly they
embarked at York Stairs for the Three Cranes, ripe for any mischief.
Upon the water the three young gentlemen amused themselves by shouting
and singing, pausing only now and then to discharge a broadside of
raillery at the occupants of some other and passing boat.

All went very well for a while, some of those in the passing boats
laughing and railing in return, others shouting out angry replies. At
last they fell in with a broad-beamed, flat-nosed, Dutch-appearing
yawl-boat, pulling heavily up against the stream, and loaded with a
crew of half-drunken sailors just come into port. In reply to the
challenge of our young gentlemen, a man in the stern of the other boat,
who appeared to be the captain of the crew--a fellow, as Dunburne could
indefinitely perceive by the dim light of the lanthorn and the faint
illumination of the misty half-moon, possessing a great, coarse red
face and a bullet head surmounted by a mildewed and mangy fur cap--
bawled out, in reply, that if they would only put their boat near
enough for a minute or two he would give them a bellyful of something
that would make them quiet for the rest of the night. He added that he
would ask for nothing better than to have the opportunity of beating
Dunburne's head to a pudding, and that he would give a crown to have
the three of them within arm's-reach for a minute.

Upon this Captain Blessington swore that he should be immediately
accommodated, and therewith delivered an order to that effect to the
watermen. These obeyed so promptly that almost before Dunburne was
aware of what had happened the two boats were side by side, with hardly
a foot of space between the gunwales. Dunburne beheld one of the
watermen of his own boat knock down one of the crew of the other with
the blade of an oar, and then he himself was clutched by the collar in
the grasp of the man with the fur cap. Him Dunburne struck twice in the
face, and in the moonlight he saw that he had started the blood to
running down from his assailant's nose. But his blows produced no other
effect than to call forth a volley of the most horrible oaths that ever
greeted his ears. Thereupon the boats drifted so far apart that our
young gentleman was haled over the gunwale and soused in the cold water
of the river. The next moment some one struck him upon the head with a
belaying-pin or a billet of wood, a blow so crushing that the darkness
seemed to split asunder with a prodigious flaming of lights and a
myriad of circling stars, which presently disappeared into the profound
and utter darkness of insensibility. How long this swoon continued our
young gentleman could never tell, but when he regained so much of his
consciousness as to be aware of the things about him, he beheld himself
to be confined in a room, the walls whereof were yellow and greasy with
dirt, he himself having been laid upon a bed so foul and so displeasing
to his taste that he could not but regret the swoon from which he had
emerged into consciousness. Looking down at his person, he beheld that
his clothes had all been taken away from him, and that he was now clad
in a shirt with only one sleeve, and a pair of breeches so tattered
that they barely covered his nakedness. While he lay thus, dismally
depressed by so sad a pickle as that into which he found himself
plunged, he was strongly and painfully aware of an uproarious babble of
loud and drunken voices and a continual clinking of glasses, which
appeared to sound as from a tap-room beneath, these commingled now and
then with oaths and scraps of discordant song bellowed out above the
hubbub. His wounded head beat with tremendous and straining
painfulness, as though it would burst asunder, and he was possessed by
a burning thirst that seemed to consume his very vitals. He called
aloud, and in reply a fat, one-eyed woman came, fetching him something
to drink in a cup. This he swallowed with avidity, and thereupon (the
liquor perhaps having been drugged) he dropped off into unconsciousness
once more.

When at last he emerged for a second time into the light of reason, it
was to find himself aboard a brig--the _Prophet Daniel_, he discovered
her name to be--bound for Baltimore, in the Americas, and then pitching
and plunging upon a westerly running stern-sea, and before a strong
wind that drove the vessel with enormous velocity upon its course for
those remote and unknown countries for which it was bound. The land was
still in sight both astern and abeam, but before him lay the boundless
and tremendously infinite stretch of the ocean. Dunburne found himself
still to be clad in the one-armed shirt and tattered breeches that had
adorned him in the house of the crimp in which he had first awakened.
Now, however, an old tattered hat with only a part of the crown had
been added to his costume. As though to complete the sad disorder of
his appearance, he discovered, upon passing his hand over his
countenance, that his beard and hair had started a bristling growth,
and that the lump on his crown--which was even yet as big as a walnut--
was still patched with pieces of dirty sticking-plaster. Indeed, had he
but known it, he presented as miserable an appearance as the most
miserable of those wretches who were daily ravished from the slums and
streets of the great cities to be shipped to the Americas. Nor was he a
long time in discovering that he was now one of the several such
indentured servants who, upon the conclusion of their voyage, were to
be sold for their passage in the plantations of Maryland.

Having learned so much of his miserable fate, and being now able to
make shift to walk (though with weak and stumbling steps), our young
gentleman lost no time in seeking the Captain, to whom he endeavored to
explain the several accidents that had befallen him, acknowledging that
he was the second son of the Earl of Clandennie, and declaring that if
he, the Captain, would put the _Prophet Daniel_ back into some English
port again, his lordship would make it well worth his while to lose so
much time for the sake of one so dear as a second son. To this address
the Captain, supposing him either to be drunk or disordered in his
mind, made no other reply than to knock him incontinently down upon the
deck, bidding him return forward where he belonged.

Thereafter poor Dunburne found himself enjoying the reputation of a
harmless madman. The name of the Earl of Rags was bestowed upon him,
and the miserable companions of his wretched plight were never tired of
tempting him to recount his adventures, for the sake of entertaining
themselves by teasing that which they supposed to be his hapless mania.

Nor is it easy to conceive of all the torments that those miserable,
obscene wretches were able to inflict upon him. Under the teasing sting
of his companions' malevolent pleasantries, there were times when
Dunburne might, as he confessed to himself, have committed a murder
with the greatest satisfaction in the world. However, he was endowed
with no small command of self-restraint, so that he was still able to
curb his passions within the bounds of reason and of policy. He was,
fortunately, a complete master of the French and Italian languages, so
that when the fury of his irritation would become too excessive for him
to control, he would ease his spirits by castigating his tormentors
with a consuming verbosity in those foreign tongues, which, had his
companions understood a single word of that which he uttered, would
have earned for him a beating that would have landed him within an inch
of his life. However, they attributed all that he said to the
irrational gibbering of a maniac.

About midway of their voyage the _Prophet Daniel_ encountered a
tremendous storm, which drove her so far out of the Captain's reckoning
that when land was sighted, in the afternoon of a tempestuous day in
the latter part of August, the first mate, who had been for some years
in the New England trade, opined that it was the coast of Rhode Island,
and that if the Captain chose to do so he might run into New Hope
Harbor and lie there until the southeaster had blown itself out. This
advice the Captain immediately put into execution, so that by nightfall
they had dropped anchor in the comparative quiet of that excellent
harbor.

Dunburne was a most excellent and practised swimmer. That evening, when
the dusk had pretty well fallen, he jumped overboard, dived under the
brig, and came up on the other side. Thus leaving all hands aboard
looking for him or for his dead body at the starboard side of the
_Prophet Daniel_, he himself swam slowly away to the larboard. Now
partly under water, now floating on his back, he directed his course
towards a point of land about a mile away, whereon, as he had observed
before the dark had settled down, there stood an old wooden building
resembling a church, and a great brick house with tall, lean chimneys
at a little farther distance inland.

The intemperate cold of the water of those parts of America was so much
more excessive than Dunburne had been used to swim in that when he
dragged himself out upon the rocky, bowlder-strewn beach he lay for a
considerable time more dead than alive. His limbs appeared to possess
hardly any vitality, so benumbed were they by the icy chill that had
entered into the very marrow of his bones. Nor did he for a long while
recover from this excessive rigor; his limbs still continued at
intervals to twitch and shudder as with a convulsion, nor could he at
such times at all control their trembling. At last, however, with a
huge sigh, he aroused himself to some perception of his surroundings,
which he acknowledged were of as dispiriting a sort as he could well
have conceived of. His recovering senses were distracted by a ceaseless
watery din, for the breaking waves, rushing with a prodigious swiftness
from the harbor to the shore before the driving wind, fell with
uproarious crashing into white foam among the rocks. Above this watery
tumult spread the wet gloom of the night, full of the blackness and
pelting chill of a fine slanting rain.

Through this shroud of mist and gloom Dunburne at last distinguished a
faint light, blurred by the sheets of rain and darkness, and shining as
though from a considerable distance. Cheered by this nearer presence of
human life, our young gentleman presently gathered his benumbed powers
together, arose, and after a while began slowly and feebly to climb a
stony hill that lay between the rocky beach and that faint but
encouraging illumination.

So, sorely buffeted by the tempest, he at last reached the black,
square form of that structure from which the light shone. The building
he perceived to be a little wooden church of two stories in height. The
shutters of the lower story were tight fastened, as though bolted from
within. Those above were open, and from them issued the light that had
guided him in his approach from the beach. A tall flight of wooden
steps, wet in the rain, reached to a small, enclosed porch or
vestibule, whence a door, now tight shut, gave ingress into the second
story of the church.

Thence, as Dunburne stood without, he could now distinguish the dull
muttering of a man's voice, which he opined might be that of the
preacher. Our young gentleman, as may be supposed, was in a wretched
plight. He was ragged and unshaven; his only clothing was the miserable
shirt and bepatched breeches that had served him as shelter throughout
the long voyage. These abominable garments were now wet to the skin,
and so displeasing was his appearance that he was forced to acknowledge
to himself that he did not possess enough of humility to avow so great
a misery to the light and to the eyes of strangers. Accordingly,
finding some shelter afforded by the vestibule of the church, he
crouched there in a corner, huddling his rags about him, and finding a
certain poor warmth in thus hiding away from the buffeting of the chill
and penetrating wind. As he so crouched he presently became aware of
the sound of many voices, dull and groaning, coming from within the
edifice, and then--now and again--the clanking as of a multitude of
chains. Then of a sudden, and unexpectedly, the door near him was flung
wide open, and a faint glow of reddish light fell across the passage.
Instantly the figure of a man came forth, and following him came, not a
congregation, as Dunburne might have supposed, but a most dolorous
company of nearly, or quite, naked men and women, outlined blackly, as
they emerged, against the dull illumination from behind. These wretched
beings, sighing and groaning most piteously, with a monotonous wailing
of many voices, were chained by the wrist, two and two together, and as
they passed by close to Dunburne, his nostrils were overpowered by a
heavy and fetid odor that came partly from within the building, partly
from the wretched creatures that passed him by.

As the last of these miserable beings came forth from the bowels of
that dreadful place, a loud voice, so near to Dunburne as to startle
his ears with its sudden exclamation, cried out, "Six-and-twenty, all
told," and thereat instantly the dull light from within was quenched
into darkness.

In the gloom and the silence that followed, Dunburne could hear for a
while nothing but the dash of the rain upon the roof and the ceaseless
drip and trickle of the water running from the eaves into the puddles
beneath the building.

Then, as he stood, still marvelling at what he had seen, there suddenly
came a loud and startling crash, as of a trap-door let fall into its
place. A faint circle of light shone within the darkness of the
building, as though from a lantern carried in a man's hands. There was
a sound of jingling, as of keys, of approaching footsteps, and of
voices talking together, and presently there came out into the
vestibule the dark figures of two men, one of them carrying a ship's
lantern. One of these figures closed and locked the door behind him,
and then both were about to turn away without having observed Dunburne,
when, of a sudden, a circle from the roof of the lantern lit up his
pale and melancholy face, and he instantly became aware that his
presence had been discovered.

The next moment the lantern was flung up almost into his eyes, and in
the light he saw the sharp, round rim of a pistol-barrel directed
immediately against his forehead.

In that moment our young gentleman's life hung as a hair in the
balance. In the intense instant of expectancy his brain appeared to
expand as a bubble, and his ears tingled and hummed as though a cloud
of flies were buzzing therein. Then suddenly a voice smote like a blow
upon the silence--"Who are you, and what d'ye want?"

"Indeed," said Dunburne, "I do not know."

"What do you do here?"

"Nor do I know that, either."

He who held the lantern lifted it so that the illumination fell still
more fully upon Dunburne's face and person. Then his interlocutor
demanded, "How did you come here?"

Upon the moment Dunburne determined to answer so much of the truth as
the question required. "'Twas by no fault of my own," he cried. "I was
knocked on the head and kidnapped in England, with the design of being
sold in Baltimore. The vessel that fetched me put into the harbor over
yonder to wait for good weather, and I jumped overboard and swam
ashore, to stumble into the cursed pickle in which I now find myself."

"Have you, then, an education? To be sure, you talk so."

"Indeed I have," said Dunburne--"a decent enough education to fit me
for a gentleman, if the opportunity offered. But what of that?" he
exclaimed, desperately. "I might as well have no more learning than a
beggar under the bush, for all the good it does me." The other once
more flashed the light of his lantern over our young gentleman's
miserable and barefoot figure. "I had a mind," says he, "to blow your
brains out against the wall. I have a notion now, however, to turn you
to some use instead, so I'll just spare your life for a little while,
till I see how you behave."

He spoke with so much more of jocularity than he had heretofore used
that Dunburne recovered in great part his dawning assurance. "I am
infinitely obliged to you," he cried, "for sparing my brains; but I
protest I doubt if you will ever find so good an opportunity again to
murder me as you have just enjoyed."

This speech seemed to tickle the other prodigiously, for he burst into
a loud and boisterous laugh, under cover of which he thrust his pistol
back into his coat-pocket again. "Come with me, and I'll fit you with
victuals and decent clothes, of both of which you appear to stand in no
little need," he said. Thereupon, and without another word, he turned
and quitted the place, accompanied by his companion, who for all this
time had uttered not a single sound. A little way from the church these
two parted company, with only a brief word spoken between them.

Dunburne's interlocutor, with our young gentleman following close
behind him, led the way in silence for a considerable distance through
the long, wet grass and the tempestuous darkness, until at last, still
in unbroken silence, they reached the confines of an enclosure, and
presently stood before a large and imposing house built of brick.

Dunburne's mysterious guide, still carrying the lantern, conducted him
directly up a broad flight of steps, and opening the door, ushered him
into a hallway of no inconsiderable pretensions. Thence he led the way
to a dining-room beyond, where our young gentleman observed a long
mahogany table, and a sideboard of carved mahogany illuminated by three
or four candles. In answer to the call of his conductor, a negro
servant appeared, whom the master of the house ordered to fetch some
bread and cheese and a bottle of rum for his wretched guest. While the
servant was gone to execute the commission the master seated himself at
his ease and favored Dunburne with a long and most minute regard. Then
he suddenly asked our young gentleman what was his name.

Upon the instant Dunburne did not offer a reply to this interrogation.
He had been so miserably abused when he had told the truth upon the
voyage that he knew not now whether to confess or deny his identity. He
possessed no great aptitude at lying, so that it was with no little
hesitation that he determined to maintain his incognito. Having reached
this conclusion, he answered his host that his name was Tom Robinson.
The other, however, appeared to notice neither his hesitation nor the
name which he had seen fit to assume. Instead, he appeared to be lost
in a reverie, which he broke only to bid our young gentleman to sit
down and tell the story of the several adventures that had befallen
him. He advised him to leave nothing untold, however shameful it might
be. "Be assured," said he, "that no matter what crimes you may have
committed, the more intolerable your wickedness, the better you will
please me for the purpose I have in view."

Being thus encouraged, and having already embarked in disingenuosity,
our young gentleman, desiring to please his host, began at random a
tale composed in great part of what he recollected of the story of
_Colonel Jack_, seasoned occasionally with extracts from Mr. Smollett's
ingenious novel of _Ferdinand, Count Fathom_. There was hardly a petty
crime or a mean action mentioned in either of these entertaining
fictions that he was not willing to attribute to himself. Meanwhile he
discovered, to his surprise, that lying was not really so difficult an
art as he had supposed it to be. His host listened for a considerable
while in silence, but at last he was obliged to call upon his penitent
to stop. "To tell you the truth, Mr. What's-a-name," he cried, "I do
not believe a single word you are telling me. However, I am satisfied
that in you I have discovered, as I have every reason to hope, one of
the most preposterous liars I have for a long time fell in with.
Indeed, I protest that any one who can with so steady a countenance lie
so tremendously as you have just done may be capable, if not of a great
crime, at least of no inconsiderable deceit, and perhaps of treachery.
If this be so, you will suit my purposes very well, though I would
rather have had you an escaped criminal or a murderer or a thief."

"Sir," said Dunburne, very seriously, "I am sorry that I am not more to
your mind. As you say, I can, I find, lie very easily, and if you will
give me sufficient time, I dare say I can become sufficiently expert in
other and more criminal matters to please even your fancy. I cannot, I
fear, commit a murder, nor would I choose to embark upon an attempt at
arson; but I could easily learn to cheat at cards; or I could, if it
would please you better, make shift to forge your own name to a bill
for a hundred pounds. I confess, however, I am entirely in the dark as
to why you choose to have me enjoy so evil a reputation."

At these words the other burst into a great and vociferous laugh. "I
protest," he cried, "you are the coolest rascal ever I fell in with.
But come," he added, sobering suddenly, "what did you say was your
name?"

"I declare, sir," said Dunburne, with the most ingenuous frankness, "I
have clean forgot. Was it Tom or John Robinson?"

Again the other burst out laughing. "Well," he said, "what does it
matter? Thomas or John--'tis all one. I see that you are a ragged,
lousy beggar, and I believe you to be a runaway servant. Even if that
is the worst to be said of you, you will suit me very well. As for a
name, I myself will fit you with one, and it shall be of the best. I
will give you a home here in the house, and will for three months
clothe you like a lord. You shall live upon the best, and shall meet
plenty of the genteelest company the Colonies can afford. All that I
demand of you is that you shall do exactly as I tell you for the three
months that I so entertain you. Come. Is it a bargain?"

Dunburne sat for a while thinking very seriously. "First of all," said
he, "I must know what is the name you have a mind to bestow upon me."

The other looked distrustfully at him for a time, and then, as though
suddenly fetching up resolution, he cried out: "Well, what then? What
of it? Why should I be afraid? I'll tell you. Your name shall be
Frederick Dunburne, and you shall be the second son of the Earl of
Clandennie."

Had a thunder-bolt fallen from heaven at Dunburne's feet he could not
have been struck more entirely dumb than he was at those astounding
words. He knew not for the moment where to look or what to think. At
that instant the negro man came into the room, fetching the bottle of
rum and the bread and cheese he had been sent for. As the sound of his
entrance struck upon our young gentleman's senses he came to himself
with the shock, and suddenly exploded into a burst of laughter so
shrill and discordant that Captain Obadiah sat staring at him as though
he believed his ragged beneficiary had gone clean out of his senses.

IV

A ROMANTIC EPISODE IN THE LIFE OF A YOUNG LADY

Miss Belinda Belford, the daughter and only child of Colonel William
Belford, was a young lady possessed of no small pretensions to personal
charms of the most exalted order. Indeed, many excellent judges in such
matters regarded her, without doubt, as the reigning belle of the
Northern Colonies. Of a medium height, of a slight but generously
rounded figure, she bore herself with an indescribable grace and
dignity of carriage. Her hair, which was occasionally permitted to curl
in ringlets upon her snowy neck, was of a brown so dark and so soft as
at times to deceive the admiring observer into a belief that it was
black. Her eyes, likewise of a dark-brown color, were of a most melting
and liquid lustre; her nose, though slight, was sufficiently high, and
modelled with so exquisite a delicacy as to lend an exceeding charm to
her whole countenance. She was easily the belle of every assembly which
she graced with her presence, and her name was the toast of every
garrison town of the Northern provinces.

Madam Belford and her lovely daughter were engaged one pleasant morning
in entertaining a number of friends, in the genteel English manner,
with a dish of tea and a bit of gossip. Upon this charming company
Colonel Belford suddenly intruded, his countenance displaying an
excessive though not displeasing agitation.

"My dear! my dear!" he cried, "what a piece of news have I for you! It
is incredible and past all belief! Who, ladies, do you suppose is here
in New Hope? Nay, you cannot guess; I shall have to enlighten you. 'Tis
none other than Frederick Dunburne, my lordship's second son. Yes, you
may well look amazed. I saw and spoke with him this very morning, and
that not above a half-hour ago. He is travelling incognito, but my
brother Obadiah discovered his identity, and is now entertaining him at
his new house upon the Point. A large party of young officers from the
garrison are there, all very gay with cards and dice, I am told. My
noble young gentleman knew me so soon as he clapped eyes upon me.
'This,' says he, 'if I am not mistook, must be Colonel Belford, my
father's honored friend.' He is," exclaimed the speaker, "a most
interesting and ingenuous youth, with extremely lively and elegant
manners, and a person exactly resembling that of his dear and honored
father."

It may be supposed into what a flutter this piece of news cast those
who heard it. "My dear," cried Madam Belford, as soon as the first
extravagance of the general surprise had passed by to an easier
acceptance of Colonel Belford's tidings--"my dear, why did you not
bring him with you to present him to us all? What an opportunity have
you lost!"

"Indeed, my dear," said Colonel Belford, "I did not forget to invite
him hither. He protested that nothing could afford him greater
pleasure, did he not have an engagement with some young gentlemen from
the garrison. But, believe me, I would not let him go without a
promise. He is to dine with us to-morrow at two; and, Belinda, my
dear"--here Colonel Belford pinched his daughter's blushing cheek--"you
must assume your best appearance for so serious an occasion. I am
informed that my noble gentleman is extremely particular in his tastes
in the matter of female excellence."

"Indeed, papa," cried the young lady, with great vivacity, "I shall
attempt no extraordinary graces upon my young gentleman's account, and
that I promise you. I protest," she exclaimed, with spirit, "I have no
great opinion of him who would come thus to New Hope without a single
word to you, who are his father's confidential correspondent. Nor do I
admire the taste of one who would choose to cast himself upon the
hospitality of my uncle Obadiah rather than upon yours."

"My dear," said Colonel Belford, very soberly, "you express your
opinion with a most unwarranted levity, considering the exalted
position your subject occupies. I may, however, explain to you that he
came to America quite unexpectedly and by an accident. Nor would he
have declared his incognito, had not my brother Obadiah discovered it
almost immediately upon his arrival. He would not, he declared, have
visited New Hope at all, had not Captain Obadiah Belford urged his
hospitality in such a manner as to preclude all denial."

But to this reproof Miss Belinda who, was, indeed, greatly indulged by
her parents, made no other reply than to toss her head with a pretty
sauciness, and to pout her cherry lips in an infinitely becoming
manner.

But though our young lady protested so emphatically against assuming
any unusual charms for the entertainment of their expected visitor, she
none the less devoted no small consideration to that very thing that
she had so exclaimed against. Accordingly, when she was presented to
her father's noble guest, what with her heightened color and her eyes
sparkling with the emotions evoked by the occasion, she so impressed
our young gentleman that he could do little but stand regarding her
with an astonishment that for the moment caused him to forget those
graces of deportment that the demands of elegance called upon him to
assume.

However, he recovered himself immediately, and proceeded to take such
advantage of his introduction that by the time they were seated at the
dinner-table he found himself conversing with his fair partner with all
the ease and vivacity imaginable. Nor in this exchange of polite
raillery did he discover her wit to be in any degree less than her
personal charms.

"Indeed, madam," he exclaimed, "I am now more than ready to thank that
happy accident that has transported me, however much against my will,
from England to America. The scenery, how beautiful! Nature, how
fertile! Woman, how exquisite! Your country," he exclaimed, with
enthusiasm, "is like heaven!"

"Indeed, sir," cried the young lady, vivaciously, "I do not take your
praise for a compliment. I protest I am acquainted with no young
gentleman who would not defer his enjoyment of heaven to the very last
extremity."

"To be sure," quoth our hero, "an ambition for the abode of saints is
of too extreme a nature to recommend itself to a modest young fellow of
parts. But when one finds himself thrown into the society of an houri--"

"And do you indeed have houris in England?" exclaimed the young lady.
"In America you must be content with society of a much more earthly
constitution!"

"Upon my word, miss," cried our young gentleman, "you compel me to
confess that I find myself in the society of one vastly more to my
inclination than that of any houri of my acquaintance."

With such lively badinage, occasionally lapsing into more serious
discourse, the dinner passed off with a great deal of pleasantness to
our young gentleman, who had prepared himself for something
prodigiously dull and heavy. After the repast, a pipe of tobacco in the
summer-house and a walk in the garden so far completed his cheerful
impressions that when he rode away towards Pig and Sow Point he found
himself accompanied by the most lively, agreeable thoughts imaginable.
Her wit, how subtle! Her person, how beautiful! He surprised himself
smiling with a fatuous indulgence of his enjoyable fancies.

Nor did the young lady's thoughts, though doubtless of a more moderate
sort, assume a less pleasing perspective. Our young gentleman was
favored with a tall, erect figure, a high nose, and a fine, thin face
expressive of excellent breeding. It seemed to her that his manners
possessed an elegance and a grace that she had never before discovered
beyond the leaves of Mr. Richardson's ingenious novels. Nor was she
unaware of the admiration of herself that his countenance had
expressed. Upon so slender a foundation she amused herself for above an
hour, erecting such castles in the air that, had any one discovered her
thought, she would have perished of mortification.

But though our young lady so yielded herself to the enjoyment of such
silly dreams as might occur to any miss of a lively imagination and
vivacious temperament, the reader is to understand that she has yet so
much dignity and spirit as to cover these foolish and romantic fancies
with a cloak of so delicate and so subtle a reserve that when the young
gentleman called to pay his respects the next afternoon he quitted her
presence ten times more infatuated with her charms than he had been the
day before.

Nor can it be denied that our young lady knew perfectly well how to
make the greatest use of such opportunities. She already possessed a
great deal of experience in teasing the other sex with those delicious
though innocent torments that cause the eyes of the victim to remain
awake at night and the fancy to dream throughout the day.

Such presently became the condition of our young gentleman that at the
end of the month he knew not whether his present life had continued for
weeks or for years; in the charming infatuation that overpowered him he
considered nothing of time, every other consideration being engulfed in
his desire for the society of his charmer. Cards and dice lost for him
their accustomed pleasure, and when a gay society would be at Belford's
Palace it was with the utmost difficulty that he assumed so much
patience as to take his part in those dissipations that there obtained.
Relieved from them, he flew with redoubled ardor back to the
gratification of his passion again.

In the mean time Captain Obadiah had become so accustomed to the
presence of his guest that he made no pretence of any concealment of
that iniquitous, dreadful avocation that lent to Pig and Sow Point so
great a terror in those parts. Rather did the West Indian appear to
court the open observation of his dependant.

One exquisite day in the last of October our young gentleman had spent
the greater part of the afternoon in the society of the beautiful
object of his regard. The leaves, though fallen from the trees in great
abundance, appeared thereby only to have admitted of the passage of a
riper radiance of golden sunlight through the thinning branches. This
and the ardor of his passion had so transported our hero that when he
had departed from her presence he seemed to walk as light as a feather,
and knew not whether it was the warmth of the sunlight or the heat of
his own impetuous transports that filled the universe with so extreme a
brightness.

Overpowered with these absorbing and transcendent introspections, he
approached his now odious home upon Pig and Sow Point by way of the old
meeting-house. There of a sudden he came upon his patron, Captain
Obadiah, superintending the burial of the last of three victims of his
odious commerce, who had died that afternoon. Two had already been
interred, and the third new-made grave was in the process of being
filled. Two men, one a negro and the other a white, had nearly
completed their labor, tramping down the crumbling earth as they
shovelled it into the shallow excavation. Meanwhile Captain Obadiah
stood near by, his red coat flaming in the slanting light, himself
smoking a pipe of tobacco with all the ease and coolness imaginable.
His hands, clasped behind his back, held his ivory-headed cane, and as
our hero approached he turned an evil countenance upon him, and greeted
him with a grin at once droll, mischievous, and malevolent in the
extreme. "And how is our pretty charmer this afternoon?" quoth Captain
Obadiah.

Conceive, if you please, of a man floating in the most ecstatic delight
of heaven pulled suddenly thence down into the most filthy extremity of
hell, and then you shall understand the motions of disgust and
repugnance and loathing that overpowered our hero, who, awakening thus
suddenly out of his dream of love, found himself in the presence of
that grim and obscene spectacle of death--who, arousing from such
absorbing and exquisite meditations, heard his ears greeted with so
rude and vulgar an address.

Acknowledging to himself that he did not dare offer an immediate reply
to his host, he turned upon his heel and walked away, without
expressing a single word.

He was not, however, permitted to escape thus easily. He had not taken
above twenty steps, when, hearing footsteps behind him, he turned his
head to discover Captain Obadiah skipping rapidly after him in a
prodigious hurry, swinging his cane and chuckling preposterously to
himself, as though in the enjoyment of some most exquisite piece of
drollery. "What!" he cried, as soon as he could catch his breath from
his hurry. "What! What! Can't you answer, you villain? Why, blind my
eyes! a body would think you were a lord's son indeed, instead of
being, as I know you, a beggarly runaway servant whom I took in like a
mangy cat out of the rain. But come, come--no offence, my boy! I'll be
no hard master to you. I've heard how the wind blows, and I've kept my
ears open to all your doings. I know who is your sweetheart. Harkee,
you rascal! You have a fancy for my niece, have you? Well, your apple
is ripe if you choose to pick it. Marry your charmer and be damned; and
if you'll serve me by taking her thus in hand, I'll pay you twenty
pounds upon your wedding-day. Now what do you say to that, you lousy
beggar in borrowed clothes?"

Our young gentleman stopped short and looked his tormentor full in the
face. The thought of his father's anger alone had saved him from
entangling himself in the web of his passions; this he forgot upon the
instant. "Captain Obadiah Belford," quoth he, "you're the most
consummate villain ever I beheld in all of my life; but if I have the
good-fortune to please the young lady, I wish I may die if I don't
serve you in this!"

At these words Captain Obadiah, who appeared to take no offence at his
guest's opinion of his honesty, burst out into a great boisterous
laugh, flinging back his head and dropping his lower jaw so
preposterously that the setting sun shone straight down his wide and
cavernous gullet.

V

HOW THE DEVIL WAS CAST OUT OF THE MEETING-HOUSE

The news that the Honorable Frederick Dunburne, second son of the Earl
of Clandennie, was to marry Miss Belinda Belford, the daughter and only
child of Colonel William Belford, of New Hope, was of a sort to arouse
the keenest and most lively interest in all those parts of the Northern
Colonies of America.

The day had been fixed, and all the circumstances arranged with such
particularity that an invitation was regarded as the highest honor that
could befall the fortunate recipient. There were to be present on this
interesting occasion two Colonial governors and their ladies, an
English general, the captain of the flag-ship _Achilles_, and above a
score of Colonial magnates and ladies of distinction.

Captain Obadiah had not been bidden to either the ceremony or the
breakfast. This rebuff he had accepted with prodigious amusement,
which, not limiting itself to the immediate occasion, broke forth at
intervals for above two weeks. Now it might express itself in chuckles
of the most delicious entertainment, vented as our Captain walked up
and down the hall of his great house, smoking his pipe and cracking the
knuckles of his fingers; at other times he would burst forth into
incontrollable fits of laughter at the extravagant deceit which he
believed himself to be imposing upon his brother, Colonel Belford.

At length came the wedding-day, with such circumstances of pomp and
display as the exceeding wealth and Colonial dignity of Colonel Belford
could surround it. For the wedding-breakfast the great folding-doors
between the drawing-room and the dining-room of Colonel Belford's house
were flung wide open, and a table extending the whole length of the two
apartments was set with the most sumptuous and exquisite display of
plate and china. Around the board were collected the distinguished
company, and the occasion was remarkable not less for the richness of
its display than for the exquisite nature of the repast intended to
celebrate so auspicious an occasion.

At the head of the board sat the young couple, radiant with an
engrossing happiness that took no thought of what the future might have
in store for it, but was contented with the triumphant ecstasy of the
moment.

These elegant festivities were at their height, when there suddenly
arose a considerable disputation in the hallway beyond, and before any
one could inquire as to what was occurring, Captain Obadiah Belford
came stumping into the room, swinging his ivory-headed cane, and with
an expression of the most malicious triumph impressed upon his
countenance. Directing his address to the bridegroom, and paying no
attention to any other one of the company, he cried out: "Though not
bidden to this entertainment, I have come to pay you a debt I owe. Here
is twenty pounds I promised to pay you for marrying my niece."

Therewith he drew a silk purse full of gold pieces from his pocket,
which he hung over the ferrule of his cane and reached across the table
to the bridegroom. That gentleman, upon his part (having expected some
such episode as this), arose, and with a most polite and elaborate bow
accepted the same and thrust it into his pocket.

"And now, my young gentleman," cried Captain Obadiah, folding his arms
and tucking his cane under his armpit, looking the while from under his
brows upon the company with a most malevolent and extravagant grin--
"and now, my young gentleman, perhaps you will favor the ladies and
gentlemen here present with an account of what services they are I thus
pay for."

"To be sure I will," cried out our hero, "and that with the utmost
willingness in the world."

During all this while the elegant company had sat as with suspended
animation, overwhelmed with wonder at the singular address of the
intruder. Even the servants stood still with the dishes in their hands
the better to hear the outcome of the affair. The bride, overwhelmed by
a sudden and inexplicable anxiety, felt the color quit her face, and
reaching out, seized her lover's hand, who took hers very readily,
holding it tight within his grasp. As for Colonel and Madam Belford,
not knowing what this remarkable address portended, they sat as though
turned to stone, the one gone as white as ashes, and the other as red
in the face as a cherry. Our young gentleman, however, maintained the
utmost coolness and composure of demeanor. Pointing his finger towards
the intruder, he exclaimed: "In Captain Obadiah Belford, ladies and
gentlemen, you behold the most unmitigated villain that ever I met in
all of my life. With an incredible spite and vindictiveness he not only
pursued my honored father-in-law, Colonel Belford, but has sought to
wreak an unwarranted revenge upon the innocent and virtuous young lady
whom I have now the honor to call my wife. But how has he overreached
himself in his machinations! How has he entangled his feet in the net
which he himself has spread! I will tell you my history, as he bids me
to do, and you may then judge for yourselves!"

At this unexpected address Captain Obadiah's face fell from its
expression of malicious triumph, growing longer and longer, until at
last it was overclouded with so much doubt and anxiety that, had he
been threatened by the loss of a thousand pounds, he could not have
assumed a greater appearance of mortification and dejection. Meantime,
regarding him with a mischievous smile, our young gentleman began the
history of all those adventures that had befallen him from the time he
embarked upon the memorable expedition with his two companions in
dissipation from York Stairs. As his account proceeded Captain
Obadiah's face altered by degrees from its natural brown to a sickly
yellow, and then to so leaden a hue that it could not have assumed a
more ghastly appearance were he about to swoon dead away. Great beads
of sweat gathered upon his forehead and trickled down his cheeks. At
last he could endure no more, but with a great and strident voice, such
as might burst forth from a devil tormented, he cried out: "'Tis a lie!
'Tis all a monstrous lie! He is a beggarly runaway servant whom I took
in out of the rain and fed and housed--to have him turn thus against me
and strike the hand that has benefited him!"

"Sir," replied our young gentleman, with a moderate and easy voice,
"what I tell you is no lie, but the truth. If any here misdoubts my
veracity, see, here is a letter received by the last packet from my
honored father. You, Colonel Belford, know his handwriting perfectly
well. Look at this and tell me if I am deceiving you."

At these words Colonel Belford took the letter with a hand that
trembled as though with palsy. He cast his eyes over it, but it is to
be doubted whether he read a single word therein contained.
Nevertheless, he saw enough to satisfy his doubts, and he could have
wept, so great was the relief from the miserable and overwhelming
anxiety that had taken possession of him since the beginning of his
brother's discourse.

Meantime our young gentleman, turning to Captain Obadiah, cried out,
"Sir, I am indeed an instrument of Providence sent hither to call your
wickedness to account," and this he spoke with so virtuous an air as to
command the admiration of all who heard him. "I have," he continued,
"lived with you now for nearly three odious months, and I know every
particular of your habits and such circumstances of your life as you
are aware of. I now proclaim how you have wickedly and sacrilegiously
turned the Old Free Grace Meeting-House into a slave-pen, whence for
above a year you have conducted a nefarious and most inhuman commerce
with the West Indies."

At these words Captain Obadiah, being thrown so suddenly upon his
defence, forced himself to give forth a huge and boisterous laugh.
"What then?" he cried. "What wickedness is there in that? What if I
have provided a few sugar plantations with negro slaves? Are there not
those here present who would do no better if the opportunity offered?
The place is mine, and I break no law by a bit of quiet slave-trading."

"I marvel," cried our young gentleman, still in the same virtuous
strain--"I marvel that you can pass over so wicked a thing thus easily.
I myself have counted above fifty graves of your victims on Pig and Sow
Point. Repent, sir, while there is yet time."

But to this adjuration Captain Obadiah returned no other reply than to
burst into a most wicked, impudent laugh.

"Is it so?" cried our young gentleman. "Do you dare me to further
exposures? Then I have here another evidence to confront you that may
move you to a more serious consideration." With these words he drew
forth from his pocket a packet wrapped in soft white paper. This he
unfolded, holding up to the gaze of all a bright and shining object.
"This," he exclaimed, "I found in Captain Obadiah's writing-desk while
I was hunting for some wax with which to seal a letter." It was the
gold snuffbox of the late Collector Goodhouse. "What," he cried, "have
you, sir, to offer in explanation of the manner in which this came into
your possession? See, here engraved upon the lid is the owner's name
and the circumstance of his having saved my own poor life. It was that
first called my attention to it, for I well recollect how my father
compelled me to present it to my savior. How came it into your
possession, and why have you hidden it away so carefully for all this
while? Sir, in the death of Lieutenant Goodhouse I suspect you of a
more sinister fault than that of converting yonder poor sanctuary into
a slave-pen. So soon as Captain Morris of your slave-ship returns from
Jamaica I shall have him arrested, and shall compel him to explain what
he knows of the circumstances of the Lieutenant's unfortunate murder."

At the sight of so unexpected an object in the young gentleman's hand
Captain Obadiah's jaw fell, and his cavernous mouth gaped as though he
had suddenly been stricken with a palsy. He lifted a trembling hand and
slowly and mechanically passed it along that cheek which was so
discolored with gunpowder stain. Then, suddenly gathering himself
together and regaining those powers that appeared for a moment to have
fled from him, he cried out, aloud: "I swear to God 'twas all an
accident! I pushed him down the steps, and he fell and broke his neck!"

Our young gentleman regarded him with a cold and collected smile.
"That, sir," said he, "you shall have the opportunity to explain to the
proper authorities--unless," he added, "you choose to take yourself
away from these parts, and to escape the just resentment of those laws
to which you may be responsible for your misdemeanors."

"I shall," roared Captain Obadiah, "stand my trial in spite of you all!
I shall live to see you in torments yet! I shall--" He gaped and
stuttered, but could find no further words with which to convey his
infinite rage and disappointed spite. Then turning, and with a furious
gesture, he rushed forth and out of the house, thrusting those aside
who stood in his way, and leaving behind him a string of curses fit to
set the whole world into a blaze.

He had destroyed all the gaiety of the wedding-breakfast, but the
relief from the prodigious doubts and anxieties that had at first
overwhelmed those whom he had intended to ruin was of so great a nature
that they thought nothing of so inconsiderable a circumstance.

As for our young gentleman, he had come forth from the adventure with
such dignity of deportment and with so exalted an air of generous
rectitude that those present could not sufficiently admire at the
continent discretion of one so young. The young lady whom he had
married, if she had before regarded him as a Paris and an Achilles
incorporated into one person, now added the wisdom of a Nestor to the
category of his accomplishments.

Captain Obadiah, in spite of the defiance he had fulminated against his
enemies, and in spite of the determination he had expressed to remain
and to stand his trial, was within a few days known to have suddenly
and mysteriously departed from New Hope. Whether or not he misdoubted
his own rectitude too greatly to put it to the test of a trial, or
whether the mortification incident upon the failure of his plot was too
great for him to support, it was clearly his purpose never to return
again. For within a month the more valuable of his belongings were
removed from his great house upon Pig and Sow Point and were loaded
upon a bark that came into the harbor for that purpose. Thence they
were transported no one knew whither, for Captain Obadiah was never
afterwards observed in those parts.

Nor was the old meeting-house ever again disturbed by such
manifestations as had terrified the community for so long a time.
Nevertheless, though the Devil was thus exorcised from his
abiding-place, the old church never lost its evil reputation, until it was
finally destroyed by fire about ten years after the incidents herein
narrated.

In conclusion it is only necessary to say that when the Honorable
Frederick Dunburne presented his wife to his noble family at home, he
was easily forgiven his _mésalliance_ in view of her extreme beauty and
vivacity. Within a year or two Lord Carrickford, his elder brother,
died of excessive dissipation in Florence, where he was then attached
to the English Embassy, so that our young gentleman thus became the
heir-apparent to his father's title, and so both branches of the family
were united into one.


THE END





How Robin Hood Cane to Be an Outlaw

IN MERRY ENGLAND in the time of old, when good King Henry the Second
ruled the land, there lived within the green glades of Sherwood Forest,
near Nottingham Town, a famous outlaw whose name was Robin Hood. No
archer ever lived that could speed a gray goose shaft with such skill
and cunning as his, nor were there ever such yeomen as the sevenscore
merry men that roamed with him through the greenwood shades. Right
merrily they dwelled within the depths of Sherwood Forest, suffering
neither care nor want, but passing the time in merry games of archery or
bouts of cudgel play, living upon the King's venison, washed down with
draughts of ale of October brewing.

Not only Robin himself but all the band were outlaws and dwelled apart
from other men, yet they were beloved by the country people round about,
for no one ever came to jolly Robin for help in time of need and went
away again with an empty fist.

And now I will tell how it came about that Robin Hood fell afoul of the
law.

When Robin was a youth of eighteen, stout of sinew and bold of heart,
the Sheriff of Nottingham proclaimed a shooting match and offered a
prize of a butt of ale to whosoever should shoot the best shaft in
Nottinghamshire. "Now," quoth Robin, "will I go too, for fain would I
draw a string for the bright eyes of my lass and a butt of good October
brewing." So up he got and took his good stout yew bow and a score
or more of broad clothyard arrows, and started off from Locksley Town
through Sherwood Forest to Nottingham.

It was at the dawn of day in the merry Maytime, when hedgerows are green
and flowers bedeck the meadows; daisies pied and yellow cuckoo buds and
fair primroses all along the briery hedges; when apple buds blossom and
sweet birds sing, the lark at dawn of day, the throstle cock and cuckoo;
when lads and lasses look upon each other with sweet thoughts; when busy
housewives spread their linen to bleach upon the bright green grass.
Sweet was the greenwood as he walked along its paths, and bright the
green and rustling leaves, amid which the little birds sang with might
and main: and blithely Robin whistled as he trudged along, thinking of
Maid Marian and her bright eyes, for at such times a youth's thoughts
are wont to turn pleasantly upon the lass that he loves the best.

As thus he walked along with a brisk step and a merry whistle, he came
suddenly upon some foresters seated beneath a great oak tree. Fifteen
there were in all, making themselves merry with feasting and drinking
as they sat around a huge pasty, to which each man helped himself,
thrusting his hands into the pie, and washing down that which they ate
with great horns of ale which they drew all foaming from a barrel that
stood nigh. Each man was clad in Lincoln green, and a fine show they
made, seated upon the sward beneath that fair, spreading tree. Then one
of them, with his mouth full, called out to Robin, "Hulloa, where goest
thou, little lad, with thy one-penny bow and thy farthing shafts?"

Then Robin grew angry, for no stripling likes to be taunted with his
green years.

"Now," quoth he, "my bow and eke mine arrows are as good as shine; and
moreover, I go to the shooting match at Nottingham Town, which same has
been proclaimed by our good Sheriff of Nottinghamshire; there I will
shoot with other stout yeomen, for a prize has been offered of a fine
butt of ale."

Then one who held a horn of ale in his hand said, "Ho! listen to the
lad! Why, boy, thy mother's milk is yet scarce dry upon thy lips, and
yet thou pratest of standing up with good stout men at Nottingham butts,
thou who art scarce able to draw one string of a two-stone bow."

"I'll hold the best of you twenty marks," quoth bold Robin, "that I hit
the clout at threescore rods, by the good help of Our Lady fair."

At this all laughed aloud, and one said, "Well boasted, thou fair
infant, well boasted! And well thou knowest that no target is nigh to
make good thy wager."

And another cried, "He will be taking ale with his milk next."

At this Robin grew right mad. "Hark ye," said he, "yonder, at the
glade's end, I see a herd of deer, even more than threescore rods
distant. I'll hold you twenty marks that, by leave of Our Lady, I cause
the best hart among them to die."

"Now done!" cried he who had spoken first. "And here are twenty marks. I
wager that thou causest no beast to die, with or without the aid of Our
Lady."

Then Robin took his good yew bow in his hand, and placing the tip at
his instep, he strung it right deftly; then he nocked a broad clothyard
arrow and, raising the bow, drew the gray goose feather to his ear; the
next moment the bowstring rang and the arrow sped down the glade as a
sparrowhawk skims in a northern wind. High leaped the noblest hart
of all the herd, only to fall dead, reddening the green path with his
heart's blood.

"Ha!" cried Robin, "how likest thou that shot, good fellow? I wot the
wager were mine, an it were three hundred pounds."

Then all the foresters were filled with rage, and he who had spoken the
first and had lost the wager was more angry than all.

"Nay," cried he, "the wager is none of thine, and get thee gone,
straightway, or, by all the saints of heaven, I'll baste thy sides
until thou wilt ne'er be able to walk again." "Knowest thou not," said
another, "that thou hast killed the King's deer, and, by the laws of
our gracious lord and sovereign King Harry, thine ears should be shaven
close to thy head?"

"Catch him!" cried a third.

"Nay," said a fourth, "let him e'en go because of his tender years."

Never a word said Robin Hood, but he looked at the foresters with a grim
face; then, turning on his heel, strode away from them down the forest
glade. But his heart was bitterly angry, for his blood was hot and
youthful and prone to boil.

Now, well would it have been for him who had first spoken had he left
Robin Hood alone; but his anger was hot, both because the youth had
gotten the better of him and because of the deep draughts of ale that
he had been quaffing. So, of a sudden, without any warning, he sprang to
his feet, and seized upon his bow and fitted it to a shaft. "Ay," cried
he, "and I'll hurry thee anon." And he sent the arrow whistling after
Robin.

It was well for Robin Hood that that same forester's head was spinning
with ale, or else he would never have taken another step. As it was, the
arrow whistled within three inches of his head. Then he turned around
and quickly drew his own bow, and sent an arrow back in return.

"Ye said I was no archer," cried he aloud, "but say so now again!"

The shaft flew straight; the archer fell forward with a cry, and lay on
his face upon the ground, his arrows rattling about him from out of his
quiver, the gray goose shaft wet with his; heart's blood. Then, before
the others could gather their wits about them, Robin Hood was gone into
the depths of the greenwood. Some started after him, but not with much
heart, for each feared to suffer the death of his fellow; so presently
they all came and lifted the dead man up and bore him away to Nottingham
Town.

Meanwhile Robin Hood ran through the greenwood. Gone was all the joy and
brightness from everything, for his heart was sick within him, and it
was borne in upon his soul that he had slain a man.

"Alas!" cried he, "thou hast found me an archer that will make thy wife
to wring! I would that thou hadst ne'er said one word to me, or that
I had never passed thy way, or e'en that my right forefinger had been
stricken off ere that this had happened! In haste I smote, but grieve I
sore at leisure!" And then, even in his trouble, he remembered the old
saw that "What is done is done; and the egg cracked cannot be cured."

And so he came to dwell in the greenwood that was to be his home for
many a year to come, never again to see the happy days with the lads and
lasses of sweet Locksley Town; for he was outlawed, not only because he
had killed a man, but also because he had poached upon the King's deer,
and two hundred pounds were set upon his head, as a reward for whoever
would bring him to the court of the King.

Now the Sheriff of Nottingham swore that he himself would bring this
knave Robin Hood to justice, and for two reasons: first, because he
wanted the two hundred pounds, and next, because the forester that Robin
Hood had killed was of kin to him.

But Robin Hood lay hidden in Sherwood Forest for one year, and in that
time there gathered around him many others like himself, cast out from
other folk for this cause and for that. Some had shot deer in hungry
wintertime, when they could get no other food, and had been seen in the
act by the foresters, but had escaped, thus saving their ears; some had
been turned out of their inheritance, that their farms might be added to
the King's lands in Sherwood Forest; some had been despoiled by a great
baron or a rich abbot or a powerful esquire--all, for one cause or
another, had come to Sherwood to escape wrong and oppression.

So, in all that year, fivescore or more good stout yeomen gathered about
Robin Hood, and chose him to be their leader and chief. Then they vowed
that even as they themselves had been despoiled they would despoil their
oppressors, whether baron, abbot, knight, or squire, and that from each
they would take that which had been wrung from the poor by unjust taxes,
or land rents, or in wrongful fines. But to the poor folk they would
give a helping hand in need and trouble, and would return to them that
which had been unjustly taken from them. Besides this, they swore never
to harm a child nor to wrong a woman, be she maid, wife, or widow; so
that, after a while, when the people began to find that no harm was
meant to them, but that money or food came in time of want to many a
poor family, they came to praise Robin and his merry men, and to tell
many tales of him and of his doings in Sherwood Forest, for they felt
him to be one of themselves.

Up rose Robin Hood one merry morn when all the birds were singing
blithely among the leaves, and up rose all his merry men, each fellow
washing his head and hands in the cold brown brook that leaped laughing
from stone to stone. Then said Robin, "For fourteen days have we seen no
sport, so now I will go abroad to seek adventures forthwith. But tarry
ye, my merry men all, here in the greenwood; only see that ye mind well
my call. Three blasts upon the bugle horn I will blow in my hour of
need; then come quickly, for I shall want your aid."

So saying, he strode away through the leafy forest glades until he
had come to the verge of Sherwood. There he wandered for a long time,
through highway and byway, through dingly dell and forest skirts. Now he
met a fair buxom lass in a shady lane, and each gave the other a merry
word and passed their way; now he saw a fair lady upon an ambling pad,
to whom he doffed his cap, and who bowed sedately in return to the
fair youth; now he saw a fat monk on a pannier-laden ass; now a gallant
knight, with spear and shield and armor that flashed brightly in the
sunlight; now a page clad in crimson; and now a stout burgher from good
Nottingham Town, pacing along with serious footsteps; all these sights
he saw, but adventure found he none. At last he took a road by the
forest skirts, a bypath that dipped toward a broad, pebbly stream
spanned by a narrow bridge made of a log of wood. As he drew nigh this
bridge he saw a tall stranger coming from the other side. Thereupon
Robin quickened his pace, as did the stranger likewise, each thinking to
cross first.

"Now stand thou back," quoth Robin, "and let the better man cross
first."

"Nay," answered the stranger, "then stand back shine own self, for the
better man, I wet, am I."

"That will we presently see," quoth Robin, "and meanwhile stand thou
where thou art, or else, by the bright brow of Saint AElfrida, I will
show thee right good Nottingham play with a clothyard shaft betwixt thy
ribs."

"Now," quoth the stranger, "I will tan thy hide till it be as many
colors as a beggar's cloak, if thou darest so much as touch a string of
that same bow that thou holdest in thy hands."

"Thou pratest like an ass," said Robin, "for I could send this shaft
clean through thy proud heart before a curtal friar could say grace over
a roast goose at Michaelmastide."

"And thou pratest like a coward," answered the stranger, "for thou
standest there with a good yew bow to shoot at my heart, while I have
nought in my hand but a plain blackthorn staff wherewith to meet thee."

"Now," quoth Robin, "by the faith of my heart, never have I had a
coward's name in all my life before. I will lay by my trusty bow and
eke my arrows, and if thou darest abide my coming, I will go and cut a
cudgel to test thy manhood withal."

"Ay, marry, that will I abide thy coming, and joyously, too," quoth the
stranger; whereupon he leaned sturdily upon his staff to await Robin.

Then Robin Hood stepped quickly to the coverside and cut a good staff of
ground oak, straight, without new, and six feet in length, and came back
trimming away the tender stems from it, while the stranger waited for
him, leaning upon his staff, and whistling as he gazed round about.
Robin observed him furtively as he trimmed his staff, measuring him from
top to toe from out the corner of his eye, and thought that he had never
seen a lustier or a stouter man. Tall was Robin, but taller was the
stranger by a head and a neck, for he was seven feet in height. Broad
was Robin across the shoulders, but broader was the stranger by twice
the breadth of a palm, while he measured at least an ell around the
waist.

"Nevertheless," said Robin to himself, "I will baste thy hide right
merrily, my good fellow;" then, aloud, "Lo, here is my good staff,
lusty and tough. Now wait my coming, an thou darest, and meet me an thou
fearest not. Then we will fight until one or the other of us tumble into
the stream by dint of blows."

"Marry, that meeteth my whole heart!" cried the stranger, twirling his
staff above his head, betwixt his fingers and thumb, until it whistled
again.

Never did the Knights of Arthur's Round Table meet in a stouter fight
than did these two. In a moment Robin stepped quickly upon the bridge
where the stranger stood; first he made a feint, and then delivered
a blow at the stranger's head that, had it met its mark, would have
tumbled him speedily into the water. But the stranger turned the blow
right deftly and in return gave one as stout, which Robin also turned as
the stranger had done. So they stood, each in his place, neither moving
a finger's-breadth back, for one good hour, and many blows were given
and received by each in that time, till here and there were sore bones
and bumps, yet neither thought of crying "Enough," nor seemed likely to
fall from off the bridge. Now and then they stopped to rest, and each
thought that he never had seen in all his life before such a hand at
quarterstaff. At last Robin gave the stranger a blow upon the ribs that
made his jacket smoke like a damp straw thatch in the sun. So shrewd was
the stroke that the stranger came within a hair's-breadth of falling off
the bridge, but he regained himself right quickly and, by a dexterous
blow, gave Robin a crack on the crown that caused the blood to flow.
Then Robin grew mad with anger and smote with all his might at the
other. But the stranger warded the blow and once again thwacked Robin,
and this time so fairly that he fell heels over head into the water, as
the queen pin falls in a game of bowls.

"And where art thou now, my good lad?" shouted the stranger, roaring
with laughter.

"Oh, in the flood and floating adown with the tide," cried Robin, nor
could he forbear laughing himself at his sorry plight. Then, gaining his
feet, he waded to the bank, the little fish speeding hither and thither,
all frightened at his splashing.

"Give me thy hand," cried he, when he had reached the bank. "I must
needs own thou art a brave and a sturdy soul and, withal, a good stout
stroke with the cudgels. By this and by that, my head hummeth like to a
hive of bees on a hot June day."

Then he clapped his horn to his lips and winded a blast that went
echoing sweetly down the forest paths. "Ay, marry," quoth he again,
"thou art a tall lad, and eke a brave one, for ne'er, I bow, is there a
man betwixt here and Canterbury Town could do the like to me that thou
hast done."

"And thou," quoth the stranger, laughing, "takest thy cudgeling like a
brave heart and a stout yeoman."

But now the distant twigs and branches rustled with the coming of men,
and suddenly a score or two of good stout yeomen, all clad in Lincoln
green, burst from out the covert, with merry Will Stutely at their head.

"Good master," cried Will, "how is this? Truly thou art all wet from
head to foot, and that to the very skin."

"Why, marry," answered jolly Robin, "yon stout fellow hath tumbled me
neck and crop into the water and hath given me a drubbing beside."

"Then shall he not go without a ducking and eke a drubbing himself!"
cried Will Stutely. "Have at him, lads!"

Then Will and a score of yeomen leaped upon the stranger, but though
they sprang quickly they found him ready and felt him strike right and
left with his stout staff, so that, though he went down with press of
numbers, some of them rubbed cracked crowns before he was overcome.

"Nay, forbear!" cried Robin, laughing until his sore sides ached again.
"He is a right good man and true, and no harm shall befall him. Now
hark ye, good youth, wilt thou stay with me and be one of my band? Three
suits of Lincoln green shalt thou have each year, beside forty marks in
fee, and share with us whatsoever good shall befall us. Thou shalt eat
sweet venison and quaff the stoutest ale, and mine own good right-hand
man shalt thou be, for never did I see such a cudgel player in all my
life before. Speak! Wilt thou be one of my good merry men?"

"That know I not," quoth the stranger surlily, for he was angry at being
so tumbled about. "If ye handle yew bow and apple shaft no better than
ye do oaken cudgel, I wot ye are not fit to be called yeomen in my
country; but if there be any man here that can shoot a better shaft than
I, then will I bethink me of joining with you."

"Now by my faith," said Robin, "thou art a right saucy varlet, sirrah;
yet I will stoop to thee as I never stooped to man before. Good Stutely,
cut thou a fair white piece of bark four fingers in breadth, and set it
fourscore yards distant on yonder oak. Now, stranger, hit that fairly
with a gray goose shaft and call thyself an archer."

"Ay, marry, that will I," answered he. "Give me a good stout bow and a
fair broad arrow, and if I hit it not, strip me and beat me blue with
bowstrings."

Then he chose the stoutest bow among them all, next to Robin's own, and
a straight gray goose shaft, well-feathered and smooth, and stepping
to the mark--while all the band, sitting or lying upon the greensward,
watched to see him shoot--he drew the arrow to his cheek and loosed the
shaft right deftly, sending it so straight down the path that it clove
the mark in the very center. "Aha!" cried he, "mend thou that if thou
canst;" while even the yeomen clapped their hands at so fair a shot.

"That is a keen shot indeed," quoth Robin. "Mend it I cannot, but mar it
I may, perhaps."

Then taking up his own good stout bow and nocking an arrow with care, he
shot with his very greatest skill. Straight flew the arrow, and so
true that it lit fairly upon the stranger's shaft and split it into
splinters. Then all the yeomen leaped to their feet and shouted for joy
that their master had shot so well.

"Now by the lusty yew bow of good Saint Withold," cried the stranger,
"that is a shot indeed, and never saw I the like in all my life before!
Now truly will I be thy man henceforth and for aye. Good Adam Bell(1)
was a fair shot, but never shot he so!"


     (1) Adam Bell, Clym o' the Clough, and William of Cloudesly
     were three noted north-country bowmen whose names have been
     celebrated in many ballads of the olden time.


"Then have I gained a right good man this day," quoth jolly Robin. "What
name goest thou by, good fellow?"

"Men call me John Little whence I came," answered the stranger.

Then Will Stutely, who loved a good jest, spoke up. "Nay, fair little
stranger," said he, "I like not thy name and fain would I have it
otherwise. Little art thou indeed, and small of bone and sinew,
therefore shalt thou be christened Little John, and I will be thy
godfather."

Then Robin Hood and all his band laughed aloud until the stranger began
to grow angry.

"An thou make a jest of me," quoth he to Will Stutely, "thou wilt have
sore bones and little pay, and that in short season."

"Nay, good friend," said Robin Hood, "bottle thine anger, for the name
fitteth thee well. Little John shall thou be called henceforth, and
Little John shall it be. So come, my merry men, we will prepare a
christening feast for this fair infant."

So turning their backs upon the stream, they plunged into the forest
once more, through which they traced their steps till they reached the
spot where they dwelled in the depths of the woodland. There had they
built huts of bark and branches of trees, and made couches of sweet
rushes spread over with skins of fallow deer. Here stood a great oak
tree with branches spreading broadly around, beneath which was a seat of
green moss where Robin Hood was wont to sit at feast and at merrymaking
with his stout men about him. Here they found the rest of the band, some
of whom had come in with a brace of fat does. Then they all built great
fires and after a time roasted the does and broached a barrel of humming
ale. Then when the feast was ready they all sat down, but Robin placed
Little John at his right hand, for he was henceforth to be the second in
the band.

Then when the feast was done Will Stutely spoke up. "It is now time, I
ween, to christen our bonny babe, is it not so, merry boys?" And "Aye!
Aye!" cried all, laughing till the woods echoed with their mirth.

"Then seven sponsors shall we have," quoth Will Stutely, and hunting
among all the band, he chose the seven stoutest men of them all.

"Now by Saint Dunstan," cried Little John, springing to his feet, "more
than one of you shall rue it an you lay finger upon me."

But without a word they all ran upon him at once, seizing him by his
legs and arms and holding him tightly in spite of his struggles, and
they bore him forth while all stood around to see the sport. Then one
came forward who had been chosen to play the priest because he had a
bald crown, and in his hand he carried a brimming pot of ale. "Now, who
bringeth this babe?" asked he right soberly.

"That do I," answered Will Stutely.

"And what name callest thou him?"

"Little John call I him."

"Now Little John," quoth the mock priest, "thou hast not lived
heretofore, but only got thee along through the world, but henceforth
thou wilt live indeed. When thou livedst not thou wast called John
Little, but now that thou dost live indeed, Little John shalt thou be
called, so christen I thee." And at these last words he emptied the pot
of ale upon Little John's head.

Then all shouted with laughter as they saw the good brown ale stream
over Little John's beard and trickle from his nose and chin, while his
eyes blinked with the smart of it. At first he was of a mind to be angry
but found he could not, because the others were so merry; so he, too,
laughed with the rest. Then Robin took this sweet, pretty babe, clothed
him all anew from top to toe in Lincoln green, and gave him a good stout
bow, and so made him a member of the merry band.

And thus it was that Robin Hood became outlawed; thus a band of merry
companions gathered about him, and thus he gained his right-hand man,
Little John; and so the prologue ends. And now I will tell how the
Sheriff of Nottingham three times sought to take Robin Hood, and how he
failed each time.




Robin Hood and the Tinker

Now it was told before how two hundred pounds were set upon Robin Hood's
head, and how the Sheriff of Nottingham swore that he himself would
seize Robin, both because he would fain have the two hundred pounds and
because the slain man was a kinsman of his own. Now the Sheriff did not
yet know what a force Robin had about him in Sherwood, but thought that
he might serve a warrant for his arrest as he could upon any other man
that had broken the laws; therefore he offered fourscore golden angels
to anyone who would serve this warrant. But men of Nottingham Town knew
more of Robin Hood and his doings than the Sheriff did, and many laughed
to think of serving a warrant upon the bold outlaw, knowing well that
all they would get for such service would be cracked crowns; so that no
one came forward to take the matter in hand. Thus a fortnight passed, in
which time none came forward to do the Sheriff's business. Then said he,
"A right good reward have I offered to whosoever would serve my warrant
upon Robin Hood, and I marvel that no one has come to undertake the
task."

Then one of his men who was near him said, "Good master, thou wottest
not the force that Robin Hood has about him and how little he cares for
warrant of king or sheriff. Truly, no one likes to go on this service,
for fear of cracked crowns and broken bones."

"Then I hold all Nottingham men to be cowards," said the Sheriff. "And
let me see the man in all Nottinghamshire that dare disobey the warrant
of our sovereign lord King Harry, for, by the shrine of Saint Edmund,
I will hang him forty cubits high! But if no man in Nottingham dare
win fourscore angels, I will send elsewhere, for there should be men of
mettle somewhere in this land."

Then he called up a messenger in whom he placed great trust, and bade
him saddle his horse and make ready to go to Lincoln Town to see whether
he could find anyone there that would do his bidding and win the reward.
So that same morning the messenger started forth upon his errand.

Bright shone the sun upon the dusty highway that led from Nottingham
to Lincoln, stretching away all white over hill and dale. Dusty was the
highway and dusty the throat of the messenger, so that his heart was
glad when he saw before him the Sign of the Blue Boar Inn, when somewhat
more than half his journey was done. The inn looked fair to his eyes,
and the shade of the oak trees that stood around it seemed cool and
pleasant, so he alighted from his horse to rest himself for a time,
calling for a pot of ale to refresh his thirsty throat.

There he saw a party of right jovial fellows seated beneath the
spreading oak that shaded the greensward in front of the door. There
was a tinker, two barefoot friars, and a party of six of the King's
foresters all clad in Lincoln green, and all of them were quaffing
humming ale and singing merry ballads of the good old times. Loud
laughed the foresters, as jests were bandied about between the singing,
and louder laughed the friars, for they were lusty men with beards
that curled like the wool of black rams; but loudest of all laughed the
Tinker, and he sang more sweetly than any of the rest. His bag and his
hammer hung upon a twig of the oak tree, and near by leaned his good
stout cudgel, as thick as his wrist and knotted at the end.

"Come," cried one of the foresters to the tired messenger, "come join us
for this shot. Ho, landlord! Bring a fresh pot of ale for each man."

The messenger was glad enough to sit down along with the others who were
there, for his limbs were weary and the ale was good.

"Now what news bearest thou so fast?" quoth one, "and whither ridest
thou today?"

The messenger was a chatty soul and loved a bit of gossip dearly;
besides, the pot of ale warmed his heart; so that, settling himself in
an easy corner of the inn bench, while the host leaned upon the doorway
and the hostess stood with her hands beneath her apron, he unfolded his
budget of news with great comfort. He told all from the very first:
how Robin Hood had slain the forester, and how he had hidden in the
greenwood to escape the law; how that he lived therein, all against the
law, God wot, slaying His Majesty's deer and levying toll on fat abbot,
knight, and esquire, so that none dare travel even on broad Watling
Street or the Fosse Way for fear of him; how that the Sheriff had a mind
to serve the King's warrant upon this same rogue, though little would he
mind warrant of either king or sheriff, for he was far from being a
law-abiding man. Then he told how none could be found in all Nottingham
Town to serve this warrant, for fear of cracked pates and broken bones,
and how that he, the messenger, was now upon his way to Lincoln Town to
find of what mettle the Lincoln men might be.

"Now come I, forsooth, from good Banbury Town," said the jolly Tinker,
"and no one nigh Nottingham--nor Sherwood either, an that be the
mark--can hold cudgel with my grip. Why, lads, did I not meet that mad
wag Simon of Ely, even at the famous fair at Hertford Town, and beat him
in the ring at that place before Sir Robert of Leslie and his lady? This
same Robin Hood, of whom, I wot, I never heard before, is a right merry
blade, but gin he be strong, am not I stronger? And gin he be sly, am
not I slyer? Now by the bright eyes of Nan o' the Mill, and by mine own
name and that's Wat o' the Crabstaff, and by mine own mother's son,
and that's myself, will I, even I, Wat o' the Crabstaff, meet this same
sturdy rogue, and gin he mind not the seal of our glorious sovereign
King Harry, and the warrant of the good Sheriff of Nottinghamshire,
I will so bruise, beat, and bemaul his pate that he shall never move
finger or toe again! Hear ye that, bully boys?"

"Now art thou the man for my farthing," cried the messenger. "And back
thou goest with me to Nottingham Town."

"Nay," quoth the Tinker, shaking his head slowly from side to side. "Go
I with no man gin it be not with mine own free will."

"Nay, nay," said the messenger, "no man is there in Nottinghamshire
could make thee go against thy will, thou brave fellow."

"Ay, that be I brave," said the Tinker.

"Ay, marry," said the messenger, "thou art a brave lad; but our good
Sheriff hath offered fourscore angels of bright gold to whosoever shall
serve the warrant upon Robin Hood; though little good will it do."

"Then I will go with thee, lad. Do but wait till I get my bag and
hammer, and my cudgel. Ay, let' me but meet this same Robin Hood, and
let me see whether he will not mind the King's warrant." So, after
having paid their score, the messenger, with the Tinker striding beside
his nag, started back to Nottingham again.

One bright morning soon after this time, Robin Hood started off to
Nottingham Town to find what was a-doing there, walking merrily along
the roadside where the grass was sweet with daisies, his eyes wandering
and his thoughts also. His bugle horn hung at his hip and his bow and
arrows at his back, while in his hand he bore a good stout oaken staff,
which he twirled with his fingers as he strolled along.

As thus he walked down a shady lane he saw a tinker coming, trolling a
merry song as he drew nigh. On his back hung his bag and his hammer, and
in his hand he carried a right stout crabstaff full six feet long, and
thus sang he:

     "_In peascod time, when hound to horn
     Gives ear till buck be killed,
     And little lads with pipes of corn
     Sit keeping beasts afield_--"

"Halloa, good friend!" cried Robin.

"I WENT TO GATHER STRAWBERRIES--"

"Halloa!" cried Robin again.

"BY WOODS AND GROVES FULL FAIR--"

"Halloa! Art thou deaf, man? Good friend, say I!"

"And who art thou dost so boldly check a fair song?" quoth the Tinker,
stopping in his singing. "Halloa, shine own self, whether thou be good
friend or no. But let me tell thee, thou stout fellow, gin thou be a
good friend it were well for us both; but gin thou be no good friend it
were ill for thee."

"And whence comest thou, my lusty blade?" quoth Robin.

"I come from Banbury," answered the Tinker.

"Alas!" quoth Robin, "I hear there is sad news this merry morn."

"Ha! Is it indeed so?" cried the Tinker eagerly. "Prythee tell it
speedily, for I am a tinker by trade, as thou seest, and as I am in my
trade I am greedy for news, even as a priest is greedy for farthings."

"Well then," quoth Robin, "list thou and I will tell, but bear thyself
up bravely, for the news is sad, I wot. Thus it is: I hear that two
tinkers are in the stocks for drinking ale and beer!"

"Now a murrain seize thee and thy news, thou scurvy dog," quoth the
Tinker, "for thou speakest but ill of good men. But sad news it is
indeed, gin there be two stout fellows in the stocks."

"Nay," said Robin, "thou hast missed the mark and dost but weep for the
wrong sow. The sadness of the news lieth in that there be but two in the
stocks, for the others do roam the country at large."

"Now by the pewter platter of Saint Dunstan," cried the Tinker, "I have
a good part of a mind to baste thy hide for thine ill jest. But gin men
be put in the stocks for drinking ale and beer, I trow thou wouldst not
lose thy part."

Loud laughed Robin and cried, "Now well taken, Tinker, well taken! Why,
thy wits are like beer, and do froth up most when they grow sour! But
right art thou, man, for I love ale and beer right well. Therefore come
straightway with me hard by to the Sign of the Blue Boar, and if thou
drinkest as thou appearest--and I wot thou wilt not belie thy looks--I
will drench thy throat with as good homebrewed as ever was tapped in all
broad Nottinghamshire."

"Now by my faith," said the Tinker, "thou art a right good fellow in
spite of thy scurvy jests. I love thee, my sweet chuck, and gin I go not
with thee to that same Blue Boar thou mayst call me a heathen."

"Tell me thy news, good friend, I prythee," quoth Robin as they trudged
along together, "for tinkers, I ween, are all as full of news as an egg
of meat."

"Now I love thee as my brother, my bully blade," said the Tinker, "else
I would not tell thee my news; for sly am I, man, and I have in hand a
grave undertaking that doth call for all my wits, for I come to seek
a bold outlaw that men, hereabouts, call Robin Hood. Within my pouch I
have a warrant, all fairly written out on parchment, forsooth, with a
great red seal for to make it lawful. Could I but meet this same Robin
Hood I would serve it upon his dainty body, and if he minded it not
I would beat him till every one of his ribs would cry Amen. But thou
livest hereabouts, mayhap thou knowest Robin Hood thyself, good fellow."

"Ay, marry, that I do somewhat," quoth Robin, "and I have seen him this
very morn. But, Tinker, men say that he is but a sad, sly thief. Thou
hadst better watch thy warrant, man, or else he may steal it out of thy
very pouch."

"Let him but try!" cried the Tinker. "Sly may he be, but sly am I, too.
I would I had him here now, man to man!" And he made his heavy cudgel to
spin again. "But what manner of man is he, lad?

"Much like myself," said Robin, laughing, "and in height and build and
age nigh the same; and he hath blue eyes, too."

"Nay," quoth the Tinker, "thou art but a green youth. I thought him to
be a great bearded man. Nottingham men feared him so."

"Truly, he is not so old nor so stout as thou art," said Robin. "But men
do call him a right deft hand at quarterstaff."

"That may be," said the Tinker right sturdily, "but I am more deft than
he, for did I not overcome Simon of Ely in a fair bout in the ring at
Hertford Town? But if thou knowest him, my jolly blade, wilt thou go
with me and bring me to him? Fourscore bright angels hath the Sheriff
promised me if I serve the warrant upon the knave's body, and ten of
them will I give to thee if thou showest me him."

"Ay, that will I," quoth Robin, "but show me thy warrant, man, until I
see whether it be good or no."

"That will I not do, even to mine own brother," answered the Tinker. "No
man shall see my warrant till I serve it upon yon fellow's own body."

"So be it," quoth Robin. "And thou show it not to me I know not to whom
thou wilt show it. But here we are at the Sign of the Blue Boar, so let
us in and taste his brown October."

No sweeter inn could be found in all Nottinghamshire than that of the
Blue Boar. None had such lovely trees standing around, or was so covered
with trailing clematis and sweet woodbine; none had such good beer and
such humming ale; nor, in wintertime, when the north wind howled and
snow drifted around the hedges, was there to be found, elsewhere, such
a roaring fire as blazed upon the hearth of the Blue Boar. At such times
might be found a goodly company of yeomen or country folk seated around
the blazing hearth, bandying merry jests, while roasted crabs(2) bobbed
in bowls of ale upon the hearthstone. Well known was the inn to Robin
Hood and his band, for there had he and such merry companions as Little
John or Will Stutely or young David of Doncaster often gathered when all
the forest was filled with snow. As for mine host, he knew how to keep
a still tongue in his head, and to swallow his words before they passed
his teeth, for he knew very well which side of his bread was spread with
butter, for Robin and his band were the best of customers and paid their
scores without having them chalked up behind the door. So now, when
Robin Hood and the Tinker came thereto and called aloud for two great
pots of ale, none would have known from look or speech that the host had
ever set eyes upon the outlaw before.

     (2) Small sour apples.

"Bide thou here," quoth Robin to the Tinker, "while I go and see that
mine host draweth ale from the right butt, for he hath good October, I
know, and that brewed by Withold of Tamworth." So saying, he went within
and whispered to the host to add a measure of Flemish strong waters to
the good English ale; which the latter did and brought it to them.

"By Our Lady," said the Tinker, after a long draught of the ale, "yon
same Withold of Tamworth--a right good Saxon name, too, I would have
thee know--breweth the most humming ale that e'er passed the lips of Wat
o' the Crabstaff."

"Drink, man, drink," cried Robin, only wetting his own lips meanwhile.
"Ho, landlord! Bring my friend another pot of the same. And now for a
song, my jolly blade."

"Ay, that will I give thee a song, my lovely fellow," quoth the Tinker,
"for I never tasted such ale in all my days before. By Our Lady, it
doth make my head hum even now! Hey, Dame Hostess, come listen, an thou
wouldst hear a song, and thou too, thou bonny lass, for never sing I so
well as when bright eyes do look upon me the while."

Then he sang an ancient ballad of the time of good King Arthur, called
"The Marriage of Sir Gawaine," which you may some time read yourself, in
stout English of early times; and as he sang, all listened to that noble
tale of noble knight and his sacrifice to his king. But long before the
Tinker came to the last verse his tongue began to trip and his head to
spin, because of the strong waters mixed with the ale. First his tongue
tripped, then it grew thick of sound; then his head wagged from side to
side, until at last he fell asleep as though he never would waken again.

Then Robin Hood laughed aloud and quickly took the warrant from out the
Tinker's pouch with his deft fingers. "Sly art thou, Tinker," quoth he,
"but not yet, I bow, art thou as sly as that same sly thief Robin Hood."

Then he called the host to him and said, "Here, good man, are ten broad
shillings for the entertainment thou hast given us this day. See that
thou takest good care of thy fair guest there, and when he wakes thou
mayst again charge him ten shillings also, and if he hath it not, thou
mayst take his bag and hammer, and even his coat, in payment. Thus do
I punish those that come into the greenwood to deal dole to me. As for
thine own self, never knew I landlord yet that would not charge twice an
he could."

At this the host smiled slyly, as though saying to himself the rustic
saw, "Teach a magpie to suck eggs."

The Tinker slept until the afternoon drew to a close and the shadows
grew long beside the woodland edge, then he awoke. First he looked up,
then he looked down, then he looked east, then he looked west, for he
was gathering his wits together, like barley straws blown apart by the
wind. First he thought of his merry companion, but he was gone. Then he
thought of his stout crabstaff, and that he had within his hand. Then of
his warrant, and of the fourscore angels he was to gain for serving it
upon Robin Hood. He thrust his hand into his pouch, but not a scrap nor
a farthing was there. Then he sprang to his feet in a rage.

"Ho, landlord!" cried he, "whither hath that knave gone that was with me
but now?"

"What knave meaneth Your Worship?" quoth the landlord, calling the
Tinker Worship to soothe him, as a man would pour oil upon angry water.
"I saw no knave with Your Worship, for I swear no man would dare call
that man knave so nigh to Sherwood Forest. A right stout yeoman I saw
with Your Worship, but I thought that Your Worship knew him, for few
there be about here that pass him by and know him not."

"Now, how should I, that ne'er have squealed in your sty, know all the
swine therein? Who was he, then, an thou knowest him so well?"

"Why, yon same is a right stout fellow whom men hereabouts do call Robin
Hood, which same--"

"Now, by'r Lady!" cried the Tinker hastily, and in a deep voice like an
angry bull, "thou didst see me come into thine inn, I, a staunch, honest
craftsman, and never told me who my company was, well knowing thine own
self who he was. Now, I have a right round piece of a mind to crack thy
knave's pate for thee!" Then he took up his cudgel and looked at the
landlord as though he would smite him where he stood.

"Nay," cried the host, throwing up his elbow, for he feared the blow,
"how knew I that thou knewest him not?"

"Well and truly thankful mayst thou be," quoth the Tinker, "that I be
a patient man and so do spare thy bald crown, else wouldst thou ne'er
cheat customer again. But as for this same knave Robin Hood, I go
straightway to seek him, and if I do not score his knave's pate, cut
my staff into fagots and call me woman." So saying, he gathered himself
together to depart.

"Nay," quoth the landlord, standing in front of him and holding out his
arms like a gooseherd driving his flock, for money made him bold, "thou
goest not till thou hast paid me my score."

"But did not he pay thee?"

"Not so much as one farthing; and ten good shillings' worth of ale have
ye drunk this day. Nay, I say, thou goest not away without paying me,
else shall our good Sheriff know of it."

"But nought have I to pay thee with, good fellow," quoth the Tinker.

"'Good fellow' not me," said the landlord. "Good fellow am I not when
it cometh to lose ten shillings! Pay me that thou owest me in broad
money, or else leave thy coat and bag and hammer; yet, I wot they
are not worth ten shillings, and I shall lose thereby. Nay, an thou
stirrest, I have a great dog within and I will loose him upon thee.
Maken, open thou the door and let forth Brian if this fellow stirs one
step."

"Nay," quoth the Tinker--for, by roaming the country, he had learned
what dogs were--"take thou what thou wilt have, and let me depart in
peace, and may a murrain go with thee. But oh, landlord! An I catch yon
scurvy varlet, I swear he shall pay full with usury for that he hath
had!"

So saying, he strode away toward the forest, talking to himself, while
the landlord and his worthy dame and Maken stood looking after him, and
laughed when he had fairly gone.

"Robin and I stripped yon ass of his pack main neatly," quoth the
landlord.

Now it happened about this time that Robin Hood was going through the
forest to Fosse Way, to see what was to be seen there, for the moon was
full and the night gave promise of being bright. In his hand he carried
his stout oaken staff, and at his side hung his bugle horn. As thus he
walked up a forest path, whistling, down another path came the Tinker,
muttering to himself and shaking his head like an angry bull; and so,
at a sudden bend, they met sharply face to face. Each stood still for a
time, and then Robin spoke:

"Halloa, my sweet bird," said he, laughing merrily, "how likest thou
thine ale? Wilt not sing to me another song?"

The Tinker said nothing at first but stood looking at Robin with a grim
face. "Now," quoth he at last, "I am right glad I have met thee, and if
I do not rattle thy bones within thy hide this day, I give thee leave to
put thy foot upon my neck."

"With all my heart," cried merry Robin. "Rattle my bones, an thou
canst." So saying, he gripped his staff and threw himself upon his
guard. Then the Tinker spat upon his hands and, grasping his staff, came
straight at the other. He struck two or three blows, but soon found that
he had met his match, for Robin warded and parried all of them, and,
before the Tinker thought, he gave him a rap upon the ribs in return. At
this Robin laughed aloud, and the Tinker grew more angry than ever, and
smote again with all his might and main. Again Robin warded two of the
strokes, but at the third, his staff broke beneath the mighty blows of
the Tinker. "Now, ill betide thee, traitor staff," cried Robin, as it
fell from his hands; "a foul stick art thou to serve me thus in mine
hour of need."

"Now yield thee," quoth the Tinker, "for thou art my captive; and if
thou do not, I will beat thy pate to a pudding."

To this Robin Hood made no answer, but, clapping his horn to his lips,
he blew three blasts, loud and clear.

"Ay," quoth the Tinker, "blow thou mayest, but go thou must with me to
Nottingham Town, for the Sheriff would fain see thee there. Now wilt
thou yield thee, or shall I have to break thy pretty head?"

"An I must drink sour ale, I must," quoth Robin, "but never have I
yielded me to man before, and that without wound or mark upon my
body. Nor, when I bethink me, will I yield now. Ho, my merry men! Come
quickly!"

Then from out the forest leaped Little John and six stout yeomen clad in
Lincoln green.

"How now, good master," cried Little John, "what need hast thou that
thou dost wind thy horn so loudly?"

"There stands a tinker," quoth Robin, "that would fain take me to
Nottingham, there to hang upon the gallows tree."

"Then shall he himself hang forthwith," cried Little John, and he and
the others made at the Tinker, to seize him.

"Nay, touch him not," said Robin, "for a right stout man is he. A metal
man he is by trade, and a mettled man by nature; moreover, he doth sing
a lovely ballad. Say, good fellow, wilt thou join my merry men all?
Three suits of Lincoln green shalt thou have a year, besides forty marks
in fee; thou shalt share all with us and lead a right merry life in
the greenwood; for cares have we not, and misfortune cometh not upon
us within the sweet shades of Sherwood, where we shoot the dun deer and
feed upon venison and sweet oaten cakes, and curds and honey. Wilt thou
come with me?"

"Ay, marry, will I join with you all," quoth the Tinker, "for I love a
merry life, and I love thee, good master, though thou didst thwack my
ribs and cheat me into the bargain. Fain am I to own thou art both a
stouter and a slyer man than I; so I will obey thee and be thine own
true servant."

So all turned their steps to the forest depths, where the Tinker was to
live henceforth. For many a day he sang ballads to the band, until the
famous Allan a Dale joined them, before whose sweet voice all others
seemed as harsh as a raven's; but of him we will learn hereafter.




The Shooting Match at Nottingham Town

THEN THE SHERIFF was very wroth because of this failure to take jolly
Robin, for it came to his ears, as ill news always does, that the people
laughed at him and made a jest of his thinking to serve a warrant upon
such a one as the bold outlaw. And a man hates nothing so much as
being made a jest of; so he said: "Our gracious lord and sovereign King
himself shall know of this, and how his laws are perverted and despised
by this band of rebel outlaws. As for yon traitor Tinker, him will
I hang, if I catch him, upon the very highest gallows tree in all
Nottinghamshire."

Then he bade all his servants and retainers to make ready to go to
London Town, to see and speak with the King.

At this there was bustling at the Sheriff's castle, and men ran hither
and thither upon this business and upon that, while the forge fires of
Nottingham glowed red far into the night like twinkling stars, for
all the smiths of the town were busy making or mending armor for the
Sheriff's troop of escort. For two days this labor lasted, then, on
the third, all was ready for the journey. So forth they started in the
bright sunlight, from Nottingham Town to Fosse Way and thence to Watling
Street; and so they journeyed for two days, until they saw at last the
spires and towers of great London Town; and many folks stopped, as
they journeyed along, and gazed at the show they made riding along the
highways with their flashing armor and gay plumes and trappings.

In London King Henry and his fair Queen Eleanor held their court, gay
with ladies in silks and satins and velvets and cloth of gold, and also
brave knights and gallant courtiers.

Thither came the Sheriff and was shown into the King's presence.

"A boon, a boon," quoth he, as he knelt upon the ground.

"Now what wouldst thou have?" said the King. "Let us hear what may be
thy desires."

"O good my Lord and Sovereign," spake the Sheriff, "in Sherwood Forest
in our own good shire of Nottingham, liveth a bold outlaw whose name is
Robin Hood."

"In good sooth," said the King, "his doings have reached even our own
royal ears. He is a saucy, rebellious varlet, yet, I am fain to own, a
right merry soul withal."

"But hearken, O my most gracious Sovereign," said the Sheriff. "I sent
a warrant to him with thine own royal seal attached, by a right lusty
knave, but he beat the messenger and stole the warrant. And he killeth
thy deer and robbeth thine own liege subjects even upon the great
highways."

"Why, how now," quoth the King wrathfully. "What wouldst thou have
me do? Comest thou not to me with a great array of men-at-arms and
retainers, and yet art not able to take a single band of lusty knaves
without armor on breast, in thine own county! What wouldst thou have
me do? Art thou not my Sheriff? Are not my laws in force in
Nottinghamshire? Canst thou not take thine own course against those that
break the laws or do any injury to thee or thine? Go, get thee gone, and
think well; devise some plan of thine own, but trouble me no further.
But look well to it, Master Sheriff, for I will have my laws obeyed by
all men within my kingdom, and if thou art not able to enforce them thou
art no sheriff for me. So look well to thyself, I say, or ill may befall
thee as well as all the thieving knaves in Nottinghamshire. When the
flood cometh it sweepeth away grain as well as chaff."

Then the Sheriff turned away with a sore and troubled heart, and sadly
he rued his fine show of retainers, for he saw that the King was angry
because he had so many men about him and yet could not enforce the
laws. So, as they all rode slowly back to Nottingham, the Sheriff was
thoughtful and full of care. Not a word did he speak to anyone, and no
one of his men spoke to him, but all the time he was busy devising some
plan to take Robin Hood.

"Aha!" cried he suddenly, smiting his hand upon his thigh "I have it
now! Ride on, my merry men all, and let us get back to Nottingham Town
as speedily as we may. And mark well my words: before a fortnight
is passed, that evil knave Robin Hood will be safely clapped into
Nottingham gaol."

But what was the Sheriff's plan?

As a usurer takes each one of a bag of silver angels, feeling each coin
to find whether it be clipped or not, so the Sheriff, as all rode slowly
and sadly back toward Nottingham, took up thought after thought in turn,
feeling around the edges of each but finding in every one some flaw.
At last he thought of the daring soul of jolly Robin and how, as he the
Sheriff knew, he often came even within the walls of Nottingham.

"Now," thought the Sheriff, "could I but persuade Robin nigh to
Nottingham Town so that I could find him, I warrant I would lay hands
upon him so stoutly that he would never get away again." Then of a
sudden it came to him like a flash that were he to proclaim a great
shooting match and offer some grand prize, Robin Hood might be
overpersuaded by his spirit to come to the butts; and it was this
thought which caused him to cry "Aha!" and smite his palm upon his
thigh.

So, as soon as he had returned safely to Nottingham, he sent messengers
north and south, and east and west, to proclaim through town, hamlet,
and countryside, this grand shooting match, and everyone was bidden that
could draw a longbow, and the prize was to be an arrow of pure beaten
gold.

When Robin Hood first heard the news of this he was in Lincoln Town, and
hastening back to Sherwood Forest he soon called all his merry men about
him and spoke to them thus:

"Now hearken, my merry men all, to the news that I have brought from
Lincoln Town today. Our friend the Sheriff of Nottingham hath proclaimed
a shooting match, and hath sent messengers to tell of it through all the
countryside, and the prize is to be a bright golden arrow. Now I fain
would have one of us win it, both because of the fairness of the prize
and because our sweet friend the Sheriff hath offered it. So we will
take our bows and shafts and go there to shoot, for I know right well
that merriment will be a-going. What say ye, lads?"

Then young David of Doncaster spoke up and said, "Now listen, I pray
thee, good master, unto what I say. I have come straight from our friend
Eadom o' the Blue Boar, and there I heard the full news of this same
match. But, master, I know from him, and he got it from the Sheriff's
man Ralph o' the Scar, that this same knavish Sheriff hath but laid a
trap for thee in this shooting match and wishes nothing so much as to
see thee there. So go not, good master, for I know right well he doth
seek to beguile thee, but stay within the greenwood lest we all meet
dole and woe."

"Now," quoth Robin, "thou art a wise lad and keepest thine ears open and
thy mouth shut, as becometh a wise and crafty woodsman. But shall we let
it be said that the Sheriff of Nottingham did cow bold Robin Hood and
sevenscore as fair archers as are in all merry England? Nay, good David,
what thou tellest me maketh me to desire the prize even more than I else
should do. But what sayeth our good gossip Swanthold? Is it not 'A hasty
man burneth his mouth, and the fool that keepeth his eyes shut falleth
into the pit'? Thus he says, truly, therefore we must meet guile with
guile. Now some of you clothe yourselves as curtal friars, and some as
rustic peasants, and some as tinkers, or as beggars, but see that each
man taketh a good bow or broadsword, in case need should arise. As for
myself, I will shoot for this same golden arrow, and should I win it, we
will hang it to the branches of our good greenwood tree for the joy of
all the band. How like you the plan, my merry men all?"

Then "Good, good!" cried all the band right heartily.

A fair sight was Nottingham Town on the day of the shooting match. All
along upon the green meadow beneath the town wall stretched a row of
benches, one above the other, which were for knight and lady, squire and
dame, and rich burghers and their wives; for none but those of rank and
quality were to sit there. At the end of the range, near the target, was
a raised seat bedecked with ribbons and scarfs and garlands of flowers,
for the Sheriff of Nottingham and his dame. The range was twoscore
paces broad. At one end stood the target, at the other a tent of
striped canvas, from the pole of which fluttered many-colored flags and
streamers. In this booth were casks of ale, free to be broached by any
of the archers who might wish to quench their thirst.

Across the range from where the seats for the better folk were raised
was a railing to keep the poorer people from crowding in front of the
target. Already, while it was early, the benches were beginning to fill
with people of quality, who kept constantly arriving in little carts or
upon palfreys that curveted gaily to the merry tinkle of silver bells at
bridle reins. With these came also the poorer folk, who sat or lay upon
the green grass near the railing that kept them from off the range.
In the great tent the archers were gathering by twos and threes; some
talking loudly of the fair shots each man had made in his day; some
looking well to their bows, drawing a string betwixt the fingers to see
that there was no fray upon it, or inspecting arrows, shutting one eye
and peering down a shaft to see that it was not warped, but straight and
true, for neither bow nor shaft should fail at such a time and for such
a prize. And never was such a company of yeomen as were gathered at
Nottingham Town that day, for the very best archers of merry England
had come to this shooting match. There was Gill o' the Red Cap, the
Sheriff's own head archer, and Diccon Cruikshank of Lincoln Town, and
Adam o' the Dell, a man of Tamworth, of threescore years and more, yet
hale and lusty still, who in his time had shot in the famous match
at Woodstock, and had there beaten that renowned archer, Clym o' the
Clough. And many more famous men of the longbow were there, whose names
have been handed down to us in goodly ballads of the olden time.

But now all the benches were filled with guests, lord and lady, burgher
and dame, when at last the Sheriff himself came with his lady, he riding
with stately mien upon his milk-white horse and she upon her brown
filly. Upon his head he wore a purple velvet cap, and purple velvet was
his robe, all trimmed about with rich ermine; his jerkin and hose were
of sea-green silk, and his shoes of black velvet, the pointed toes
fastened to his garters with golden chains. A golden chain hung about
his neck, and at his collar was a great carbuncle set in red gold. His
lady was dressed in blue velvet, all trimmed with swan's down. So they
made a gallant sight as they rode along side by side, and all the people
shouted from where they crowded across the space from the gentlefolk;
so the Sheriff and his lady came to their place, where men-at-arms, with
hauberk and spear, stood about, waiting for them.

Then when the Sheriff and his dame had sat down, he bade his herald
wind upon his silver horn; who thereupon sounded three blasts that
came echoing cheerily back from the gray walls of Nottingham. Then the
archers stepped forth to their places, while all the folks shouted with
a mighty voice, each man calling upon his favorite yeoman. "Red Cap!"
cried some; "Cruikshank!" cried others; "Hey for William o' Leslie!"
shouted others yet again; while ladies waved silken scarfs to urge each
yeoman to do his best.

Then the herald stood forth and loudly proclaimed the rules of the game
as follows:

"Shoot each man from yon mark, which is sevenscore yards and ten from
the target. One arrow shooteth each man first, and from all the archers
shall the ten that shooteth the fairest shafts be chosen for to shoot
again. Two arrows shooteth each man of these ten, then shall the three
that shoot the fairest shafts be chosen for to shoot again. Three arrows
shooteth each man of those three, and to him that shooteth the fairest
shafts shall the prize be given."

Then the Sheriff leaned forward, looking keenly among the press of
archers to find whether Robin Hood was among them; but no one was
there clad in Lincoln green, such as was worn by Robin and his band.
"Nevertheless," said the Sheriff to himself, "he may still be there, and
I miss him among the crowd of other men. But let me see when but ten men
shoot, for I wot he will be among the ten, or I know him not."

And now the archers shot, each man in turn, and the good folk never saw
such archery as was done that day. Six arrows were within the clout,
four within the black, and only two smote the outer ring; so that when
the last arrow sped and struck the target, all the people shouted aloud,
for it was noble shooting.

And now but ten men were left of all those that had shot before, and
of these ten, six were famous throughout the land, and most of the folk
gathered there knew them. These six men were Gilbert o' the Red Cap,
Adam o' the Dell, Diccon Cruikshank, William o' Leslie, Hubert o' Cloud,
and Swithin o' Hertford. Two others were yeomen of merry Yorkshire,
another was a tall stranger in blue, who said he came from London Town,
and the last was a tattered stranger in scarlet, who wore a patch over
one eye.

"Now," quoth the Sheriff to a man-at-arms who stood near him, "seest
thou Robin Hood among those ten?"

"Nay, that do I not, Your Worship," answered the man. "Six of them I
know right well. Of those Yorkshire yeomen, one is too tall and the
other too short for that bold knave. Robin's beard is as yellow as gold,
while yon tattered beggar in scarlet hath a beard of brown, besides
being blind of one eye. As for the stranger in blue, Robin's shoulders,
I ween, are three inches broader than his."

"Then," quoth the Sheriff, smiting his thigh angrily, "yon knave is a
coward as well as a rogue, and dares not show his face among good men
and true."

Then, after they had rested a short time, those ten stout men stepped
forth to shoot again. Each man shot two arrows, and as they shot, not
a word was spoken, but all the crowd watched with scarce a breath of
sound; but when the last had shot his arrow another great shout arose,
while many cast their caps aloft for joy of such marvelous shooting.

"Now by our gracious Lady fair," quoth old Sir Amyas o' the Dell, who,
bowed with fourscore years and more, sat near the Sheriff, "ne'er saw
I such archery in all my life before, yet have I seen the best hands at
the longbow for threescore years and more."

And now but three men were left of all those that had shot before. One
was Gill o' the Red Cap, one the tattered stranger in scarlet, and one
Adam o' the Dell of Tamworth Town. Then all the people called aloud,
some crying, "Ho for Gilbert o' the Red Cap!" and some, "Hey for stout
Adam o' Tamworth!" But not a single man in the crowd called upon the
stranger in scarlet.

"Now, shoot thou well, Gilbert," cried the Sheriff, "and if thine be the
best shaft, fivescore broad silver pennies will I give to thee beside
the prize."

"Truly I will do my best," quoth Gilbert right sturdily. "A man cannot
do aught but his best, but that will I strive to do this day." So
saying, he drew forth a fair smooth arrow with a broad feather and
fitted it deftly to the string, then drawing his bow with care he
sped the shaft. Straight flew the arrow and lit fairly in the clout, a
finger's-breadth from the center. "A Gilbert, a Gilbert!" shouted all
the crowd; and, "Now, by my faith," cried the Sheriff, smiting his hands
together, "that is a shrewd shot."

Then the tattered stranger stepped forth, and all the people laughed as
they saw a yellow patch that showed beneath his arm when he raised his
elbow to shoot, and also to see him aim with but one eye. He drew the
good yew bow quickly, and quickly loosed a shaft; so short was the time
that no man could draw a breath betwixt the drawing and the shooting;
yet his arrow lodged nearer the center than the other by twice the
length of a barleycorn.

"Now by all the saints in Paradise!" cried the Sheriff, "that is a
lovely shaft in very truth!"

Then Adam o' the Dell shot, carefully and cautiously, and his arrow
lodged close beside the stranger's. Then after a short space they all
three shot again, and once more each arrow lodged within the clout, but
this time Adam o' the Dell's was farthest from the center, and again the
tattered stranger's shot was the best. Then, after another time of rest,
they all shot for the third time. This time Gilbert took great heed to
his aim, keenly measuring the distance and shooting with shrewdest care.
Straight flew the arrow, and all shouted till the very flags that
waved in the breeze shook with the sound, and the rooks and daws flew
clamoring about the roofs of the old gray tower, for the shaft had
lodged close beside the spot that marked the very center.

"Well done, Gilbert!" cried the Sheriff right joyously. "Fain am I
to believe the prize is thine, and right fairly won. Now, thou ragged
knave, let me see thee shoot a better shaft than that."

Nought spake the stranger but took his place, while all was hushed, and
no one spoke or even seemed to breathe, so great was the silence
for wonder what he would do. Meanwhile, also, quite still stood the
stranger, holding his bow in his hand, while one could count five; then
he drew his trusty yew, holding it drawn but a moment, then loosed the
string. Straight flew the arrow, and so true that it smote a gray goose
feather from off Gilbert's shaft, which fell fluttering through the
sunlit air as the stranger's arrow lodged close beside his of the Red
Cap, and in the very center. No one spoke a word for a while and no one
shouted, but each man looked into his neighbor's face amazedly.

"Nay," quoth old Adam o' the Dell presently, drawing a long breath
and shaking his head as he spoke, "twoscore years and more have I shot
shaft, and maybe not all times bad, but I shoot no more this day, for
no man can match with yon stranger, whosoe'er he may be." Then he
thrust his shaft into his quiver, rattling, and unstrung his bow without
another word.

Then the Sheriff came down from his dais and drew near, in all his silks
and velvets, to where the tattered stranger stood leaning upon his
stout bow, while the good folk crowded around to see the man who shot so
wondrously well. "Here, good fellow," quoth the Sheriff, "take thou
the prize, and well and fairly hast thou won it, I bow. What may be thy
name, and whence comest thou?"

"Men do call me Jock o' Teviotdale, and thence am I come," said the
stranger.

"Then, by Our Lady, Jock, thou art the fairest archer that e'er mine
eyes beheld, and if thou wilt join my service I will clothe thee with a
better coat than that thou hast upon thy back; thou shalt eat and drink
of the best, and at every Christmastide fourscore marks shall be thy
wage. I trow thou drawest better bow than that same coward knave Robin
Hood, that dared not show his face here this day. Say, good fellow, wilt
thou join my service?"

"Nay, that will I not," quoth the stranger roughly. "I will be mine own,
and no man in all merry England shall be my master."

"Then get thee gone, and a murrain seize thee!" cried the Sheriff, and
his voice trembled with anger. "And by my faith and troth, I have a good
part of a mind to have thee beaten for thine insolence!" Then he turned
upon his heel and strode away.

It was a right motley company that gathered about the noble greenwood
tree in Sherwood's depths that same day. A score and more of barefoot
friars were there, and some that looked like tinkers, and some that
seemed to be sturdy beggars and rustic hinds; and seated upon a mossy
couch was one all clad in tattered scarlet, with a patch over one eye;
and in his hand he held the golden arrow that was the prize of the great
shooting match. Then, amidst a noise of talking and laughter, he took
the patch from off his eye and stripped away the scarlet rags from off
his body and showed himself all clothed in fair Lincoln green; and
quoth he, "Easy come these things away, but walnut stain cometh not so
speedily from yellow hair." Then all laughed louder than before, for it
was Robin Hood himself that had won the prize from the Sheriff's very
hands.

Then all sat down to the woodland feast and talked among themselves
of the merry jest that had been played upon the Sheriff, and of the
adventures that had befallen each member of the band in his disguise.
But when the feast was done, Robin Hood took Little John apart and said,
"Truly am I vexed in my blood, for I heard the Sheriff say today, 'Thou
shootest better than that coward knave Robin Hood, that dared not show
his face here this day.' I would fain let him know who it was who won
the golden arrow from out his hand, and also that I am no coward such as
he takes me to be."

Then Little John said, "Good master, take thou me and Will Stutely, and
we will send yon fat Sheriff news of all this by a messenger such as he
doth not expect."

That day the Sheriff sat at meat in the great hall of his house
at Nottingham Town. Long tables stood down the hall, at which sat
men-at-arms and household servants and good stout villains,(1) in all
fourscore and more. There they talked of the day's shooting as they ate
their meat and quaffed their ale. The Sheriff sat at the head of the
table upon a raised seat under a canopy, and beside him sat his dame.

     (1) Bond-servants.

"By my troth," said he, "I did reckon full roundly that that knave Robin
Hood would be at the game today. I did not think that he was such a
coward. But who could that saucy knave be who answered me to my beard
so bravely? I wonder that I did not have him beaten; but there was
something about him that spoke of other things than rags and tatters."

Then, even as he finished speaking, something fell rattling among the
dishes on the table, while those that sat near started up wondering
what it might be. After a while one of the men-at-arms gathered courage
enough to pick it up and bring it to the Sheriff. Then everyone saw
that it was a blunted gray goose shaft, with a fine scroll, about the
thickness of a goose quill, tied near to its head. The Sheriff opened
the scroll and glanced at it, while the veins upon his forehead swelled
and his cheeks grew ruddy with rage as he read, for this was what he
saw:

     "_Now Heaven bless Thy Grace this day
     Say all in sweet Sherwood
     For thou didst give the prize away
     To merry Robin Hood_."

"Whence came this?" cried the Sheriff in a mighty voice.

"Even through the window, Your Worship," quoth the man who had handed
the shaft to him.




Will Stutely Rescued by His Companions

NOW WHEN THE SHERIFF found that neither law nor guile could overcome
Robin Hood, he was much perplexed, and said to himself, "Fool that I am!
Had I not told our King of Robin Hood, I would not have gotten myself
into such a coil; but now I must either take him captive or have wrath
visited upon my head from his most gracious Majesty. I have tried law,
and I have tried guile, and I have failed in both; so I will try what
may be done with might."

Thus communing within himself, he called his constables together and
told them what was in his mind. "Now take ye each four men, all armed
in proof," said he, "and get ye gone to the forest, at different points,
and lie in wait for this same Robin Hood. But if any constable finds
too many men against him, let him sound a horn, and then let each band
within hearing come with all speed and join the party that calls them.
Thus, I think, shall we take this green-clad knave. Furthermore, to him
that first meeteth with Robin Hood shall one hundred pounds of silver
money be given, if he be brought to me dead or alive; and to him that
meeteth with any of his band shall twoscore pounds be given, if such be
brought to me dead or alive. So, be ye bold and be ye crafty."

So thus they went in threescore companies of five to Sherwood Forest, to
take Robin Hood, each constable wishing that he might be the one to find
the bold outlaw, or at least one of his band. For seven days and nights
they hunted through the forest glades, but never saw so much as a single
man in Lincoln green; for tidings of all this had been brought to Robin
Hood by trusty Eadom o' the Blue Boar.

When he first heard the news, Robin said, "If the Sheriff dare send
force to meet force, woe will it be for him and many a better man
besides, for blood will flow and there will be great trouble for all.
But fain would I shun blood and battle, and fain would I not deal sorrow
to womenfolk and wives because good stout yeomen lose their lives. Once
I slew a man, and never do I wish to slay a man again, for it is bitter
for the soul to think thereon. So now we will abide silently in Sherwood
Forest, so that it may be well for all, but should we be forced to
defend ourselves, or any of our band, then let each man draw bow and
brand with might and main."

At this speech many of the band shook their heads, and said to
themselves, "Now the Sheriff will think that we are cowards, and folk
will scoff throughout the countryside, saying that we fear to meet these
men." But they said nothing aloud, swallowing their words and doing as
Robin bade them.

Thus they hid in the depths of Sherwood Forest for seven days and seven
nights and never showed their faces abroad in all that time; but early
in the morning of the eighth day Robin Hood called the band together and
said, "Now who will go and find what the Sheriff's men are at by this
time? For I know right well they will not bide forever within Sherwood
shades."

At this a great shout arose, and each man waved his bow aloft and cried
that he might be the one to go. Then Robin Hood's heart was proud when
he looked around on his stout, brave fellows, and he said, "Brave and
true are ye all, my merry men, and a right stout band of good fellows
are ye, but ye cannot all go, so I will choose one from among you, and
it shall be good Will Stutely, for he is as sly as e'er an old dog fox
in Sherwood Forest."

Then Will Stutely leaped high aloft and laughed loudly, clapping his
hands for pure joy that he should have been chosen from among them all.
"Now thanks, good master," quoth he, "and if I bring not news of those
knaves to thee, call me no more thy sly Will Stutely."

Then he clad himself in a friar's gown, and underneath the robe he hung
a good broadsword in such a place that he could easily lay hands upon
it. Thus clad, he set forth upon his quest, until he came to the verge
of the forest, and so to the highway. He saw two bands of the Sheriff's
men, yet he turned neither to the right nor the left, but only drew his
cowl the closer over his face, folding his hands as if in meditation.
So at last he came to the Sign of the Blue Boar. "For," quoth he to
himself, "our good friend Eadom will tell me all the news."

At the Sign of the Blue Boar he found a band of the Sheriffs men
drinking right lustily; so, without speaking to anyone, he sat down upon
a distant bench, his staff in his hand, and his head bowed forward as
though he were meditating. Thus he sat waiting until he might see the
landlord apart, and Eadom did not know him, but thought him to be some
poor tired friar, so he let him sit without saying a word to him or
molesting him, though he liked not the cloth. "For," said he to himself,
"it is a hard heart that kicks the lame dog from off the sill." As
Stutely sat thus, there came a great house cat and rubbed against his
knee, raising his robe a palm's-breadth high. Stutely pushed his robe
quickly down again, but the constable who commanded the Sheriffs men
saw what had passed, and saw also fair Lincoln green beneath the friar's
robe. He said nothing at the time, but communed within himself in this
wise: "Yon is no friar of orders gray, and also, I wot, no honest yeoman
goeth about in priest's garb, nor doth a thief go so for nought. Now I
think in good sooth that is one of Robin Hood's own men." So, presently,
he said aloud, "O holy father, wilt thou not take a good pot of March
beer to slake thy thirsty soul withal?"

But Stutely shook his head silently, for he said to himself, "Maybe
there be those here who know my voice."

Then the constable said again, "Whither goest thou, holy friar, upon
this hot summer's day?"

"I go a pilgrim to Canterbury Town," answered Will Stutely, speaking
gruffly, so that none might know his voice.

Then the constable said, for the third time, "Now tell me, holy father,
do pilgrims to Canterbury wear good Lincoln green beneath their robes?
Ha! By my faith, I take thee to be some lusty thief, and perhaps one of
Robin Hood's own band! Now, by Our Lady's grace, if thou movest hand or
foot, I will run thee through the body with my sword!"

Then he flashed forth his bright sword and leaped upon Will Stutely,
thinking he would take him unaware; but Stutely had his own sword
tightly held in his hand, beneath his robe, so he drew it forth before
the constable came upon him. Then the stout constable struck a mighty
blow; but he struck no more in all that fight, for Stutely, parrying the
blow right deftly, smote the constable back again with all his might.
Then he would have escaped, but could not, for the other, all dizzy with
the wound and with the flowing blood, seized him by the knees with his
arms even as he reeled and fell. Then the others rushed upon him, and
Stutely struck again at another of the Sheriff's men, but the steel
cap glanced the blow, and though the blade bit deep, it did not kill.
Meanwhile, the constable, fainting as he was, drew Stutely downward, and
the others, seeing the yeoman hampered so, rushed upon him again, and
one smote him a blow upon the crown so that the blood ran down his face
and blinded him. Then, staggering, he fell, and all sprang upon him,
though he struggled so manfully that they could hardly hold him fast.
Then they bound him with stout hempen cords so that he could not move
either hand or foot, and thus they overcame him.

Robin Hood stood under the greenwood tree, thinking of Will Stutely and
how he might be faring, when suddenly he saw two of his stout yeomen
come running down the forest path, and betwixt them ran buxom Maken
of the Blue Boar. Then Robin's heart fell, for he knew they were the
bearers of ill tidings.

"Will Stutely hath been taken," cried they, when they had come to where
he stood.

"And is it thou that hast brought such doleful news?" said Robin to the
lass.

"Ay, marry, for I saw it all," cried she, panting as the hare pants when
it has escaped the hounds, "and I fear he is wounded sore, for one smote
him main shrewdly i' the crown. They have bound him and taken him to
Nottingham Town, and ere I left the Blue Boar I heard that he should be
hanged tomorrow day."

"He shall not be hanged tomorrow day," cried Robin; "or, if he be,
full many a one shall gnaw the sod, and many shall have cause to cry
Alack-a-day!"

Then he clapped his horn to his lips and blew three blasts right loudly,
and presently his good yeomen came running through the greenwood until
sevenscore bold blades were gathered around him.

"Now hark you all!" cried Robin. "Our dear companion Will Stutely hath
been taken by that vile Sheriff's men, therefore doth it behoove us to
take bow and brand in hand to bring him off again; for I wot that we
ought to risk life and limb for him, as he hath risked life and limb for
us. Is it not so, my merry men all?" Then all cried, "Ay!" with a great
voice.

So the next day they all wended their way from Sherwood Forest, but by
different paths, for it behooved them to be very crafty; so the band
separated into parties of twos and threes, which were all to meet again
in a tangled dell that lay near to Nottingham Town. Then, when they had
all gathered together at the place of meeting, Robin spoke to them thus:

"Now we will lie here in ambush until we can get news, for it doth
behoove us to be cunning and wary if we would bring our friend Will
Stutely off from the Sheriff's clutches."

So they lay hidden a long time, until the sun stood high in the sky. The
day was warm and the dusty road was bare of travelers, except an aged
palmer who walked slowly along the highroad that led close beside
the gray castle wall of Nottingham Town. When Robin saw that no other
wayfarer was within sight, he called young David of Doncaster, who was
a shrewd man for his years, and said to him, "Now get thee forth, young
David, and speak to yonder palmer that walks beside the town wall, for
he hath come but now from Nottingham Town, and may tell thee news of
good Stutely, perchance."

So David strode forth, and when he came up to the pilgrim, he saluted
him and said, "Good morrow, holy father, and canst thou tell me when
Will Stutely will be hanged upon the gallows tree? I fain would not miss
the sight, for I have come from afar to see so sturdy a rogue hanged."

"Now, out upon thee, young man," cried the Palmer, "that thou shouldst
speak so when a good stout man is to be hanged for nothing but guarding
his own life!" And he struck his staff upon the ground in anger. "Alas,
say I, that this thing should be! For even this day, toward evening,
when the sun falleth low, he shall be hanged, fourscore rods from the
great town gate of Nottingham, where three roads meet; for there
the Sheriff sweareth he shall die as a warning to all outlaws in
Nottinghamshire. But yet, I say again, Alas! For, though Robin Hood and
his band may be outlaws, yet he taketh only from the rich and the strong
and the dishonest man, while there is not a poor widow nor a peasant
with many children, nigh to Sherwood, but has barley flour enough all
the year long through him. It grieves my heart to see one as gallant as
this Stutely die, for I have been a good Saxon yeoman in my day, ere
I turned palmer, and well I know a stout hand and one that smiteth
shrewdly at a cruel Norman or a proud abbot with fat moneybags. Had good
Stutely's master but known how his man was compassed about with perils,
perchance he might send succor to bring him out of the hand of his
enemies.

"Ay, marry, that is true," cried the young man. "If Robin and his men
be nigh this place, I wot right well they will strive to bring him forth
from his peril. But fare thee well, thou good old man, and believe me,
if Will Stutely die, he shall be right well avenged."

Then he turned and strode rapidly away; but the Palmer looked after him,
muttering, "I wot that youth is no country hind that hath come to see
a good man die. Well, well, perchance Robin Hood is not so far away
but that there will be stout doings this day." So he went upon his way,
muttering to himself.

When David of Doncaster told Robin Hood what the Palmer had said to him,
Robin called the band around him and spoke to them thus:

"Now let us get straightway into Nottingham Town and mix ourselves with
the people there; but keep ye one another in sight, pressing as near
the prisoner and his guards as ye can, when they come outside the walls.
Strike no man without need, for I would fain avoid bloodshed, but if ye
do strike, strike hard, and see that there be no need to strike again.
Then keep all together until we come again to Sherwood, and let no man
leave his fellows."

The sun was low in the western sky when a bugle note sounded from the
castle wall. Then all was bustle in Nottingham Town and crowds filled
the streets, for all knew that the famous Will Stutely was to be hanged
that day. Presently the castle gates opened wide and a great array of
men-at-arms came forth with noise and clatter, the Sheriff, all clad in
shining mail of linked chain, riding at their head. In the midst of all
the guard, in a cart, with a halter about his neck, rode Will Stutely.
His face was pale with his wound and with loss of blood, like the moon
in broad daylight, and his fair hair was clotted in points upon his
forehead, where the blood had hardened. When he came forth from the
castle he looked up and he looked down, but though he saw some faces
that showed pity and some that showed friendliness, he saw none that
he knew. Then his heart sank within him like a plummet of lead, but
nevertheless he spoke up boldly.

"Give a sword into my hand, Sir Sheriff," said he, "and wounded man
though I be, I will fight thee and all thy men till life and strength be
gone."

"Nay, thou naughty varlet," quoth the Sheriff, turning his head and
looking right grimly upon Will Stutely, "thou shalt have no sword but
shall die a mean death, as beseemeth a vile thief like thee."

"Then do but untie my hands and I will fight thee and thy men with no
weapon but only my naked fists. I crave no weapon, but let me not be
meanly hanged this day."

Then the Sheriff laughed aloud. "Why, how now," quoth he, "is thy proud
stomach quailing? Shrive thyself, thou vile knave, for I mean that thou
shalt hang this day, and that where three roads meet, so that all men
shall see thee hang, for carrion crows and daws to peck at."

"O thou dastard heart!" cried Will Stutely, gnashing his teeth at the
Sheriff. "Thou coward hind! If ever my good master meet thee thou shalt
pay dearly for this day's work! He doth scorn thee, and so do all brave
hearts. Knowest thou not that thou and thy name are jests upon the lips
of every brave yeoman? Such a one as thou art, thou wretched craven,
will never be able to subdue bold Robin Hood."

"Ha!" cried the Sheriff in a rage, "is it even so? Am I a jest with thy
master, as thou callest him? Now I will make a jest of thee and a sorry
jest withal, for I will quarter thee limb from limb, after thou art
hanged." Then he spurred his horse forward and said no more to Stutely.

At last they came to the great town gate, through which Stutely saw the
fair country beyond, with hills and dales all clothed in verdure, and
far away the dusky line of Sherwood's skirts. Then when he saw the
slanting sunlight lying on field and fallow, shining redly here and
there on cot and farmhouse, and when he heard the sweet birds singing
their vespers, and the sheep bleating upon the hillside, and beheld the
swallows flying in the bright air, there came a great fullness to his
heart so that all things blurred to his sight through salt tears, and he
bowed his head lest the folk should think him unmanly when they saw
the tears in his eyes. Thus he kept his head bowed till they had passed
through the gate and were outside the walls of the town. But when he
looked up again he felt his heart leap within him and then stand still
for pure joy, for he saw the face of one of his own dear companions of
merry Sherwood; then glancing quickly around he saw well-known faces
upon all sides of him, crowding closely upon the men-at-arms who were
guarding him. Then of a sudden the blood sprang to his cheeks, for he
saw for a moment his own good master in the press and, seeing him, knew
that Robin Hood and all his band were there. Yet betwixt him and them
was a line of men-at-arms.

"Now, stand back!" cried the Sheriff in a mighty voice, for the crowd
pressed around on all sides. "What mean ye, varlets, that ye push upon
us so? Stand back, I say!"

Then came a bustle and a noise, and one strove to push between the
men-at-arms so as to reach the cart, and Stutely saw that it was Little
John that made all that stir.

"Now stand thou back!" cried one of the men-at-arms whom Little John
pushed with his elbows.

"Now stand thou back thine own self," quoth Little John, and straightway
smote the man a buffet beside his head that felled him as a butcher
fells an ox, and then he leaped to the cart where Stutely sat.

"I pray thee take leave of thy friends ere thou diest, Will," quoth he,
"or maybe I will die with thee if thou must die, for I could never have
better company." Then with one stroke he cut the bonds that bound the
other's arms and legs, and Stutely leaped straightway from the cart.

"Now as I live," cried the Sheriff, "yon varlet I know right well is a
sturdy rebel! Take him, I bid you all, and let him not go!"

So saying, he spurred his horse upon Little John, and rising in his
stirrups smote with might and main, but Little John ducked quickly
underneath the horse's belly and the blow whistled harmlessly over his
head.

"Nay, good Sir Sheriff," cried he, leaping up again when the blow had
passed, "I must e'en borrow thy most worshipful sword." Thereupon he
twitched the weapon deftly from out the Sheriff's hand, "Here, Stutely,"
he cried, "the Sheriff hath lent thee his sword! Back to back with me,
man, and defend thyself, for help is nigh!"

"Down with them!" bellowed the Sheriff in a voice like an angry bull;
and he spurred his horse upon the two who now stood back to back,
forgetting in his rage that he had no weapon with which to defend
himself.

"Stand back, Sheriff!" cried Little John; and even as he spoke, a bugle
horn sounded shrilly and a clothyard shaft whistled within an inch of
the Sheriff's head. Then came a swaying hither and thither, and oaths,
cries, and groans, and clashing of steel, and swords flashed in the
setting sun, and a score of arrows whistled through the air. And some
cried, "Help, help!" and some, "A rescue, a rescue!"

"Treason!" cried the Sheriff in a loud voice. "Bear back! Bear back!
Else we be all dead men!" Thereupon he reined his horse backward through
the thickest of the crowd.

Now Robin Hood and his band might have slain half of the Sheriff's men
had they desired to do so, but they let them push out of the press and
get them gone, only sending a bunch of arrows after them to hurry them
in their flight.

"Oh stay!" shouted Will Stutely after the Sheriff. "Thou wilt never
catch bold Robin Hood if thou dost not stand to meet him face to face."
But the Sheriff, bowing along his horse's back, made no answer but only
spurred the faster.

Then Will Stutely turned to Little John and looked him in the face till
the tears ran down from his eyes and he wept aloud; and kissing his
friend's cheeks, "O Little John!" quoth he, "mine own true friend, and
he that I love better than man or woman in all the world beside!
Little did I reckon to see thy face this day, or to meet thee this side
Paradise." Little John could make no answer, but wept also.

Then Robin Hood gathered his band together in a close rank, with Will
Stutely in the midst, and thus they moved slowly away toward Sherwood,
and were gone, as a storm cloud moves away from the spot where a tempest
has swept the land. But they left ten of the Sheriff's men lying along
the ground wounded--some more, some less--yet no one knew who smote them
down.

Thus the Sheriff of Nottingham tried thrice to take Robin Hood and
failed each time; and the last time he was frightened, for he felt how
near he had come to losing his life; so he said, "These men fear neither
God nor man, nor king nor king's officers. I would sooner lose mine
office than my life, so I will trouble them no more." So he kept close
within his castle for many a day and dared not show his face outside of
his own household, and all the time he was gloomy and would speak to no
one, for he was ashamed of what had happened that day.




Robin Hood Turns Butcher

NOW AFTER all these things had happened, and it became known to Robin
Hood how the Sheriff had tried three times to make him captive, he said
to himself, "If I have the chance, I will make our worshipful Sheriff
pay right well for that which he hath done to me. Maybe I may bring him
some time into Sherwood Forest and have him to a right merry feast with
us." For when Robin Hood caught a baron or a squire, or a fat abbot or
bishop, he brought them to the greenwood tree and feasted them before he
lightened their purses.

But in the meantime Robin Hood and his band lived quietly in Sherwood
Forest, without showing their faces abroad, for Robin knew that it would
not be wise for him to be seen in the neighborhood of Nottingham, those
in authority being very wroth with him. But though they did not go
abroad, they lived a merry life within the woodlands, spending the days
in shooting at garlands hung upon a willow wand at the end of the glade,
the leafy aisles ringing with merry jests and laughter: for whoever
missed the garland was given a sound buffet, which, if delivered by
Little John, never failed to topple over the unfortunate yeoman. Then
they had bouts of wrestling and of cudgel play, so that every day they
gained in skill and strength.

Thus they dwelled for nearly a year, and in that time Robin Hood often
turned over in his mind many means of making an even score with the
Sheriff. At last he began to fret at his confinement; so one day he took
up his stout cudgel and set forth to seek adventure, strolling blithely
along until he came to the edge of Sherwood. There, as he rambled along
the sunlit road, he met a lusty young butcher driving a fine mare and
riding in a stout new cart, all hung about with meat. Merrily whistled
the Butcher as he jogged along, for he was going to the market, and the
day was fresh and sweet, making his heart blithe within him.

"Good morrow to thee, jolly fellow," quoth Robin, "thou seemest happy
this merry morn."

"Ay, that am I," quoth the jolly Butcher, "and why should I not be so?
Am I not hale in wind and limb? Have I not the bonniest lass in all
Nottinghamshire? And lastly, am I not to be married to her on Thursday
next in sweet Locksley Town?"

"Ha," said Robin, "comest thou from Locksley Town? Well do I know that
fair place for miles about, and well do I know each hedgerow and gentle
pebbly stream, and even all the bright little fishes therein, for
there I was born and bred. Now, where goest thou with thy meat, my fair
friend?"

"I go to the market at Nottingham Town to sell my beef and my mutton,"
answered the Butcher. "But who art thou that comest from Locksley Town?"

"A yeoman am I, and men do call me Robin Hood."

"Now, by Our Lady's grace," cried the Butcher, "well do I know thy name,
and many a time have I heard thy deeds both sung and spoken of. But
Heaven forbid that thou shouldst take aught of me! An honest man am I,
and have wronged neither man nor maid; so trouble me not, good master,
as I have never troubled thee."

"Nay, Heaven forbid, indeed," quoth Robin, "that I should take from such
as thee, jolly fellow! Not so much as one farthing would I take
from thee, for I love a fair Saxon face like thine right well--more
especially when it cometh from Locksley Town, and most especially when
the man that owneth it is to marry a bonny lass on Thursday next. But
come, tell me for what price thou wilt sell me all of thy meat and thy
horse and cart."

"At four marks do I value meat, cart, and mare," quoth the Butcher, "but
if I do not sell all my meat I will not have four marks in value."

Then Robin Hood plucked the purse from his girdle, and quoth he, "Here
in this purse are six marks. Now, I would fain be a butcher for the day
and sell my meat in Nottingham Town. Wilt thou close a bargain with me
and take six marks for thine outfit?"

"Now may the blessings of all the saints fall on thine honest head!"
cried the Butcher right joyfully, as he leaped down from his cart and
took the purse that Robin held out to him.

"Nay," quoth Robin, laughing loudly, "many do like me and wish me well,
but few call me honest. Now get thee gone back to thy lass, and give her
a sweet kiss from me." So saying, he donned the Butcher's apron, and,
climbing into the cart, he took the reins in his hand and drove off
through the forest to Nottingham Town.

When he came to Nottingham, he entered that part of the market where
butchers stood, and took up his inn(2) in the best place he could find.
Next, he opened his stall and spread his meat upon the bench, then,
taking his cleaver and steel and clattering them together, he trolled
aloud in merry tones:

     (2) Stand for selling.

     "Now come, ye lasses, and eke ye dames,
     And buy your meat from me;
     For three pennyworths of meat I sell
     For the charge of one penny.

     "Lamb have I that hath fed upon nought
     But the dainty dames pied,
     And the violet sweet, and the daffodil
     That grow fair streams beside.

     "And beef have I from the heathery words,
     And mutton from dales all green,
     And veal as white as a maiden's brow,
     With its mother's milk, I ween.

     "Then come, ye lasses, and eke ye dames,
     Come, buy your meat from me,
     For three pennyworths of meat I sell
     For the charge of one penny."

Thus he sang blithely, while all who stood near listened amazedly. Then,
when he had finished, he clattered the steel and cleaver still more
loudly, shouting lustily, "Now, who'll buy? Who'll buy? Four fixed
prices have I. Three pennyworths of meat I sell to a fat friar or priest
for sixpence, for I want not their custom; stout aldermen I charge
threepence, for it doth not matter to me whether they buy or not; to
buxom dames I sell three pennyworths of meat for one penny for I like
their custom well; but to the bonny lass that hath a liking for a good
tight butcher I charge nought but one fair kiss, for I like her custom
the best of all."

Then all began to stare and wonder and crowd around, laughing, for never
was such selling heard of in all Nottingham Town; but when they came to
buy they found it as he had said, for he gave goodwife or dame as much
meat for one penny as they could buy elsewhere for three, and when a
widow or a poor woman came to him, he gave her flesh for nothing; but
when a merry lass came and gave him a kiss, he charged not one penny for
his meat; and many such came to his stall, for his eyes were as blue as
the skies of June, and he laughed merrily, giving to each full measure.
Thus he sold his meat so fast that no butcher that stood near him could
sell anything.

Then they began to talk among themselves, and some said, "This must be
some thief who has stolen cart, horse, and meat;" but others said, "Nay,
when did ye ever see a thief who parted with his goods so freely and
merrily? This must be some prodigal who hath sold his father's land, and
would fain live merrily while the money lasts." And these latter being
the greater number, the others came round, one by one to their way of
thinking.

Then some of the butchers came to him to make his acquaintance. "Come,
brother," quoth one who was the head of them all, "we be all of one
trade, so wilt thou go dine with us? For this day the Sheriff hath asked
all the Butcher Guild to feast with him at the Guild Hall. There will
be stout fare and much to drink, and that thou likest, or I much mistake
thee."

"Now, beshrew his heart," quoth jolly Robin, "that would deny a butcher.
And, moreover, I will go dine with you all, my sweet lads, and that as
fast as I can hie." Whereupon, having sold all his meat, he closed his
stall and went with them to the great Guild Hall.

There the Sheriff had already come in state, and with him many butchers.
When Robin and those that were with him came in, all laughing at some
merry jest he had been telling them, those that were near the Sheriff
whispered to him, "Yon is a right mad blade, for he hath sold more meat
for one penny this day than we could sell for three, and to whatsoever
merry lass gave him a kiss he gave meat for nought." And others said,
"He is some prodigal that hath sold his land for silver and gold, and
meaneth to spend all right merrily."

Then the Sheriff called Robin to him, not knowing him in his butcher's
dress, and made him sit close to him on his right hand; for he loved a
rich young prodigal--especially when he thought that he might lighten
that prodigal's pockets into his own most worshipful purse. So he made
much of Robin, and laughed and talked with him more than with any of the
others.

At last the dinner was ready to be served and the Sheriff bade Robin say
grace, so Robin stood up and said, "Now Heaven bless us all and eke good
meat and good sack within this house, and may all butchers be and remain
as honest men as I am."

At this all laughed, the Sheriff loudest of all, for he said to himself,
"Surely this is indeed some prodigal, and perchance I may empty his
purse of some of the money that the fool throweth about so freely." Then
he spake aloud to Robin, saying, "Thou art a jolly young blade, and I
love thee mightily;" and he smote Robin upon the shoulder.

Then Robin laughed loudly too. "Yea," quoth he, "I know thou dost love
a jolly blade, for didst thou not have jolly Robin Hood at thy shooting
match and didst thou not gladly give him a bright golden arrow for his
own?"

At this the Sheriff looked grave and all the guild of butchers too, so
that none laughed but Robin, only some winked slyly at each other.

"Come, fill us some sack!" cried Robin. "Let us e'er be merry while we
may, for man is but dust, and he hath but a span to live here till the
worm getteth him, as our good gossip Swanthold sayeth; so let life be
merry while it lasts, say I. Nay, never look down i' the mouth, Sir
Sheriff. Who knowest but that thou mayest catch Robin Hood yet, if thou
drinkest less good sack and Malmsey, and bringest down the fat about thy
paunch and the dust from out thy brain. Be merry, man."

Then the Sheriff laughed again, but not as though he liked the jest,
while the butchers said, one to another, "Before Heaven, never have
we seen such a mad rollicking blade. Mayhap, though, he will make the
Sheriff mad."

"How now, brothers," cried Robin, "be merry! nay, never count over your
farthings, for by this and by that I will pay this shot myself, e'en
though it cost two hundred pounds. So let no man draw up his lip, nor
thrust his forefinger into his purse, for I swear that neither butcher
nor Sheriff shall pay one penny for this feast."

"Now thou art a right merry soul," quoth the Sheriff, "and I wot thou
must have many a head of horned beasts and many an acre of land, that
thou dost spend thy money so freely."

"Ay, that have I," quoth Robin, laughing loudly again, "five hundred and
more horned beasts have I and my brothers, and none of them have we been
able to sell, else I might not have turned butcher. As for my land, I
have never asked my steward how many acres I have."

At this the Sheriff's eyes twinkled, and he chuckled to himself. "Nay,
good youth," quoth he, "if thou canst not sell thy cattle, it may be I
will find a man that will lift them from thy hands; perhaps that man may
be myself, for I love a merry youth and would help such a one along the
path of life. Now how much dost thou want for thy horned cattle?"

"Well," quoth Robin, "they are worth at least five hundred pounds."

"Nay," answered the Sheriff slowly, and as if he were thinking within
himself, "well do I love thee, and fain would I help thee along, but
five hundred pounds in money is a good round sum; besides I have it not
by me. Yet I will give thee three hundred pounds for them all, and that
in good hard silver and gold."

"Now thou old miser!" quoth Robin, "well thou knowest that so many
horned cattle are worth seven hundred pounds and more, and even that is
but small for them, and yet thou, with thy gray hairs and one foot in
the grave, wouldst trade upon the folly of a wild youth."

At this the Sheriff looked grimly at Robin. "Nay," quoth Robin, "look
not on me as though thou hadst sour beer in thy mouth, man. I will take
thine offer, for I and my brothers do need the money. We lead a merry
life, and no one leads a merry life for a farthing, so I will close
the bargain with thee. But mind that thou bringest a good three hundred
pounds with thee, for I trust not one that driveth so shrewd a bargain."

"I will bring the money," said the Sheriff. "But what is thy name, good
youth?"

"Men call me Robert o' Locksley," quoth bold Robin.

"Then, good Robert o' Locksley," quoth the Sheriff, "I will come this
day to see thy horned beasts. But first my clerk shall draw up a paper
in which thou shalt be bound to the sale, for thou gettest not my money
without I get thy beasts in return."

Then Robin Hood laughed again. "So be it," he said, smiting his palm
upon the Sheriff's hand. "Truly my brothers will be thankful to thee for
thy money."

Thus the bargain was closed, but many of the butchers talked among
themselves of the Sheriff, saying that it was but a scurvy trick to
beguile a poor spendthrift youth in this way.

The afternoon had come when the Sheriff mounted his horse and joined
Robin Hood, who stood outside the gateway of the paved court waiting for
him, for he had sold his horse and cart to a trader for two marks. Then
they set forth upon their way, the Sheriff riding upon his horse and
Robin running beside him. Thus they left Nottingham Town and traveled
forward along the dusty highway, laughing and jesting together as though
they had been old friends. But all the time the Sheriff said within
himself, "Thy jest to me of Robin Hood shall cost thee dear, good
fellow, even four hundred pounds, thou fool." For he thought he would
make at least that much by his bargain.

So they journeyed onward till they came within the verge of Sherwood
Forest, when presently the Sheriff looked up and down and to the right
and to the left of him, and then grew quiet and ceased his laughter.
"Now," quoth he, "may Heaven and its saints preserve us this day from a
rogue men call Robin Hood."

Then Robin laughed aloud. "Nay," said he, "thou mayst set thy mind at
rest, for well do I know Robin Hood and well do I know that thou art in
no more danger from him this day than thou art from me."

At this the Sheriff looked askance at Robin, saying to himself, "I like
not that thou seemest so well acquainted with this bold outlaw, and I
wish that I were well out of Sherwood Forest."

But still they traveled deeper into the forest shades, and the deeper
they went, the more quiet grew the Sheriff. At last they came to where
the road took a sudden bend, and before them a herd of dun deer went
tripping across the path. Then Robin Hood came close to the Sheriff and
pointing his finger, he said, "These are my horned beasts, good Master
Sheriff. How dost thou like them? Are they not fat and fair to see?"

At this the Sheriff drew rein quickly. "Now fellow," quoth he, "I would
I were well out of this forest, for I like not thy company. Go thou
thine own path, good friend, and let me but go mine."

But Robin only laughed and caught the Sheriff's bridle rein. "Nay,"
cried he, "stay awhile, for I would thou shouldst see my brothers, who
own these fair horned beasts with me." So saying, he clapped his bugle
to his mouth and winded three merry notes, and presently up the path
came leaping fivescore good stout yeomen with Little John at their head.

"What wouldst thou have, good master?" quoth Little John.

"Why," answered Robin, "dost thou not see that I have brought goodly
company to feast with us today? Fye, for shame! Do you not see our good
and worshipful master, the Sheriff of Nottingham? Take thou his bridle,
Little John, for he has honored us today by coming to feast with us."

Then all doffed their hats humbly, without smiling or seeming to be in
jest, while Little John took the bridle rein and led the palfrey still
deeper into the forest, all marching in order, with Robin Hood walking
beside the Sheriff, hat in hand.

All this time the Sheriff said never a word but only looked about him
like one suddenly awakened from sleep; but when he found himself going
within the very depths of Sherwood his heart sank within him, for he
thought, "Surely my three hundred pounds will be taken from me, even
if they take not my life itself, for I have plotted against their lives
more than once." But all seemed humble and meek and not a word was said
of danger, either to life or money.

So at last they came to that part of Sherwood Forest where a noble oak
spread its branches wide, and beneath it was a seat all made of moss, on
which Robin sat down, placing the Sheriff at his right hand. "Now busk
ye, my merry men all," quoth he, "and bring forth the best we have,
both of meat and wine, for his worship the Sheriff hath feasted me in
Nottingham Guild Hall today, and I would not have him go back empty."

All this time nothing had been said of the Sheriff's money, so presently
he began to pluck up heart. "For," said he to himself, "maybe Robin Hood
hath forgotten all about it."

Then, while beyond in the forest bright fires crackled and savory smells
of sweetly roasting venison and fat capons filled the glade, and brown
pasties warmed beside the blaze, did Robin Hood entertain the Sheriff
right royally. First, several couples stood forth at quarterstaff, and
so shrewd were they at the game, and so quickly did they give stroke
and parry, that the Sheriff, who loved to watch all lusty sports of
the kind, clapped his hands, forgetting where he was, and crying aloud,
"Well struck! Well struck, thou fellow with the black beard!" little
knowing that the man he called upon was the Tinker that tried to serve
his warrant upon Robin Hood.

Then several yeomen came forward and spread cloths upon the green grass,
and placed a royal feast; while others still broached barrels of sack
and Malmsey and good stout ale, and set them in jars upon the cloth,
with drinking horns about them. Then all sat down and feasted and drank
merrily together until the sun was low and the half-moon glimmered with
a pale light betwixt the leaves of the trees overhead.

Then the Sheriff arose and said, "I thank you all, good yeomen, for the
merry entertainment ye have given me this day. Right courteously have ye
used me, showing therein that ye have much respect for our glorious King
and his deputy in brave Nottinghamshire. But the shadows grow long,
and I must away before darkness comes, lest I lose myself within the
forest."

Then Robin Hood and all his merry men arose also, and Robin said to the
Sheriff, "If thou must go, worshipful sir, go thou must; but thou hast
forgotten one thing."

"Nay, I forgot nought," said the Sheriff; yet all the same his heart
sank within him.

"But I say thou hast forgot something," quoth Robin. "We keep a merry
inn here in the greenwood, but whoever becometh our guest must pay his
reckoning."

Then the Sheriff laughed, but the laugh was hollow. "Well, jolly boys,"
quoth he, "we have had a merry time together today, and even if ye had
not asked me, I would have given you a score of pounds for the sweet
entertainment I have had."

"Nay," quoth Robin seriously, "it would ill beseem us to treat Your
Worship so meanly. By my faith, Sir Sheriff, I would be ashamed to show
my face if I did not reckon the King's deputy at three hundred pounds.
Is it not so, my merry men all?"

Then "Ay!" cried all, in a loud voice.

"Three hundred devils!" roared the Sheriff. "Think ye that your beggarly
feast was worth three pounds, let alone three hundred?"

"Nay," quoth Robin gravely. "Speak not so roundly, Your Worship. I
do love thee for the sweet feast thou hast given me this day in merry
Nottingham Town; but there be those here who love thee not so much. If
thou wilt look down the cloth thou wilt see Will Stutely, in whose eyes
thou hast no great favor; then two other stout fellows are there here
that thou knowest not, that were wounded in a brawl nigh Nottingham
Town, some time ago--thou wottest when; one of them was sore hurt in one
arm, yet he hath got the use of it again. Good Sheriff, be advised by
me; pay thy score without more ado, or maybe it may fare ill with thee."

As he spoke the Sheriff's ruddy cheeks grew pale, and he said nothing
more but looked upon the ground and gnawed his nether lip. Then slowly
he drew forth his fat purse and threw it upon the cloth in front of him.

"Now take the purse, Little John," quoth Robin Hood, "and see that the
reckoning be right. We would not doubt our Sheriff, but he might not
like it if he should find he had not paid his full score."

Then Little John counted the money and found that the bag held three
hundred pounds in silver and gold. But to the Sheriff it seemed as if
every clink of the bright money was a drop of blood from his veins. And
when he saw it all counted out in a heap of silver and gold, filling a
wooden platter, he turned away and silently mounted his horse.

"Never have we had so worshipful a guest before!" quoth Robin, "and, as
the day waxeth late, I will send one of my young men to guide thee out
of the forest depths."

"Nay, Heaven forbid!" cried the Sheriff hastily. "I can find mine own
way, good man, without aid."

"Then I will put thee on the right track mine own self," quoth Robin,
and, taking the Sheriff's horse by the bridle rein, he led him into the
main forest path. Then, before he let him go, he said, "Now, fare thee
well, good Sheriff, and when next thou thinkest to despoil some poor
prodigal, remember thy feast in Sherwood Forest. 'Ne'er buy a horse,
good friend, without first looking into its mouth,' as our good gaffer
Swanthold says. And so, once more, fare thee well." Then he clapped
his hand to the horse's back, and off went nag and Sheriff through the
forest glades.

Then bitterly the Sheriff rued the day that first he meddled with Robin
Hood, for all men laughed at him and many ballads were sung by folk
throughout the country, of how the Sheriff went to shear and came home
shorn to the very quick. For thus men sometimes overreach themselves
through greed and guile.




Little John Goes to Nottingham Fair

SPRING HAD GONE since the Sheriff's feast in Sherwood, and summer also,
and the mellow month of October had come. All the air was cool and
fresh; the harvests were gathered home, the young birds were full
fledged, the hops were plucked, and apples were ripe. But though time
had so smoothed things over that men no longer talked of the horned
beasts that the Sheriff wished to buy, he was still sore about the
matter and could not bear to hear Robin Hood's name spoken in his
presence.

With October had come the time for holding the great Fair which was
celebrated every five years at Nottingham Town, to which folk came from
far and near throughout the country. At such times archery was always
the main sport of the day, for the Nottinghamshire yeomen were the best
hand at the longbow in all merry England, but this year the Sheriff
hesitated a long time before he issued proclamation of the Fair, fearing
lest Robin Hood and his band might come to it. At first he had a great
part of a mind not to proclaim the Fair, but second thought told him
that men would laugh at him and say among themselves that he was afraid
of Robin Hood, so he put that thought by. At last he fixed in his mind
that he would offer such a prize as they would not care to shoot for.
At such times it had been the custom to offer a half score of marks or
a tun of ale, so this year he proclaimed that a prize of two fat steers
should be given to the best bowman.

When Robin Hood heard what had been proclaimed he was vexed, and said,
"Now beshrew this Sheriff that he should offer such a prize that none
but shepherd hinds will care to shoot for it! I would have loved nothing
better than to have had another bout at merry Nottingham Town, but if I
should win this prize nought would it pleasure or profit me."

Then up spoke Little John: "Nay, but hearken, good master," said he,
"only today Will Stutely, young David of Doncaster, and I were at the
Sign of the Blue Boar, and there we heard all the news of this merry
Fair, and also that the Sheriff hath offered this prize, that we of
Sherwood might not care to come to the Fair; so, good master, if thou
wilt, I would fain go and strive to win even this poor thing among the
stout yeomen who will shoot at Nottingham Town."

"Nay, Little John," quoth Robin, "thou art a sound stout fellow, yet
thou lackest the cunning that good Stutely hath, and I would not have
harm befall thee for all Nottinghamshire. Nevertheless, if thou wilt go,
take some disguise lest there be those there who may know thee."

"So be it, good master," quoth Little John, "yet all the disguise that I
wish is a good suit of scarlet instead of this of Lincoln green. I will
draw the cowl of my jacket about my head so that it will hide my brown
hair and beard, and then, I trust, no one will know me."

"It is much against my will," said Robin Hood, "ne'ertheless, if thou
dost wish it, get thee gone, but bear thyself seemingly, Little John,
for thou art mine own right-hand man and I could ill bear to have harm
befall thee."

So Little John clad himself all in scarlet and started off to the Fair
at Nottingham Town.

Right merry were these Fair days at Nottingham, when the green before
the great town gate was dotted with booths standing in rows, with
tents of many-colored canvas, hung about with streamers and garlands
of flowers, and the folk came from all the countryside, both gentle
and common. In some booths there was dancing to merry music, in others
flowed ale and beer, and in others yet again sweet cakes and barley
sugar were sold; and sport was going outside the booths also, where some
minstrel sang ballads of the olden time, playing a second upon the harp,
or where the wrestlers struggled with one another within the sawdust
ring, but the people gathered most of all around a raised platform where
stout fellows played at quarterstaff.

So Little John came to the Fair. All scarlet were his hose and jerkin,
and scarlet was his cowled cap, with a scarlet feather stuck in the side
of it. Over his shoulders was slung a stout bow of yew, and across his
back hung a quiver of good round arrows. Many turned to look after such
a stout, tall fellow, for his shoulders were broader by a palm's-breadth
than any that were there, and he stood a head taller than all the other
men. The lasses, also, looked at him askance, thinking they had never
seen a lustier youth.

First of all he went to the booth where stout ale was sold and, standing
aloft on a bench, he called to all that were near to come and drink
with him. "Hey, sweet lads!" cried he "who will drink ale with a stout
yeoman? Come, all! Come, all! Let us be merry, for the day is sweet and
the ale is tingling. Come hither, good yeoman, and thou, and thou;
for not a farthing shall one of you pay. Nay, turn hither, thou lusty
beggar, and thou jolly tinker, for all shall be merry with me."

Thus he shouted, and all crowded around, laughing, while the brown ale
flowed; and they called Little John a brave fellow, each swearing that
he loved him as his own brother; for when one has entertainment with
nothing to pay, one loves the man that gives it to one.

Then he strolled to the platform where they were at cudgel play, for he
loved a bout at quarterstaff as he loved meat and drink; and here befell
an adventure that was sung in ballads throughout the mid-country for
many a day.

One fellow there was that cracked crowns of everyone who threw cap into
the ring. This was Eric o' Lincoln, of great renown, whose name had been
sung in ballads throughout the countryside. When Little John reached the
stand he found none fighting, but only bold Eric walking up and down the
platform, swinging his staff and shouting lustily, "Now, who will
come and strike a stroke for the lass he loves the best, with a good
Lincolnshire yeoman? How now, lads? Step up! Step up! Or else the
lasses' eyes are not bright hereabouts, or the blood of Nottingham youth
is sluggish and cold. Lincoln against Nottingham, say I! For no one hath
put foot upon the boards this day such as we of Lincoln call a cudgel
player."

At this, one would nudge another with his elbow, saying, "Go thou,
Ned!" or "Go thou, Thomas!" but no lad cared to gain a cracked crown for
nothing.

Presently Eric saw where Little John stood among the others, a head and
shoulders above them all, and he called to him loudly, "Halloa, thou
long-legged fellow in scarlet! Broad are thy shoulders and thick thy
head; is not thy lass fair enough for thee to take cudgel in hand for
her sake? In truth, I believe that Nottingham men do turn to bone and
sinew, for neither heart nor courage have they! Now, thou great lout,
wilt thou not twirl staff for Nottingham?"

"Ay," quoth Little John, "had I but mine own good staff here, it would
pleasure me hugely to crack thy knave's pate, thou saucy braggart! I wot
it would be well for thee an thy cock's comb were cut!" Thus he spoke,
slowly at first, for he was slow to move; but his wrath gathered headway
like a great stone rolling down a hill, so that at the end he was full
of anger.

Then Eric o' Lincoln laughed aloud. "Well spoken for one who fears to
meet me fairly, man to man," said he. "Saucy art thou thine own self,
and if thou puttest foot upon these boards, I will make thy saucy tongue
rattle within thy teeth!"

"Now," quoth Little John, "is there never a man here that will lend me
a good stout staff till I try the mettle of yon fellow?" At this, half a
score reached him their staves, and he took the stoutest and heaviest of
them all. Then, looking up and down the cudgel, he said, "Now, I have in
my hand but a splint of wood--a barley straw, as it were--yet I trow it
will have to serve me, so here goeth." Thereupon he cast the cudgel
upon the stand and, leaping lightly after it, snatched it up in his hand
again.

Then each man stood in his place and measured the other with fell looks
until he that directed the sport cried, "Play!" At this they stepped
forth, each grasping his staff tightly in the middle. Then those that
stood around saw the stoutest game of quarterstaff that e'er Nottingham
Town beheld. At first Eric o' Lincoln thought that he would gain an easy
advantage, so he came forth as if he would say, "Watch, good people, how
that I carve you this cockerel right speedily;" but he presently found
it to be no such speedy matter. Right deftly he struck, and with great
skill of fence, but he had found his match in Little John. Once, twice,
thrice, he struck, and three times Little John turned the blows to the
left hand and to the right. Then quickly and with a dainty backhanded
blow, he rapped Eric beneath his guard so shrewdly that it made his head
ring again. Then Eric stepped back to gather his wits, while a great
shout went up and all were glad that Nottingham had cracked Lincoln's
crown; and thus ended the first bout of the game.

Then presently the director of the sport cried, "Play!" and they came
together again; but now Eric played warily, for he found his man was of
right good mettle, and also he had no sweet memory of the blow that he
had got; so this bout neither Little John nor the Lincoln man caught
a stroke within his guard. Then, after a while, they parted again, and
this made the second bout.

Then for the third time they came together, and at first Eric strove to
be wary, as he had been before; but, growing mad at finding himself so
foiled, he lost his wits and began to rain blows so fiercely and so fast
that they rattled like hail on penthouse roof; but, in spite of all, he
did not reach within Little John's guard. Then at last Little John saw
his chance and seized it right cleverly. Once more, with a quick blow,
he rapped Eric beside the head, and ere he could regain himself, Little
John slipped his right hand down to his left and, with a swinging blow,
smote the other so sorely upon the crown that down he fell as though he
would never move again.

Then the people shouted so loud that folk came running from all about to
see what was the ado; while Little John leaped down from the stand and
gave the staff back to him that had lent it to him. And thus ended the
famous bout between Little John and Eric o' Lincoln of great renown.

But now the time had come when those who were to shoot with the longbow
were to take their places, so the people began flocking to the butts
where the shooting was to be. Near the target, in a good place, sat the
Sheriff upon a raised dais, with many gentlefolk around him. When the
archers had taken their places, the herald came forward and proclaimed
the rules of the game, and how each should shoot three shots, and to him
that should shoot the best the prize of two fat steers was to belong.
A score of brave shots were gathered there, and among them some of the
keenest hands at the longbow in Lincoln and Nottinghamshire; and among
them Little John stood taller than all the rest. "Who is yon stranger
clad all in scarlet?" said some, and others answered, "It is he that
hath but now so soundly cracked the crown of Eric o' Lincoln." Thus
the people talked among themselves, until at last it reached even the
Sheriff's ears.

And now each man stepped forward and shot in turn; but though each shot
well, Little John was the best of all, for three times he struck the
clout, and once only the length of a barleycorn from the center. "Hey
for the tall archer!" shouted the crowd, and some among them shouted,
"Hey for Reynold Greenleaf!" for this was the name that Little John had
called himself that day.

Then the Sheriff stepped down from the raised seat and came to where
the archers stood, while all doffed their caps that saw him coming. He
looked keenly at Little John but did not know him, though he said, after
a while, "How now, good fellow, methinks there is that about thy face
that I have seen erewhile."

"Mayhap it may be so," quoth Little John, "for often have I seen Your
Worship." And, as he spoke, he looked steadily into the Sheriff's eyes
so that the latter did not suspect who he was.

"A brave blade art thou, good friend," said the Sheriff, "and I hear
that thou hast well upheld the skill of Nottinghamshire against that of
Lincoln this day. What may be thy name, good fellow?"

"Men do call me Reynold Greenleaf, Your Worship," said Little John; and
the old ballad that tells of this, adds, "So, in truth, was he a green
leaf, but of what manner of tree the Sheriff wotted not."

"Now, Reynold Greenleaf," quoth the Sheriff, "thou art the fairest hand
at the longbow that mine eyes ever beheld, next to that false knave,
Robin Hood, from whose wiles Heaven forfend me! Wilt thou join my
service, good fellow? Thou shalt be paid right well, for three suits of
clothes shalt thou have a year, with good food and as much ale as
thou canst drink; and, besides this, I will pay thee forty marks each
Michaelmastide."

"Then here stand I a free man, and right gladly will I enter thy
household," said Little John, for he thought he might find some merry
jest, should he enter the Sheriff's service.

"Fairly hast thou won the fat steers," said the Sheriff, "and hereunto
I will add a butt of good March beer, for joy of having gotten such a
man; for, I wot, thou shootest as fair a shaft as Robin Hood himself."

"Then," said Little John, "for joy of having gotten myself into thy
service, I will give fat steers and brown ale to all these good folk, to
make them merry withal." At this arose a great shout, many casting their
caps aloft, for joy of the gift.

Then some built great fires and roasted the steers, and others broached
the butt of ale, with which all made themselves merry. Then, when they
had eaten and drunk as much as they could, and when the day faded and
the great moon arose, all red and round, over the spires and towers of
Nottingham Town, they joined hands and danced around the fires, to the
music of bagpipes and harps. But long before this merrymaking had begun,
the Sheriff and his new servant Reynold Greenleaf were in the Castle of
Nottingham.




How Little John Lived at the Sheriff's

THUS LITTLE JOHN entered into the Sheriff's service and found the life
he led there easy enough, for the Sheriff made him his right-hand man
and held him in great favor. He sat nigh the Sheriff at meat, and he ran
beside his horse when he went a-hunting; so that, what with hunting and
hawking a little, and eating rich dishes and drinking good sack, and
sleeping until late hours in the morning, he grew as fat as a stall-fed
ox. Thus things floated easily along with the tide, until one day when
the Sheriff went a-hunting, there happened that which broke the smooth
surface of things.

This morning the Sheriff and many of his men set forth to meet certain
lords, to go a-hunting. He looked all about him for his good man,
Reynold Greenleaf, but, not finding him, was vexed, for he wished to
show Little John's skill to his noble friends. As for Little John, he
lay abed, snoring lustily, till the sun was high in the heavens. At
last he opened his eyes and looked about him but did not move to arise.
Brightly shone the sun in at the window, and all the air was sweet with
the scent of woodbine that hung in sprays about the wall without, for
the cold winter was past and spring was come again, and Little John lay
still, thinking how sweet was everything on this fair morn. Just then he
heard, faint and far away, a distant bugle note sounding thin and clear.
The sound was small, but, like a little pebble dropped into a glassy
fountain, it broke all the smooth surface of his thoughts, until his
whole soul was filled with disturbance. His spirit seemed to awaken
from its sluggishness, and his memory brought back to him all the merry
greenwood life--how the birds were singing blithely there this bright
morning, and how his loved companions and friends were feasting and
making merry, or perhaps talking of him with sober speech; for when
he first entered the Sheriff's service he did so in jest; but the
hearthstone was warm during the winter, and the fare was full, and so
he had abided, putting off from day to day his going back to Sherwood,
until six long months had passed. But now he thought of his good master
and of Will Stutely, whom he loved better than anyone in all the world,
and of young David of Doncaster, whom he had trained so well in all
manly sports, till there came over his heart a great and bitter longing
for them all, so that his eyes filled with tears. Then he said aloud,
"Here I grow fat like a stall-fed ox and all my manliness departeth from
me while I become a sluggard and dolt. But I will arouse me and go back
to mine own dear friends once more, and never will I leave them again
till life doth leave my lips." So saying, he leaped from bed, for he
hated his sluggishness now.

When he came downstairs he saw the Steward standing near the pantry
door--a great, fat man, with a huge bundle of keys hanging to his
girdle. Then Little John said, "Ho, Master Steward, a hungry man am I,
for nought have I had for all this blessed morn. Therefore, give me to
eat."

Then the Steward looked grimly at him and rattled the keys in his
girdle, for he hated Little John because he had found favor with the
Sheriff. "So, Master Reynold Greenleaf, thou art anhungered, art thou?"
quoth he. "But, fair youth, if thou livest long enough, thou wilt find
that he who getteth overmuch sleep for an idle head goeth with an empty
stomach. For what sayeth the old saw, Master Greenleaf? Is it not 'The
late fowl findeth but ill faring'?"

"Now, thou great purse of fat!" cried Little John, "I ask thee not for
fool's wisdom, but for bread and meat. Who art thou, that thou shouldst
deny me to eat? By Saint Dunstan, thou hadst best tell me where my
breakfast is, if thou wouldst save broken bones!"

"Thy breakfast, Master Fireblaze, is in the pantry," answered the
Steward.

"Then fetch it hither!" cried Little John, who waxed angry by this time.

"Go thou and fetch it thine own self," quoth the Steward. "Am I thy
slave, to fetch and carry for thee?"

"I say, go thou, bring it me!"

"I say, go thou, fetch it for thyself!"

"Ay, marry, that will I, right quickly!" quoth Little John in a rage.
And, so saying, he strode to the pantry and tried to open the door but
found it locked, whereat the Steward laughed and rattled his keys. Then
the wrath of Little John boiled over, and, lifting his clenched fist, he
smote the pantry door, bursting out three panels and making so large an
opening that he could easily stoop and walk through it.

When the Steward saw what was done, he waxed mad with rage; and, as
Little John stooped to look within the pantry, he seized him from behind
by the nape of the neck, pinching him sorely and smiting him over the
head with his keys till the yeoman's ears rang again. At this Little
John turned upon the Steward and smote him such a buffet that the fat
man fell to the floor and lay there as though he would never move again.
"There," quoth Little John, "think well of that stroke and never keep a
good breakfast from a hungry man again."

So saying, he crept into the pantry and looked about him to see if he
could find something to appease his hunger. He saw a great venison pasty
and two roasted capons, beside which was a platter of plover's eggs;
moreover, there was a flask of sack and one of canary--a sweet sight
to a hungry man. These he took down from the shelves and placed upon a
sideboard, and prepared to make himself merry.

Now the Cook, in the kitchen across the courtyard, heard the loud
talking between Little John and the Steward, and also the blow that
Little John struck the other, so he came running across the court and up
the stairway to where the Steward's pantry was, bearing in his hands the
spit with the roast still upon it. Meanwhile the Steward had gathered
his wits about him and risen to his feet, so that when the Cook came
to the Steward's pantry he saw him glowering through the broken door at
Little John, who was making ready for a good repast, as one dog glowers
at another that has a bone. When the Steward saw the Cook, he came to
him, and, putting one arm over his shoulder, "Alas, sweet friend!" quoth
he--for the Cook was a tall, stout man--"seest thou what that vile knave
Reynold Greenleaf hath done? He hath broken in upon our master's goods,
and hath smitten me a buffet upon the ear, so that I thought I was dead.
Good Cook, I love thee well, and thou shalt have a good pottle of our
master's best wine every day, for thou art an old and faithful servant.
Also, good Cook, I have ten shillings that I mean to give as a gift
to thee. But hatest thou not to see a vile upstart like this Reynold
Greenleaf taking it upon him so bravely?"

"Ay, marry, that do I," quoth the Cook boldly, for he liked the Steward
because of his talk of the wine and of the ten shillings. "Get thee gone
straightway to thy room, and I will bring out this knave by his ears."
So saying, he laid aside his spit and drew the sword that hung by his
side; whereupon the Steward left as quickly as he could, for he hated
the sight of naked steel.

Then the Cook walked straightway to the broken pantry door, through
which he saw Little John tucking a napkin beneath his chin and preparing
to make himself merry.

"Why, how now, Reynold Greenleaf?" said the Cook, "thou art no better
than a thief, I wot. Come thou straight forth, man, or I will carve thee
as I would carve a sucking pig."

"Nay, good Cook, bear thou thyself more seemingly, or else I will come
forth to thy dole. At most times I am as a yearling lamb, but when one
cometh between me and my meat, I am a raging lion, as it were."

"Lion or no lion," quoth the valorous Cook, "come thou straight forth,
else thou art a coward heart as well as a knavish thief."

"Ha!" cried Little John, "coward's name have I never had; so, look to
thyself, good Cook, for I come forth straight, the roaring lion I did
speak of but now."

Then he, too, drew his sword and came out of the pantry; then, putting
themselves into position, they came slowly together, with grim and angry
looks; but suddenly Little John lowered his point. "Hold, good Cook!"
said he. "Now, I bethink me it were ill of us to fight with good
victuals standing so nigh, and such a feast as would befit two stout
fellows such as we are. Marry, good friend, I think we should enjoy this
fair feast ere we fight. What sayest thou, jolly Cook?"

At this speech the Cook looked up and down, scratching his head in
doubt, for he loved good feasting. At last he drew a long breath and
said to Little John, "Well, good friend, I like thy plan right well; so,
pretty boy, say I, let us feast, with all my heart, for one of us may
sup in Paradise before nightfall."

So each thrust his sword back into the scabbard and entered the pantry.
Then, after they had seated themselves, Little John drew his dagger and
thrust it into the pie. "A hungry man must be fed," quoth he, "so,
sweet chuck, I help myself without leave." But the Cook did not lag far
behind, for straightway his hands also were deeply thrust within the
goodly pasty. After this, neither of them spoke further, but used their
teeth to better purpose. But though neither spoke, they looked at one
another, each thinking within himself that he had never seen a more
lusty fellow than the one across the board.

At last, after a long time had passed, the Cook drew a full, deep
breath, as though of much regret, and wiped his hands upon the napkin,
for he could eat no more. Little John, also, had enough, for he pushed
the pasty aside, as though he would say, "I want thee by me no more,
good friend." Then he took the pottle of sack, and said he, "Now,
good fellow, I swear by all that is bright, that thou art the stoutest
companion at eating that ever I had. Lo! I drink thy health." So saying,
he clapped the flask to his lips and cast his eyes aloft, while the good
wine flooded his throat. Then he passed the pottle to the Cook, who also
said, "Lo, I drink thy health, sweet fellow!" Nor was he behind Little
John in drinking any more than in eating.

"Now," quoth Little John, "thy voice is right round and sweet, jolly
lad. I doubt not thou canst sing a ballad most blithely; canst thou
not?"

"Truly, I have trolled one now and then," quoth the Cook, "yet I would
not sing alone."

"Nay, truly," said Little John, "that were but ill courtesy. Strike up
thy ditty, and I will afterward sing one to match it, if I can.

"So be it, pretty boy," quoth the Cook. "And hast thou e'er heard the
song of the Deserted Shepherdess?"

"Truly, I know not," answered Little John, "but sing thou and let me
hear."

Then the Cook took another draught from the pottle, and, clearing his
throat, sang right sweetly:


THE SONG OF THE DESERTED SHEPHERDESS

     "_In Lententime, when leaves wax green,
     And pretty birds begin to mate,
     When lark cloth sing, and thrush, I ween,
     And stockdove cooeth soon and late,
     Fair Phillis sat beside a stone,
     And thus I heard her make her moan:
     'O willow, willow, willow, willow!
     I'll take me of thy branches fair
     And twine a wreath to deck my hair.

     "'The thrush hath taken him a she,
     The robin, too, and eke the dove;
     My Robin hath deserted me,
     And left me for another love.
     So here, by brookside, all alone,
     I sit me down and make my moan.
     O willow, willow, willow, willow!
     I'll take me of thy branches fair
     And twine a wreath to deck my hair.'

     "But ne'er came herring from the sea,
     But good as he were in the tide;
     Young Corydon came o'er the lea,
     And sat him Phillis down beside.
     So, presently, she changed her tone,
     And 'gan to cease her from her moan,
     'O willow, willow, willow, willow!
     Thou mayst e'en keep thy garlands fair,
     I want them not to deck my hair_.'"

"Now, by my faith," cried Little John, "that same is a right good song,
and hath truth in it, also."

"Glad am I thou likest it, sweet lad," said the Cook. "Now sing thou one
also, for ne'er should a man be merry alone, or sing and list not."

"Then I will sing thee a song of a right good knight of Arthur's court,
and how he cured his heart's wound without running upon the dart again,
as did thy Phillis; for I wot she did but cure one smart by giving
herself another. So, list thou while I sing:"


THE GOOD KNIGHT AND HIS LOVE

     "_When Arthur, King, did rule this land,
     A goodly king was he,
     And had he of stout knights a band
     Of merry company.

     "Among them all, both great and small,
     A good stout knight was there,
     A lusty childe, and eke a tall,
     That loved a lady fair.

     "But nought would she to do with he,
     But turned her face away;
     So gat he gone to far countrye,
     And left that lady gay.

     "There all alone he made his moan,
     And eke did sob and sigh,
     And weep till it would move a stone,
     And he was like to die.

     "But still his heart did feel the smart,
     And eke the dire distress,
     And rather grew his pain more sharp
     As grew his body less.

     "Then gat he back where was good sack
     And merry com panye,
     And soon did cease to cry 'Alack!'
     When blithe and gay was he.

     "From which I hold, and feel full bold
     To say, and eke believe,
     That gin the belly go not cold
     The heart will cease to grieve_."

"Now, by my faith," cried the Cook, as he rattled the pottle against
the sideboard, "I like that same song hugely, and eke the motive of it,
which lieth like a sweet kernel in a hazelnut."

"Now thou art a man of shrewd opinions," quoth Little John, "and I love
thee truly as thou wert my brother."

"And I love thee, too. But the day draweth on, and I have my cooking to
do ere our master cometh home; so let us e'en go and settle this brave
fight we have in hand."

"Ay, marry," quoth Little John, "and that right speedily. Never have I
been more laggard in fighting than in eating and drinking. So come thou
straight forth into the passageway, where there is good room to swing a
sword, and I will try to serve thee."

Then they both stepped forth into the broad passage that led to the
Steward's pantry, where each man drew his sword again and without more
ado fell upon the other as though he would hew his fellow limb from
limb. Then their swords clashed upon one another with great din, and
sparks flew from each blow in showers. So they fought up and down the
hall for an hour and more, neither striking the other a blow, though
they strove their best to do so; for both were skillful at the fence;
so nothing came of all their labor. Ever and anon they rested, panting;
then, after getting their wind, at it they would go again more fiercely
than ever. At last Little John cried aloud, "Hold, good Cook!" whereupon
each rested upon his sword, panting.

"Now will I make my vow," quoth Little John, "thou art the very best
swordsman that ever mine eyes beheld. Truly, I had thought to carve thee
ere now."

"And I had thought to do the same by thee," quoth the Cook, "but I have
missed the mark somehow."

"Now I have been thinking within myself," quoth Little John, "what we
are fighting for; but albeit I do not rightly know."

"Why, no more do I," said the Cook. "I bear no love for that pursy
Steward, but I thought that we had engaged to fight with one another and
that it must be done."

"Now," quoth Little John, "it doth seem to me that instead of striving
to cut one another's throats, it were better for us to be boon
companions. What sayst thou, jolly Cook, wilt thou go with me to
Sherwood Forest and join with Robin Hood's band? Thou shalt live a merry
life within the woodlands, and sevenscore good companions shalt thou
have, one of whom is mine own self. Thou shalt have three suits of
Lincoln green each year, and forty marks in pay."

"Now, thou art a man after mine own heart!" cried the Cook right
heartily, "and, as thou speakest of it, that is the very service for
me. I will go with thee, and that right gladly. Give me thy palm, sweet
fellow, and I will be thine own companion from henceforth. What may be
thy name, lad?"

"Men do call me Little John, good fellow."

"How? And art thou indeed Little John, and Robin Hood's own right-hand
man? Many a time and oft I heard of thee, but never did I hope to set
eyes upon thee. And thou art indeed the famous Little John!" And the
Cook seemed lost in amazement, and looked upon his companion with open
eyes.

"I am Little John, indeed, and I will bring to Robin Hood this day a
right stout fellow to join his merry band. But ere we go, good friend,
it seemeth to me to be a vast pity that, as we have had so much of the
Sheriff's food, we should not also carry off some of his silver plate to
Robin Hood, as a present from his worship."

"Ay, marry is it," said the Cook. And so they began hunting about, and
took as much silver as they could lay hands upon, clapping it into
a bag, and when they had filled the sack they set forth to Sherwood
Forest.

Plunging into the woods, they came at last to the greenwood tree, where
they found Robin Hood and threescore of his merry men lying upon the
fresh green grass. When Robin and his men saw who it was that came, they
leaped to their feet. "Now welcome!" cried Robin Hood. "Now welcome,
Little John! For long hath it been since we have heard from thee, though
we all knew that thou hadst joined the Sheriff's service. And how hast
thou fared all these long days?"

"Right merrily have I lived at the Lord Sheriff's," answered Little
John, "and I have come straight thence. See, good master! I have brought
thee his cook, and even his silver plate." Thereupon he told Robin Hood
and his merry men that were there, all that had befallen him since he
had left them to go to the Fair at Nottingham Town. Then all shouted
with laughter, except Robin Hood; but he looked grave.

"Nay, Little John," said he, "thou art a brave blade and a trusty
fellow. I am glad thou hast brought thyself back to us, and with such a
good companion as the Cook, whom we all welcome to Sherwood. But I like
not so well that thou hast stolen the Sheriff's plate like some paltry
thief. The Sheriff hath been punished by us, and hath lost three hundred
pounds, even as he sought to despoil another; but he hath done nought
that we should steal his household plate from him."

Though Little John was vexed with this, he strove to pass it off with a
jest. "Nay, good master," quoth he, "if thou thinkest the Sheriff gave
us not the plate, I will fetch him, that he may tell us with his own
lips he giveth it all to us." So saying he leaped to his feet, and was
gone before Robin could call him back.

Little John ran for full five miles till he came to where the Sheriff of
Nottingham and a gay company were hunting near the forest. When Little
John came to the Sheriff he doffed his cap and bent his knee. "God save
thee, good master," quoth he.

"Why, Reynold Greenleaf!" cried the Sheriff, "whence comest thou and
where hast thou been?"

"I have been in the forest," answered Little John, speaking amazedly,
"and there I saw a sight such as ne'er before man's eyes beheld! Yonder
I saw a young hart all in green from top to toe, and about him was a
herd of threescore deer, and they, too, were all of green from head to
foot. Yet I dared not shoot, good master, for fear lest they should slay
me."

"Why, how now, Reynold Greenleaf," cried the Sheriff, "art thou dreaming
or art thou mad, that thou dost bring me such, a tale?"

"Nay, I am not dreaming nor am I mad," said Little John, "and if thou
wilt come with me, I will show thee this fair sight, for I have seen
it with mine own eyes. But thou must come alone, good master, lest the
others frighten them and they get away."

So the party all rode forward, and Little John led them downward into
the forest.

"Now, good master," quoth he at last, "we are nigh where I saw this
herd."

Then the Sheriff descended from his horse and bade them wait for him
until he should return; and Little John led him forward through a close
copse until suddenly they came to a great open glade, at the end of
which Robin Hood sat beneath the shade of the great oak tree, with his
merry men all about him. "See, good Master Sheriff," quoth Little John,
"yonder is the hart of which I spake to thee."

At this the Sheriff turned to Little John and said bitterly, "Long ago
I thought I remembered thy face, but now I know thee. Woe betide thee,
Little John, for thou hast betrayed me this day."

In the meantime Robin Hood had come to them. "Now welcome, Master
Sheriff," said he. "Hast thou come today to take another feast with me?"

"Nay, Heaven forbid!" said the Sheriff in tones of deep earnest. "I care
for no feast and have no hunger today."

"Nevertheless," quoth Robin, "if thou hast no hunger, maybe thou hast
thirst, and well I know thou wilt take a cup of sack with me. But I am
grieved that thou wilt not feast with me, for thou couldst have victuals
to thy liking, for there stands thy Cook."

Then he led the Sheriff, willy-nilly, to the seat he knew so well
beneath the greenwood tree.

"Ho, lads!" cried Robin, "fill our good friend the Sheriff a right
brimming cup of sack and fetch it hither, for he is faint and weary."

Then one of the band brought the Sheriff a cup of sack, bowing low as he
handed it to him; but the Sheriff could not touch the wine, for he saw
it served in one of his own silver flagons, on one of his own silver
plates.

"How now," quoth Robin, "dost thou not like our new silver service? We
have gotten a bag of it this day." So saying, he held up the sack of
silver that Little John and the Cook had brought with them.

Then the Sheriff's heart was bitter within him; but, not daring to say
anything, he only gazed upon the ground. Robin looked keenly at him for
a time before he spoke again. Then said he, "Now, Master Sheriff, the
last time thou camest to Sherwood Forest thou didst come seeking to
despoil a poor spendthrift, and thou wert despoiled thine own self;
but now thou comest seeking to do no harm, nor do I know that thou hast
despoiled any man. I take my tithes from fat priests and lordly squires,
to help those that they despoil and to raise up those that they bow
down; but I know not that thou hast tenants of thine own whom thou hast
wronged in any way. Therefore, take thou thine own again, nor will I
dispossess thee today of so much as one farthing. Come with me, and I
will lead thee from the forest back to thine own party again."

Then, slinging the bag upon his shoulder, he turned away, the Sheriff
following him, all too perplexed in mind to speak. So they went forward
until they came to within a furlong of the spot where the Sheriff's
companions were waiting for him. Then Robin Hood gave the sack of silver
back to the Sheriff. "Take thou thine own again," he said, "and hearken
to me, good Sheriff, take thou a piece of advice with it. Try thy
servants well ere thou dost engage them again so readily." Then,
turning, he left the other standing bewildered, with the sack in his
hands.

The company that waited for the Sheriff were all amazed to see him come
out of the forest bearing a heavy sack upon his shoulders; but though
they questioned him, he answered never a word, acting like one who walks
in a dream. Without a word, he placed the bag across his nag's back and
then, mounting, rode away, all following him; but all the time there
was a great turmoil of thoughts within his head, tumbling one over the
other. And thus ends the merry tale of Little John and how he entered
the Sheriff's service.




Little John and the Tanner of Blyth

ONE FINE DAY, not long after Little John had left abiding with the
Sheriff and had come back, with his worship's cook, to the merry
greenwood, as has just been told, Robin Hood and a few chosen fellows of
his band lay upon the soft sward beneath the greenwood tree where they
dwelled. The day was warm and sultry, so that while most of the band
were scattered through the forest upon this mission and upon that, these
few stout fellows lay lazily beneath the shade of the tree, in the soft
afternoon, passing jests among themselves and telling merry stories,
with laughter and mirth.

All the air was laden with the bitter fragrance of the May, and all
the bosky shades of the woodlands beyond rang with the sweet song of
birds--the throstle cock, the cuckoo, and the wood pigeon--and with the
song of birds mingled the cool sound of the gurgling brook that leaped
out of the forest shades, and ran fretting amid its rough, gray stones
across the sunlit open glade before the trysting tree. And a fair sight
was that halfscore of tall, stout yeomen, all clad in Lincoln green,
lying beneath the broad-spreading branches of the great oak tree, amid
the quivering leaves of which the sunlight shivered and fell in dancing
patches upon the grass.

Suddenly Robin Hood smote his knee.

"By Saint Dunstan," quoth he, "I had nigh forgot that quarter-day cometh
on apace, and yet no cloth of Lincoln green in all our store. It must be
looked to, and that in quick season. Come, busk thee, Little John! Stir
those lazy bones of thine, for thou must get thee straightway to our
good gossip, the draper Hugh Longshanks of Ancaster. Bid him send us
straightway twenty-score yards of fair cloth of Lincoln green; and mayhap
the journey may take some of the fat from off thy bones, that thou hast
gotten from lazy living at our dear Sheriff's."

"Nay," muttered Little John (for he had heard so much upon this score
that he was sore upon the point), "nay, truly, mayhap I have more flesh
upon my joints than I once had, yet, flesh or no flesh, I doubt not that
I could still hold my place and footing upon a narrow bridge against
e'er a yeoman in Sherwood, or Nottinghamshire, for the matter of that,
even though he had no more fat about his bones than thou hast, good
master."

At this reply a great shout of laughter went up, and all looked at Robin
Hood, for each man knew that Little John spake of a certain fight that
happened between their master and himself, through which they first
became acquainted.

"Nay," quoth Robin Hood, laughing louder than all. "Heaven forbid that
I should doubt thee, for I care for no taste of thy staff myself, Little
John. I must needs own that there are those of my band can handle a
seven-foot staff more deftly than I; yet no man in all Nottinghamshire
can draw gray goose shaft with my fingers. Nevertheless, a journey to
Ancaster may not be ill for thee; so go thou, as I bid, and thou hadst
best go this very evening, for since thou hast abided at the Sheriff's
many know thy face, and if thou goest in broad daylight, thou mayst get
thyself into a coil with some of his worship's men-at-arms. Bide thou
here till I bring thee money to pay our good Hugh. I warrant he hath no
better customers in all Nottinghamshire than we." So saying, Robin left
them and entered the forest.

Not far from the trysting tree was a great rock in which a chamber
had been hewn, the entrance being barred by a massive oaken door two
palms'-breadth in thickness, studded about with spikes, and fastened
with a great padlock. This was the treasure house of the band, and
thither Robin Hood went and, unlocking the door, entered the chamber,
from which he brought forth a bag of gold which he gave to Little John,
to pay Hugh Longshanks withal, for the cloth of Lincoln green.

Then up got Little John, and, taking the bag of gold, which he thrust
into his bosom, he strapped a girdle about his loins, took a stout
pikestaff full seven feet long in his hand, and set forth upon his
journey.

So he strode whistling along the leafy forest path that led to Fosse
Way, turning neither to the right hand nor the left, until at last he
came to where the path branched, leading on the one hand onward to Fosse
Way, and on the other, as well Little John knew, to the merry Blue
Boar Inn. Here Little John suddenly ceased whistling and stopped in
the middle of the path. First he looked up and then he looked down, and
then, tilting his cap over one eye, he slowly scratched the back part of
his head. For thus it was: at the sight of these two roads, two voices
began to alarum within him, the one crying, "There lies the road to
the Blue Boar Inn, a can of brown October, and a merry night with sweet
companions such as thou mayst find there;" the other, "There lies the
way to Ancaster and the duty thou art sent upon." Now the first of these
two voices was far the louder, for Little John had grown passing fond
of good living through abiding at the Sheriff's house; so, presently,
looking up into the blue sky, across which bright clouds were sailing
like silver boats, and swallows skimming in circling flight, quoth he,
"I fear me it will rain this evening, so I'll e'en stop at the Blue Boar
till it passes by, for I know my good master would not have me wet to
the skin." So, without more ado, off he strode down the path that lay
the way of his likings. Now there was no sign of any foul weather, but
when one wishes to do a thing, as Little John did, one finds no lack of
reasons for the doing.

Four merry wags were at the Blue Boar Inn; a butcher, a beggar, and two
barefoot friars. Little John heard them singing from afar, as he walked
through the hush of the mellow twilight that was now falling over hill
and dale. Right glad were they to welcome such a merry blade as Little
John. Fresh cans of ale were brought, and with jest and song and merry
tales the hours slipped away on fleeting wings. None thought of time or
tide till the night was so far gone that Little John put by the thought
of setting forth upon his journey again that night, and so bided at the
Blue Boar Inn until the morrow.

Now it was an ill piece of luck for Little John that he left his duty
for his pleasure, and he paid a great score for it, as we are all apt to
do in the same case, as you shall see.

Up he rose at the dawn of the next day, and, taking his stout pikestaff
in his hand, he set forth upon his journey once more, as though he would
make up for lost time.

In the good town of Blyth there lived a stout tanner, celebrated far
and near for feats of strength and many tough bouts at wrestling and the
quarterstaff. For five years he had held the mid-country champion belt
for wrestling, till the great Adam o' Lincoln cast him in the ring and
broke one of his ribs; but at quarterstaff he had never yet met his
match in all the country about. Besides all this, he dearly loved the
longbow, and a sly jaunt in the forest when the moon was full and the
dun deer in season; so that the King's rangers kept a shrewd eye upon
him and his doings, for Arthur a Bland's house was apt to have aplenty
of meat in it that was more like venison than the law allowed.

Now Arthur had been to Nottingham Town the day before Little John set
forth on his errand, there to sell a halfscore of tanned cowhides. At
the dawn of the same day that Little John left the inn, he started from
Nottingham, homeward for Blyth. His way led, all in the dewy morn, past
the verge of Sherwood Forest, where the birds were welcoming the lovely
day with a great and merry jubilee. Across the Tanner's shoulders was
slung his stout quarterstaff, ever near enough to him to be gripped
quickly, and on his head was a cap of doubled cowhide, so tough that it
could hardly be cloven even by a broadsword.

"Now," quoth Arthur a Bland to himself, when he had come to that part of
the road that cut through a corner of the forest, "no doubt at this time
of year the dun deer are coming from the forest depths nigher to the
open meadow lands. Mayhap I may chance to catch a sight of the dainty
brown darlings thus early in the morn." For there was nothing he loved
better than to look upon a tripping herd of deer, even when he could
not tickle their ribs with a clothyard shaft. Accordingly, quitting the
path, he went peeping this way and that through the underbrush, spying
now here and now there, with all the wiles of a master of woodcraft, and
of one who had more than once donned a doublet of Lincoln green.

Now as Little John stepped blithely along, thinking of nothing but of
such things as the sweetness of the hawthorn buds that bedecked the
hedgerows, or gazing upward at the lark, that, springing from the dewy
grass, hung aloft on quivering wings in the yellow sunlight, pouring
forth its song that fell like a falling star from the sky, his luck led
him away from the highway, not far from the spot where Arthur a Bland
was peeping this way and that through the leaves of the thickets.
Hearing a rustling of the branches, Little John stopped and presently
caught sight of the brown cowhide cap of the Tanner moving among the
bushes.

"I do much wonder," quoth Little John to himself, "what yon knave is
after, that he should go thus peeping and peering about I verily believe
that yon scurvy varlet is no better than a thief, and cometh here after
our own and the good King's dun deer." For by much roving in the forest,
Little John had come to look upon all the deer in Sherwood as belonging
to Robin Hood and his band as much as to good King Harry. "Nay," quoth
he again, after a time, "this matter must e'en be looked into." So,
quitting the highroad, he also entered the thickets, and began spying
around after stout Arthur a Bland.

So for a long time they both of them went hunting about, Little John
after the Tanner, and the Tanner after the deer. At last Little John
trod upon a stick, which snapped under his foot, whereupon, hearing the
noise, the Tanner turned quickly and caught sight of the yeoman. Seeing
that the Tanner had spied him out, Little John put a bold face upon the
matter.

"Hilloa," quoth he, "what art thou doing here, thou naughty fellow? Who
art thou that comest ranging Sherwood's paths? In very sooth thou hast
an evil cast of countenance, and I do think, truly, that thou art no
better than a thief, and comest after our good King's deer."

"Nay," quoth the Tanner boldly--for, though taken by surprise, he was
not a man to be frightened by big words--"thou liest in thy teeth. I am
no thief, but an honest craftsman. As for my countenance, it is what
it is; and, for the matter of that, thine own is none too pretty, thou
saucy fellow."

"Ha!" quoth Little John in a great loud voice, "wouldst thou give me
backtalk? Now I have a great part of a mind to crack thy pate for thee.
I would have thee know, fellow, that I am, as it were, one of the King's
foresters. Leastwise," muttered he to himself, "I and my friends do take
good care of our good sovereign's deer."

"I care not who thou art," answered the bold Tanner, "and unless thou
hast many more of thy kind by thee, thou canst never make Arthur a Bland
cry 'A mercy.'"

"Is it so?" cried Little John in a rage. "Now, by my faith, thou saucy
rogue, thy tongue hath led thee into a pit thou wilt have a sorry time
getting out of; for I will give thee such a drubbing as ne'er hast thou
had in all thy life before. Take thy staff in thy hand, fellow, for I
will not smite an unarmed man.

"Marry come up with a murrain!" cried the Tanner, for he, too, had
talked himself into a fume. "Big words ne'er killed so much as a mouse.
Who art thou that talkest so freely of cracking the head of Arthur a
Bland? If I do not tan thy hide this day as ne'er I tanned a calf's hide
in all my life before, split my staff into skewers for lamb's flesh and
call me no more brave man! Now look to thyself, fellow!"

"Stay!" said Little John. "Let us first measure our cudgels. I do reckon
my staff longer than thine, and I would not take vantage of thee by even
so much as an inch."

"Nay, I pass not for length," answered the Tanner. "My staff is long
enough to knock down a calf; so look to thyself, fellow, I say again."

So, without more ado, each gripped his staff in the middle, and, with
fell and angry looks, they came slowly together.


Now news had been brought to Robin Hood how that Little John, instead of
doing his bidding, had passed by duty for pleasure, and so had stopped
overnight with merry company at the Blue Boar Inn, instead of going
straight to Ancaster. So, being vexed to his heart by this, he set forth
at dawn of day to seek Little John at the Blue Boar, or at least to
meet the yeoman on the way, and ease his heart of what he thought of the
matter. As thus he strode along in anger, putting together the words he
would use to chide Little John, he heard, of a sudden, loud and angry
voices, as of men in a rage, passing fell words back and forth from one
to the other. At this, Robin Hood stopped and listened. "Surely," quoth
he to himself, "that is Little John's voice, and he is talking in anger
also. Methinks the other is strange to my ears. Now Heaven forfend that
my good trusty Little John should have fallen into the hands of the
King's rangers. I must see to this matter, and that quickly."

Thus spoke Robin Hood to himself, all his anger passing away like a
breath from the windowpane, at the thought that perhaps his trusty
right-hand man was in some danger of his life. So cautiously he made his
way through the thickets whence the voices came, and, pushing aside the
leaves, peeped into the little open space where the two men, staff in
hand, were coming slowly together.

"Ha!" quoth Robin to himself, "here is merry sport afoot. Now I would
give three golden angels from my own pocket if yon stout fellow would
give Little John a right sound drubbing! It would please me to see him
well thumped for having failed in my bidding. I fear me, though, there
is but poor chance of my seeing such a pleasant sight." So saying, he
stretched himself at length upon the ground, that he might not only see
the sport the better, but that he might enjoy the merry sight at his
ease.

As you may have seen two dogs that think to fight, walking slowly round
and round each other, neither cur wishing to begin the combat, so those
two stout yeomen moved slowly around, each watching for a chance to take
the other unaware, and so get in the first blow. At last Little John
struck like a flash, and--"rap!"--the Tanner met the blow and turned it
aside, and then smote back at Little John, who also turned the blow; and
so this mighty battle began. Then up and down and back and forth they
trod, the blows falling so thick and fast that, at a distance, one would
have thought that half a score of men were fighting. Thus they fought
for nigh a half an hour, until the ground was all plowed up with the
digging of their heels, and their breathing grew labored like the ox in
the furrow. But Little John suffered the most, for he had become unused
to such stiff labor, and his joints were not as supple as they had been
before he went to dwell with the Sheriff.

All this time Robin Hood lay beneath the bush, rejoicing at such a
comely bout of quarterstaff. "By my faith!" quoth he to himself, "never
had I thought to see Little John so evenly matched in all my life.
Belike, though, he would have overcome yon fellow before this had he
been in his former trim."

At last Little John saw his chance, and, throwing all the strength
he felt going from him into one blow that might have felled an ox,
he struck at the Tanner with might and main. And now did the Tanner's
cowhide cap stand him in good stead, and but for it he might never have
held staff in hand again. As it was, the blow he caught beside the head
was so shrewd that it sent him staggering across the little glade, so
that, if Little John had had the strength to follow up his vantage, it
would have been ill for stout Arthur. But he regained himself quickly
and, at arm's length, struck back a blow at Little John, and this time
the stroke reached its mark, and down went Little John at full length,
his cudgel flying from his hand as he fell. Then, raising his staff,
stout Arthur dealt him another blow upon the ribs.

"Hold!" roared Little John. "Wouldst thou strike a man when he is down?"

"Ay, marry would I," quoth the Tanner, giving him another thwack with
his staff.

"Stop!" roared Little John. "Help! Hold, I say! I yield me! I yield me,
I say, good fellow!"

"Hast thou had enough?" asked the Tanner grimly, holding his staff
aloft.

"Ay, marry, and more than enough."

"And thou dost own that I am the better man of the two?"

"Yea, truly, and a murrain seize thee!" said Little John, the first
aloud and the last to his beard.

"Then thou mayst go thy ways; and thank thy patron saint that I am a
merciful man," said the Tanner.

"A plague o' such mercy as thine!" said Little John, sitting up and
feeling his ribs where the Tanner had cudgeled him. "I make my vow, my
ribs feel as though every one of them were broken in twain. I tell thee,
good fellow, I did think there was never a man in all Nottinghamshire
could do to me what thou hast done this day."

"And so thought I, also," cried Robin Hood, bursting out of the thicket
and shouting with laughter till the tears ran down his cheeks. "O man,
man!" said he, as well as he could for his mirth, "'a didst go over
like a bottle knocked from a wall. I did see the whole merry bout, and
never did I think to see thee yield thyself so, hand and foot, to any
man in all merry England. I was seeking thee, to chide thee for leaving
my bidding undone; but thou hast been paid all I owed thee, full
measure, pressed down and overflowing, by this good fellow. Marry, 'a
did reach out his arm full length while thou stood gaping at him, and,
with a pretty rap, tumbled thee over as never have I seen one tumbled
before." So spoke bold Robin, and all the time Little John sat upon the
ground, looking as though he had sour curds in his mouth. "What may be
thy name, good fellow?" said Robin, next, turning to the Tanner.

"Men do call me Arthur a Bland," spoke up the Tanner boldly, "and now
what may be thy name?"

"Ha, Arthur a Bland!" quoth Robin, "I have heard thy name before, good
fellow. Thou didst break the crown of a friend of mine at the fair at
Ely last October. The folk there call him Jock o' Nottingham; we call
him Will Scathelock. This poor fellow whom thou hast so belabored is
counted the best hand at the quarterstaff in all merry England. His name
is Little John, and mine Robin Hood."

"How!" cried the Tanner, "art thou indeed the great Robin Hood, and is
this the famous Little John? Marry, had I known who thou art, I would
never have been so bold as to lift my hand against thee. Let me help
thee to thy feet, good Master Little John, and let me brush the dust
from off thy coat."

"Nay," quoth Little John testily, at the same time rising carefully,
as though his bones had been made of glass, "I can help myself, good
fellow, without thy aid; and let me tell thee, had it not been for that
vile cowskin cap of thine, it would have been ill for thee this day."

At this Robin laughed again, and, turning to the Tanner, he said, "Wilt
thou join my band, good Arthur? For I make my vow thou art one of the
stoutest men that ever mine eyes beheld."

"Will I join thy band?" cried the Tanner joyfully. "Ay, marry, will I!
Hey for a merry life!" cried he, leaping aloft and snapping his fingers,
"and hey for the life I love! Away with tanbark and filthy vats and foul
cowhides! I will follow thee to the ends of the earth, good master, and
not a herd of dun deer in all the forest but shall know the sound of the
twang of my bowstring."

"As for thee, Little John," said Robin, turning to him and laughing,
"thou wilt start once more for Ancaster, and we will go part way with
thee, for I will not have thee turn again to either the right hand or
the left till thou hast fairly gotten away from Sherwood. There are
other inns that thou knowest yet, hereabouts." Thereupon, leaving the
thickets, they took once more to the highway and departed upon their
business.




Robin Hood and Will Scarlet

THUS THEY traveled along the sunny road, three stout fellows such as you
could hardly match anywhere else in all merry England. Many stopped to
gaze after them as they strode along, so broad were their shoulders and
so sturdy their gait.

Quoth Robin Hood to Little John, "Why didst thou not go straight to
Ancaster, yesterday, as I told thee? Thou hadst not gotten thyself into
such a coil hadst thou done as I ordered."

"I feared the rain that threatened," said Little John in a sullen tone,
for he was vexed at being so chaffed by Robin with what had happened to
him.

"The rain!" cried Robin, stopping of a sudden in the middle of the road,
and looking at Little John in wonder. "Why, thou great oaf! not a drop
of rain has fallen these three days, neither has any threatened, nor
hath there been a sign of foul weather in earth or sky or water."

"Nevertheless," growled Little John, "the holy Saint Swithin holdeth the
waters of the heavens in his pewter pot, and he could have poured them
out, had he chosen, even from a clear sky; and wouldst thou have had me
wet to the skin?"

At this Robin Hood burst into a roar of laughter. "O Little John!" said
he, "what butter wits hast thou in that head of thine! Who could hold
anger against such a one as thou art?"

So saying, they all stepped out once more, with the right foot foremost,
as the saying is.

After they had traveled some distance, the day being warm and the road
dusty, Robin Hood waxed thirsty; so, there being a fountain of water as
cold as ice, just behind the hedgerow, they crossed the stile and came
to where the water bubbled up from beneath a mossy stone. Here, kneeling
and making cups of the palms of their hands, they drank their fill,
and then, the spot being cool and shady, they stretched their limbs and
rested them for a space.

In front of them, over beyond the hedge, the dusty road stretched away
across the plain; behind them the meadow lands and bright green fields
of tender young corn lay broadly in the sun, and overhead spread the
shade of the cool, rustling leaves of the beechen tree. Pleasantly to
their nostrils came the tender fragrance of the purple violets and
wild thyme that grew within the dewy moisture of the edge of the little
fountain, and pleasantly came the soft gurgle of the water. All was so
pleasant and so full of the gentle joy of the bright Maytime, that for a
long time no one of the three cared to speak, but each lay on his back,
gazing up through the trembling leaves of the trees to the bright
sky overhead. At last, Robin, whose thoughts were not quite so busy
wool-gathering as those of the others, and who had been gazing around
him now and then, broke the silence.

"Heyday!" quoth he, "yon is a gaily feathered bird, I take my vow."

The others looked and saw a young man walking slowly down the highway.
Gay was he, indeed, as Robin had said, and a fine figure he cut, for
his doublet was of scarlet silk and his stockings also; a handsome sword
hung by his side, the embossed leathern scabbard being picked out with
fine threads of gold; his cap was of scarlet velvet, and a broad feather
hung down behind and back of one ear. His hair was long and yellow and
curled upon his shoulders, and in his hand he bore an early rose, which
he smelled at daintily now and then.

"By my life!" quoth Robin Hood, laughing, "saw ye e'er such a pretty,
mincing fellow?"

"Truly, his clothes have overmuch prettiness for my taste," quoth Arthur
a Bland, "but, ne'ertheless, his shoulders are broad and his loins are
narrow, and seest thou, good master, how that his arms hang from his
body? They dangle not down like spindles, but hang stiff and bend at
the elbow. I take my vow, there be no bread and milk limbs in those fine
clothes, but stiff joints and tough thews."

"Methinks thou art right, friend Arthur," said Little John. "I do verily
think that yon is no such roseleaf and whipped-cream gallant as he would
have one take him to be."

"Pah!" quoth Robin Hood, "the sight of such a fellow doth put a nasty
taste into my mouth! Look how he doth hold that fair flower betwixt his
thumb and finger, as he would say, 'Good rose, I like thee not so ill
but I can bear thy odor for a little while.' I take it ye are both
wrong, and verily believe that were a furious mouse to run across his
path, he would cry, 'La!' or 'Alack-a-day!' and fall straightway into a
swoon. I wonder who he may be."

"Some great baron's son, I doubt not," answered Little John, "with good
and true men's money lining his purse."

"Ay, marry, that is true, I make no doubt," quoth Robin. "What a pity
that such men as he, that have no thought but to go abroad in gay
clothes, should have good fellows, whose shoes they are not fit to tie,
dancing at their bidding. By Saint Dunstan, Saint Alfred, Saint Withold,
and all the good men in the Saxon calendar, it doth make me mad to see
such gay lordlings from over the sea go stepping on the necks of good
Saxons who owned this land before ever their great-grandsires chewed
rind of brawn! By the bright bow of Heaven, I will have their ill-gotten
gains from them, even though I hang for it as high as e'er a forest tree
in Sherwood!"

"Why, how now, master," quoth Little John, "what heat is this? Thou
dost set thy pot a-boiling, and mayhap no bacon to cook! Methinks yon
fellow's hair is overlight for Norman locks. He may be a good man and
true for aught thou knowest."

"Nay," said Robin, "my head against a leaden farthing, he is what I say.
So, lie ye both here, I say, till I show you how I drub this fellow."
So saying, Robin Hood stepped forth from the shade of the beech tree,
crossed the stile, and stood in the middle of the road, with his hands
on his hips, in the stranger's path.

Meantime the stranger, who had been walking so slowly that all this
talk was held before he came opposite the place where they were, neither
quickened his pace nor seemed to see that such a man as Robin Hood was
in the world. So Robin stood in the middle of the road, waiting while
the other walked slowly forward, smelling his rose, and looking this way
and that, and everywhere except at Robin.

"Hold!" cried Robin, when at last the other had come close to him.
"Hold! Stand where thou art!"

"Wherefore should I hold, good fellow?" said the stranger in soft and
gentle voice. "And wherefore should I stand where I am? Ne'ertheless, as
thou dost desire that I should stay, I will abide for a short time, that
I may hear what thou mayst have to say to me."

"Then," quoth Robin, "as thou dost so fairly do as I tell thee, and dost
give me such soft speech, I will also treat thee with all due courtesy.
I would have thee know, fair friend, that I am, as it were, a votary at
the shrine of Saint Wilfred who, thou mayst know, took, willy-nilly,
all their gold from the heathen, and melted it up into candlesticks.
Wherefore, upon such as come hereabouts, I levy a certain toll, which
I use for a better purpose, I hope, than to make candlesticks withal.
Therefore, sweet chuck, I would have thee deliver to me thy purse, that
I may look into it, and judge, to the best of my poor powers, whether
thou hast more wealth about thee than our law allows. For, as our good
Gaffer Swanthold sayeth, 'He who is fat from overliving must needs lose
blood.'"

All this time the youth had been sniffing at the rose that he held
betwixt his thumb and finger. "Nay," said he with a gentle smile, when
Robin Hood had done, "I do love to hear thee talk, thou pretty fellow,
and if, haply, thou art not yet done, finish, I beseech thee. I have yet
some little time to stay."

"I have said all," quoth Robin, "and now, if thou wilt give me thy
purse, I will let thee go thy way without let or hindrance so soon as I
shall see what it may hold. I will take none from thee if thou hast but
little."

"Alas! It doth grieve me much," said the other, "that I cannot do
as thou dost wish. I have nothing to give thee. Let me go my way, I
prythee. I have done thee no harm."

"Nay, thou goest not," quoth Robin, "till thou hast shown me thy purse."

"Good friend," said the other gently, "I have business elsewhere. I
have given thee much time and have heard thee patiently. Prythee, let me
depart in peace."

"I have spoken to thee, friend," said Robin sternly, "and I now tell
thee again, that thou goest not one step forward till thou hast done as
I bid thee." So saying, he raised his quarterstaff above his head in a
threatening way.

"Alas!" said the stranger sadly, "it doth grieve me that this thing must
be. I fear much that I must slay thee, thou poor fellow!" So saying, he
drew his sword.

"Put by thy weapon," quoth Robin. "I would take no vantage of thee. Thy
sword cannot stand against an oaken staff such as mine. I could snap
it like a barley straw. Yonder is a good oaken thicket by the roadside;
take thee a cudgel thence and defend thyself fairly, if thou hast a
taste for a sound drubbing."

First the stranger measured Robin with his eye, and then he measured the
oaken staff. "Thou art right, good fellow," said he presently, "truly,
my sword is no match for that cudgel of thine. Bide thee awhile till
I get me a staff." So saying, he threw aside the rose that he had been
holding all this time, thrust his sword back into the scabbard, and,
with a more hasty step than he had yet used, stepped to the roadside
where grew the little clump of ground oaks Robin had spoken of. Choosing
among them, he presently found a sapling to his liking. He did not cut
it, but, rolling up his sleeves a little way, he laid hold of it, placed
his heel against the ground, and, with one mighty pull, plucked the
young tree up by the roots from out the very earth. Then he came back,
trimming away the roots and tender stems with his sword as quietly as if
he had done nought to speak of.

Little John and the Tanner had been watching all that passed, but when
they saw the stranger drag the sapling up from the earth, and heard the
rending and snapping of its roots, the Tanner pursed his lips together,
drawing his breath between them in a long inward whistle.

"By the breath of my body!" said Little John, as soon as he could gather
his wits from their wonder, "sawest thou that, Arthur? Marry, I think
our poor master will stand but an ill chance with yon fellow. By Our
Lady, he plucked up yon green tree as it were a barley straw."

Whatever Robin Hood thought, he stood his ground, and now he and the
stranger in scarlet stood face to face.

Well did Robin Hood hold his own that day as a mid-country yeoman. This
way and that they fought, and back and forth, Robin's skill against the
stranger's strength. The dust of the highway rose up around them like
a cloud, so that at times Little John and the Tanner could see nothing,
but only hear the rattle of the staves against one another. Thrice Robin
Hood struck the stranger; once upon the arm and twice upon the ribs, and
yet had he warded all the other's blows, only one of which, had it met
its mark, would have laid stout Robin lower in the dust than he had ever
gone before. At last the stranger struck Robin's cudgel so fairly in the
middle that he could hardly hold his staff in his hand; again he struck,
and Robin bent beneath the blow; a third time he struck, and now not
only fairly beat down Robin's guard, but gave him such a rap, also, that
down he tumbled into the dusty road.

"Hold!" cried Robin Hood, when he saw the stranger raising his staff
once more. "I yield me!"

"Hold!" cried Little John, bursting from his cover, with the Tanner at
his heels. "Hold! give over, I say!"

"Nay," answered the stranger quietly, "if there be two more of you,
and each as stout as this good fellow, I am like to have my hands full.
Nevertheless, come on, and I will strive my best to serve you all."

"Stop!" cried Robin Hood, "we will fight no more. I take my vow, this
is an ill day for thee and me, Little John. I do verily believe that
my wrist, and eke my arm, are palsied by the jar of the blow that this
stranger struck me."

Then Little John turned to Robin Hood. "Why, how now, good master," said
he. "Alas! Thou art in an ill plight. Marry, thy jerkin is all befouled
with the dust of the road. Let me help thee to arise."

"A plague on thy aid!" cried Robin angrily. "I can get to my feet
without thy help, good fellow."

"Nay, but let me at least dust thy coat for thee. I fear thy poor bones
are mightily sore," quoth Little John soberly, but with a sly twinkle in
his eyes.

"Give over, I say!" quoth Robin in a fume. "My coat hath been dusted
enough already, without aid of thine." Then, turning to the stranger, he
said, "What may be thy name, good fellow?"

"My name is Gamwell," answered the other.

"Ha!" cried Robin, "is it even so? I have near kin of that name. Whence
camest thou, fair friend?"

"From Maxfield Town I come," answered the stranger. "There was I born
and bred, and thence I come to seek my mother's young brother, whom men
call Robin Hood. So, if perchance thou mayst direct me--"

"Ha! Will Gamwell!" cried Robin, placing both hands upon the other's
shoulders and holding him off at arm's length. "Surely, it can be none
other! I might have known thee by that pretty maiden air of thine--that
dainty, finicking manner of gait. Dost thou not know me, lad? Look upon
me well."

"Now, by the breath of my body!" cried the other, "I do believe from my
heart that thou art mine own Uncle Robin. Nay, certain it is so!" And
each flung his arms around the other, kissing him upon the cheek.

Then once more Robin held his kinsman off at arm's length and scanned
him keenly from top to toe. "Why, how now," quoth he, "what change is
here? Verily, some eight or ten years ago I left thee a stripling lad,
with great joints and ill-hung limbs, and lo! here thou art, as tight a
fellow as e'er I set mine eyes upon. Dost thou not remember, lad, how I
showed thee the proper way to nip the goose feather betwixt thy fingers
and throw out thy bow arm steadily? Thou gayest great promise of being a
keen archer. And dost thou not mind how I taught thee to fend and parry
with the cudgel?"

"Yea," said young Gamwell, "and I did so look up to thee, and thought
thee so above all other men that, I make my vow, had I known who thou
wert, I would never have dared to lift hand against thee this day. I
trust I did thee no great harm."

"No, no," quoth Robin hastily, and looking sideways at Little John,
"thou didst not harm me. But say no more of that, I prythee. Yet I will
say, lad, that I hope I may never feel again such a blow as thou didst
give me. By'r Lady, my arm doth tingle yet from fingernail to elbow.
Truly, I thought that I was palsied for life. I tell thee, coz, that
thou art the strongest man that ever I laid mine eyes upon. I take my
vow, I felt my stomach quake when I beheld thee pluck up yon green tree
as thou didst. But tell me, how camest thou to leave Sir Edward and thy
mother?"

"Alas!" answered young Gamwell, "it is an ill story, uncle, that I
have to tell thee. My father's steward, who came to us after old Giles
Crookleg died, was ever a saucy varlet, and I know not why my father
kept him, saving that he did oversee with great judgment. It used to
gall me to hear him speak up so boldly to my father, who, thou knowest,
was ever a patient man to those about him, and slow to anger and harsh
words. Well, one day--and an ill day it was for that saucy fellow--he
sought to berate my father, I standing by. I could stand it no
longer, good uncle, so, stepping forth, I gave him a box o' the ear,
and--wouldst thou believe it?--the fellow straightway died o't. I think
they said I broke his neck, or something o' the like. So off they packed
me to seek thee and escape the law. I was on my way when thou sawest me,
and here I am."

"Well, by the faith of my heart," quoth Robin Hood, "for anyone escaping
the law, thou wast taking it the most easily that ever I beheld in all
my life. Whenever did anyone in all the world see one who had slain a
man, and was escaping because of it, tripping along the highway like a
dainty court damsel, sniffing at a rose the while?"

"Nay, uncle," answered Will Gamwell, "overhaste never churned good
butter, as the old saying hath it. Moreover, I do verily believe that
this overstrength of my body hath taken the nimbleness out of my heels.
Why, thou didst but just now rap me thrice, and I thee never a once,
save by overbearing thee by my strength."

"Nay," quoth Robin, "let us say no more on that score. I am right glad
to see thee, Will, and thou wilt add great honor and credit to my band
of merry fellows. But thou must change thy name, for warrants will be
out presently against thee; so, because of thy gay clothes, thou shalt
henceforth and for aye be called Will Scarlet."

"Will Scarlet," quoth Little John, stepping forward and reaching out his
great palm, which the other took, "Will Scarlet, the name fitteth thee
well. Right glad am I to welcome thee among us. I am called Little John;
and this is a new member who has just joined us, a stout tanner named
Arthur a Bland. Thou art like to achieve fame, Will, let me tell thee,
for there will be many a merry ballad sung about the country, and many
a merry story told in Sherwood of how Robin Hood taught Little John and
Arthur a Bland the proper way to use the quarterstaff; likewise, as
it were, how our good master bit off so large a piece of cake that he
choked on it."

"Nay, good Little John," quoth Robin gently, for he liked ill to have
such a jest told of him. "Why should we speak of this little matter?
Prythee, let us keep this day's doings among ourselves."

"With all my heart," quoth Little John. "But, good master, I thought
that thou didst love a merry story, because thou hast so often made a
jest about a certain increase of fatness on my joints, of flesh gathered
by my abiding with the Sheriff of--"

"Nay, good Little John," said Robin hastily, "I do bethink me I have
said full enough on that score."

"It is well," quoth Little John, "for in truth I myself have tired of
it somewhat. But now I bethink me, thou didst also seem minded to make a
jest of the rain that threatened last night; so--"

"Nay, then," said Robin Hood testily, "I was mistaken. I remember me now
it did seem to threaten rain."

"Truly, I did think so myself," quoth Little John, "therefore, no doubt,
thou dost think it was wise of me to abide all night at the Blue Boar
Inn, instead of venturing forth in such stormy weather; dost thou not?"

"A plague of thee and thy doings!" cried Robin Hood. "If thou wilt have
it so, thou wert right to abide wherever thou didst choose."

"Once more, it is well," quoth Little John. "As for myself, I have been
blind this day. I did not see thee drubbed; I did not see thee tumbled
heels over head in the dust; and if any man says that thou wert, I can
with a clear conscience rattle his lying tongue betwixt his teeth."

"Come," cried Robin, biting his nether lip, while the others could
not forbear laughing. "We will go no farther today, but will return to
Sherwood, and thou shalt go to Ancaster another time, Little John."

So said Robin, for now that his bones were sore, he felt as though a
long journey would be an ill thing for him. So, turning their backs,
they retraced their steps whence they came.




The Adventure with Midge the Miller's Son

WHEN THE four yeomen had traveled for a long time toward Sherwood again,
high noontide being past, they began to wax hungry. Quoth Robin Hood, "I
would that I had somewhat to eat. Methinks a good loaf of white bread,
with a piece of snow-white cheese, washed down with a draught of humming
ale, were a feast for a king."

"Since thou speakest of it," said Will Scarlet, "methinks it would not
be amiss myself. There is that within me crieth out, 'Victuals, good
friend, victuals!'"

"I know a house near by," said Arthur a Bland, "and, had I but the
money, I would bring ye that ye speak of; to wit, a sweet loaf of bread,
a fair cheese, and a skin of brown ale."

"For the matter of that, thou knowest I have money by me, good master,"
quoth Little John.

"Why, so thou hast, Little John," said Robin. "How much money will it
take, good Arthur, to buy us meat and drink?"

"I think that six broad pennies will buy food enow for a dozen men,"
said the Tanner.

"Then give him six pennies, Little John," quoth Robin, "for methinks
food for three men will about fit my need. Now get thee gone, Arthur,
with the money, and bring the food here, for there is a sweet shade in
that thicket yonder, beside the road, and there will we eat our meal."

So Little John gave Arthur the money, and the others stepped to the
thicket, there to await the return of the Tanner.

After a time he came back, bearing with him a great brown loaf of bread,
and a fair, round cheese, and a goatskin full of stout March beer, slung
over his shoulders. Then Will Scarlet took his sword and divided
the loaf and the cheese into four fair portions, and each man helped
himself. Then Robin Hood took a deep pull at the beer. "Aha!" said he,
drawing in his breath, "never have I tasted sweeter drink than this."

After this no man spake more, but each munched away at his bread and
cheese lustily, with ever and anon a pull at the beer.

At last Will Scarlet looked at a small piece of bread he still held in
his hand, and quoth he, "Methinks I will give this to the sparrows." So,
throwing it from him, he brushed the crumbs from his jerkin.

"I, too," quoth Robin, "have had enough, I think." As for Little John
and the Tanner, they had by this time eaten every crumb of their bread
and cheese.

"Now," quoth Robin, "I do feel myself another man, and would fain enjoy
something pleasant before going farther upon our journey. I do bethink
me, Will, that thou didst use to have a pretty voice, and one that tuned
sweetly upon a song. Prythee, give us one ere we journey farther."

"Truly, I do not mind turning a tune," answered Will Scarlet, "but I
would not sing alone."

"Nay, others will follow. Strike up, lad," quoth Robin.

"In that case, 'tis well," said Will Scarlet. "I do call to mind a song
that a certain minstrel used to sing in my father's hall, upon occasion.
I know no name for it and so can give you none; but thus it is." Then,
clearing his throat, he sang:

     "_In the merry blossom time,
     When love longings food the breast,
     When the flower is on the lime,
     When the small fowl builds her nest,
     Sweetly sings the nightingale
     And the throstle cock so bold;
     Cuckoo in the dewy dale
     And the turtle in the word.
     But the robin I love dear,
     For he singeth through the year.
     Robin! Robin!
     Merry Robin!
     So I'd have my true love be:
     Not to fly
     At the nigh
     Sign of cold adversity_.

     "_When the spring brings sweet delights,
     When aloft the lark doth rise,
     Lovers woo o' mellow nights,
     And youths peep in maidens' eyes,
     That time blooms the eglantine,
     Daisies pied upon the hill,
     Cowslips fair and columbine,
     Dusky violets by the rill.
     But the ivy green cloth grow
     When the north wind bringeth snow.
     Ivy! Ivy!
     Stanch and true!
     Thus I'd have her love to be:
     Not to die
     At the nigh
     Breath of cold adversity_."

"'Tis well sung," quoth Robin, "but, cousin, I tell thee plain, I would
rather hear a stout fellow like thee sing some lusty ballad than a
finicking song of flowers and birds, and what not. Yet, thou didst sing
it fair, and 'tis none so bad a snatch of a song, for the matter of
that. Now, Tanner, it is thy turn."

"I know not," quoth Arthur, smiling, with his head on one side, like a
budding lass that is asked to dance, "I know not that I can match our
sweet friend's song; moreover, I do verily think that I have caught a
cold and have a certain tickling and huskiness in the windpipe."

"Nay, sing up, friend," quoth Little John, who sat next to him, patting
him upon the shoulder. "Thou hast a fair, round, mellow voice; let us
have a touch of it."

"Nay, an ye will ha' a poor thing," said Arthur, "I will do my best.
Have ye ever heard of the wooing of Sir Keith, the stout young Cornish
knight, in good King Arthur's time?"

"Methinks I have heard somewhat of it," said Robin; "but ne'ertheless
strike up thy ditty and let us hear it, for, as I do remember me, it is
a gallant song; so out with it, good fellow."

Thereupon, clearing his throat, the Tanner, without more ado, began to
sing:


THE WOOING OF SIR KEITH

     "_King Arthur sat in his royal hall,
     And about on either hand
     Was many a noble lordling tall,
     The greatest in the land.

     "Sat  Lancelot with raven locks,
     Gawaine with golden hair,
     Sir Tristram, Kay who kept the locks,
     And many another there.

     "And through the stained windows bright,
     From o'er the red-tiled eaves,
     The sunlight blazed with colored light
     On golden helms and greaves.

     "But suddenly a silence came
     About the Table Round,
     For up the hall there walked a dame
     Bent nigh unto the ground.

     "Her nose was hooked, her eyes were bleared,
     Her locks were lank and white;
     Upon her chin there grew a beard;
     She was a gruesome sight.

     "And so with crawling step she came
     And kneeled at Arthur's feet;
     Quoth Kay, 'She is the foulest dame
     That e'er my sight did greet.'

     "'O mighty King! of thee I crave
     A boon on bended knee';
     'Twas thus she spoke. 'What wouldst thou have.'
     Quoth Arthur, King, 'of me_?'

     "_Quoth she, 'I have a foul disease
     Doth gnaw my very heart,
     And but one thing can bring me ease
     Or cure my bitter smart.

     "'There is no rest, no ease for me
     North, east, or west, or south,
     Till Christian knight will willingly
     Thrice kiss me on the mouth.

     "'Nor wedded may this childe have been
     That giveth ease to me;
     Nor may he be constrained, I ween,
     But kiss me willingly.

     "'So is there here one Christian knight
     Of such a noble strain
     That he will give a tortured wight
     Sweet ease of mortal pain?'

     "'A wedded man,' quoth Arthur, King,
     'A wedded man I be
     Else would I deem it noble thing
     To kiss thee willingly.

     "'Now, Lancelot, in all men's sight
     Thou art the head and chief
     Of chivalry. Come, noble knight,
     And give her quick relief.'

     "But Lancelot he turned aside
     And looked upon the ground,
     For it did sting his haughty pride
     To hear them laugh around.

     "'Come thou, Sir Tristram,' quoth the King.
     Quoth he, 'It cannot be,
     For ne'er can I my stomach bring
     To do it willingly.'

     "'Wilt thou, Sir Kay, thou scornful wight?'
     Quoth Kay, 'Nay, by my troth!
     What noble dame would kiss a knight
     That kissed so foul a mouth_?'

     "'_Wilt thou, Gawaine?' 'I cannot, King.'
     'Sir Geraint?' 'Nay, not I;
     My kisses no relief could bring,
     For sooner would I die.'

     "Then up and spake the youngest man
     Of all about the board,
     'Now such relief as Christian can
     I'll give to her, my lord.'

     "It was Sir Keith, a youthful knight,
     Yet strong of limb and bold,
     With beard upon his chin as light
     As finest threads of gold.

     "Quoth Kay, 'He hath no mistress yet
     That he may call his own,
     But here is one that's quick to get,
     As she herself has shown.'

     "He kissed her once, he kissed her twice,
     He kissed her three times o'er,
     A wondrous change came in a trice,
     And she was foul no more.

     "Her cheeks grew red as any rose,
     Her brow as white as lawn,
     Her bosom like the winter snows,
     Her eyes like those of fawn.

     "Her breath grew sweet as summer breeze
     That blows the meadows o'er;
     Her voice grew soft as rustling trees,
     And cracked and harsh no more.

     "Her hair grew glittering, like the gold,
     Her hands as white as milk;
     Her filthy rags, so foul and old,
     Were changed to robes of silk.

     "In great amaze the knights did stare.
     Quoth Kay, 'I make my vow
     If it will please thee, lady fair,
     I'll gladly kiss thee now_.'

     "_But young Sir Keith kneeled on one knee
     And kissed her robes so fair.
     'O let me be thy slave,' said he,
     'For none to thee compare.'

     "She bent her down, she kissed his brow,
     She kissed his lips and eyes.
     Quoth she, 'Thou art my master now,
     My lord, my love, arise!

     "'And all the wealth that is mine own,
     My lands, I give to thee,
     For never knight hath lady shown
     Such noble courtesy.

     "'Bewitched was I, in bitter pain,
     But thou hast set me free,
     So now I am myself again,
     I give myself to thee_.'"


"Yea, truly," quoth Robin Hood, when the Tanner had made an end of
singing, "it is as I remember it, a fair ditty, and a ballad with a
pleasing tune of a song."

"It hath oftentimes seemed to me," said Will Scarlet, "that it hath a
certain motive in it, e'en such as this: That a duty which seemeth to us
sometimes ugly and harsh, when we do kiss it fairly upon the mouth, so
to speak, is no such foul thing after all."

"Methinks thou art right," quoth Robin, "and, contrariwise, that when we
kiss a pleasure that appeareth gay it turneth foul to us; is it not so,
Little John? Truly such a thing hath brought thee sore thumps this day.
Nay, man, never look down in the mouth. Clear thy pipes and sing us a
ditty."

"Nay," said Little John, "I have none as fair as that merry Arthur has
trolled. They are all poor things that I know. Moreover, my voice is
not in tune today, and I would not spoil even a tolerable song by ill
singing."

Upon this all pressed Little John to sing, so that when he had denied
them a proper length of time, such as is seemly in one that is asked
to sing, he presently yielded. Quoth he, 'Well, an ye will ha' it so,
I will give you what I can. Like to fair Will, I have no title to my
ditty, but thus it runs:

     "_O Lady mine, the spring is here,
     With a hey nonny nonny;
     The sweet love season of the year,
     With a ninny ninny nonny;
     Now lad and lass
     Lie in the grass
     That groweth green
     With flowers between.
     The buck doth rest
     The leaves do start,
     The cock doth crow,
     The breeze doth blow,
     And all things laugh in_--"

"Who may yon fellow be coming along the road?" said Robin, breaking into
the song.

"I know not," quoth Little John in a surly voice. "But this I do know,
that it is an ill thing to do to check the flow of a good song."

"Nay, Little John," said Robin, "be not vexed, I prythee; but I have
been watching him coming along, bent beneath that great bag over his
shoulder, ever since thou didst begin thy song. Look, Little John, I
pray, and see if thou knowest him."

Little John looked whither Robin Hood pointed. "Truly," quoth he, after
a time, "I think yon fellow is a certain young miller I have seen now
and then around the edge of Sherwood; a poor wight, methinks, to spoil a
good song about."

"Now thou speakest of him," quoth Robin Hood, "methinks I myself have
seen him now and then. Hath he not a mill over beyond Nottingham Town,
nigh to the Salisbury road?"

"Thou art right; that is the man," said Little John.

"A good stout fellow," quoth Robin. "I saw him crack Ned o' Bradford's
crown about a fortnight since, and never saw I hair lifted more neatly
in all my life before."

By this time the young miller had come so near that they could see
him clearly. His clothes were dusted with flour, and over his back he
carried a great sack of meal, bending so as to bring the whole weight
upon his shoulders, and across the sack was a thick quarterstaff. His
limbs were stout and strong, and he strode along the dusty road right
sturdily with the heavy sack across his shoulders. His cheeks were ruddy
as a winter hip, his hair was flaxen in color, and on his chin was a
downy growth of flaxen beard.

"A good honest fellow," quoth Robin Hood, "and such an one as is a
credit to English yeomanrie. Now let us have a merry jest with him. We
will forth as though we were common thieves and pretend to rob him of
his honest gains. Then will we take him into the forest and give him
a feast such as his stomach never held in all his life before. We will
flood his throat with good canary and send him home with crowns in his
purse for every penny he hath. What say ye, lads?"

"Truly, it is a merry thought," said Will Scarlet.

"It is well planned," quoth Little John, "but all the saints preserve us
from any more drubbings this day! Marry, my poor bones ache so that I--"

"Prythee peace, Little John," quoth Robin. "Thy foolish tongue will get
us both well laughed at yet."

"My foolish tongue, forsooth," growled Little John to Arthur a Bland.
"I would it could keep our master from getting us into another coil this
day."

But now the Miller, plodding along the road, had come opposite to
where the yeomen lay hidden, whereupon all four of them ran at him and
surrounded him.

"Hold, friend!" cried Robin to the Miller; whereupon he turned slowly,
with the weight of the bag upon his shoulder, and looked at each in turn
all bewildered, for though a good stout man his wits did not skip like
roasting chestnuts.

"Who bids me stay?" said the Miller in a voice deep and gruff, like the
growl of a great dog.

"Marry, that do I," quoth Robin; "and let me tell thee, friend, thou
hadst best mind my bidding."

"And who art thou, good friend?" said the Miller, throwing the great
sack of meal from his shoulder to the ground, "and who are those with
thee?"

"We be four good Christian men," quoth Robin, "and would fain help thee
by carrying part of thy heavy load."

"I give you all thanks," said the Miller, "but my bag is none that heavy
that I cannot carry it e'en by myself."

"Nay, thou dost mistake," quoth Robin, "I meant that thou mightest
perhaps have some heavy farthings or pence about thee, not to speak
of silver and gold. Our good Gaffer Swanthold sayeth that gold is an
overheavy burden for a two-legged ass to carry; so we would e'en lift
some of this load from thee."

"Alas!" cried the Miller, "what would ye do to me? I have not about me
so much as a clipped groat. Do me no harm, I pray you, but let me
depart in peace. Moreover, let me tell you that ye are upon Robin Hood's
ground, and should he find you seeking to rob an honest craftsman, he
will clip your ears to your heads and scourge you even to the walls of
Nottingham.

"In truth I fear Robin Hood no more than I do myself," quoth jolly
Robin. "Thou must this day give up to me every penny thou hast about
thee. Nay, if thou dost budge an inch I will rattle this staff about
thine ears."

"Nay, smite me not!" cried the Miller, throwing up his elbow as though
he feared the blow. "Thou mayst search me if thou wilt, but thou wilt
find nothing upon me, pouch, pocket, or skin."

"Is it so?" quoth Robin Hood, looking keenly upon him. "Now I believe
that what thou tellest is no true tale. If I am not much mistook thou
hast somewhat in the bottom of that fat sack of meal. Good Arthur, empty
the bag upon the ground; I warrant thou wilt find a shilling or two in
the flour."

"Alas!" cried the Miller, falling upon his knees, "spoil not all my good
meal! It can better you not, and will ruin me. Spare it, and I will give
up the money in the bag."

"Ha!" quoth Robin, nudging Will Scarlet. "Is it so? And have I found
where thy money lies? Marry, I have a wondrous nose for the blessed
image of good King Harry. I thought that I smelled gold and silver
beneath the barley meal. Bring it straight forth, Miller."

Then slowly the Miller arose to his feet, and slowly and unwillingly he
untied the mouth of the bag, and slowly thrust his hands into the meal
and began fumbling about with his arms buried to the elbows in the
barley flour. The others gathered round him, their heads together,
looking and wondering what he would bring forth.

So they stood, all with their heads close together gazing down into the
sack. But while he pretended to be searching for the money, the Miller
gathered two great handfuls of meal. "Ha," quoth he, "here they are, the
beauties." Then, as the others leaned still more forward to see what he
had, he suddenly cast the meal into their faces, filling their eyes and
noses and mouths with the flour, blinding and half choking them. Arthur
a Bland was worse off than any, for his mouth was open, agape with
wonder of what was to come, so that a great cloud of flour flew down his
throat, setting him a-coughing till he could scarcely stand.

Then, while all four stumbled about, roaring with the smart of the meal
in their eyeballs, and while they rubbed their eyes till the tears
made great channels on their faces through the meal, the Miller seized
another handful of flour and another and another, throwing it in their
faces, so that even had they had a glimmering of light before they were
now as blind as ever a beggar in Nottinghamshire, while their hair and
beards and clothes were as white as snow.

Then catching up his great crabstaff, the Miller began laying about him
as though he were clean gone mad. This way and that skipped the four,
like peas on a drumhead, but they could see neither to defend themselves
nor to run away. Thwack! thwack! went the Miller's cudgel across their
backs, and at every blow great white clouds of flour rose in the air
from their jackets and went drifting down the breeze.

"Stop!" roared Robin at last. "Give over, good friend, I am Robin Hood!"

"Thou liest, thou knave," cried the Miller, giving him a rap on the ribs
that sent up a great cloud of flour like a puff of smoke. "Stout Robin
never robbed an honest tradesman. Ha! thou wouldst have my money,
wouldst thou?" And he gave him another blow. "Nay, thou art not getting
thy share, thou long-legged knave. Share and share alike." And he smote
Little John across the shoulders so that he sent him skipping half
across the road. "Nay, fear not, it is thy turn now, black beard." And
he gave the Tanner a crack that made him roar for all his coughing. "How
now, red coat, let me brush the dust from thee!" cried he, smiting Will
Scarlet. And so he gave them merry words and blows until they could
scarcely stand, and whenever he saw one like to clear his eyes he threw
more flour in his face. At last Robin Hood found his horn and clapping
it to his lips, blew three loud blasts upon it.

Now it chanced that Will Stutely and a party of Robin's men were in the
glade not far from where this merry sport was going forward. Hearing the
hubbub of voices, and blows that sounded like the noise of a flail in
the barn in wintertime, they stopped, listening and wondering what was
toward. Quoth Will Stutely, "Now if I mistake not there is some stout
battle with cudgels going forward not far hence. I would fain see this
pretty sight." So saying, he and the whole party turned their steps
whence the noise came. When they had come near where all the tumult
sounded they heard the three blasts of Robin's bugle horn.

"Quick!" cried young David of Doncaster. "Our master is in sore need!"
So, without stopping a moment, they dashed forward with might and main
and burst forth from the covert into the highroad.

But what a sight was that which they saw! The road was all white with
meal, and five men stood there also white with meal from top to toe, for
much of the barley flour had fallen back upon the Miller.

"What is thy need, master?" cried Will Stutely. "And what doth all this
mean?"

"Why," quoth Robin in a mighty passion, "yon traitor felt low hath come
as nigh slaying me as e'er a man in all the world. Hadst thou not come
quickly, good Stutely, thy master had been dead."

Hereupon, while he and the three others rubbed the meal from their eyes,
and Will Stutely and his men brushed their clothes clean, he told them
all; how that he had meant to pass a jest upon the Miller, which same
had turned so grievously upon them.

"Quick, men, seize the vile Miller!" cried Stutely, who was nigh choking
with laughter as were the rest; whereupon several ran upon the stout
fellow and seizing him, bound his arms behind his back with bowstrings.

"Ha!" cried Robin, when they brought the trembling Miller to him. "Thou
wouldst murder me, wouldst thou? By my faith,"--Here he stopped and stood
glaring upon the Miller grimly. But Robin's anger could not hold, so
first his eyes twinkled, and then in spite of all he broke into a laugh.

Now when they saw their master laugh, the yeomen who stood around could
contain themselves no longer, and a mighty shout of laughter went up
from all. Many could not stand, but rolled upon the ground from pure
merriment.

"What is thy name, good fellow?" said Robin at last to the Miller, who
stood gaping and as though he were in amaze.

"Alas, sir, I am Midge, the Miller's son," said he in a frightened
voice.

"I make my vow," quoth merry Robin, smiting him upon the shoulder, "thou
art the mightiest Midge that e'er mine eyes beheld. Now wilt thou leave
thy dusty mill and come and join my band? By my faith, thou art too
stout a man to spend thy days betwixt the hopper and the till."

"Then truly, if thou dost forgive me for the blows I struck, not knowing
who thou wast, I will join with thee right merrily," said the Miller.

"Then have I gained this day," quoth Robin, "the three stoutest yeomen
in all Nottinghamshire. We will get us away to the greenwood tree, and
there hold a merry feast in honor of our new friends, and mayhap a cup
or two of good sack and canary may mellow the soreness of my poor joints
and bones, though I warrant it will be many a day before I am again the
man I was." So saying, he turned and led the way, the rest following,
and so they entered the forest once more and were lost to sight.

So that night all was ablaze with crackling fires in the woodlands,
for though Robin and those others spoken of, only excepting Midge, the
Miller's son, had many a sore bump and bruise here and there on their
bodies, they were still not so sore in the joints that they could not
enjoy a jolly feast given all in welcome to the new members of the band.
Thus with songs and jesting and laughter that echoed through the deeper
and more silent nooks of the forest, the night passed quickly along, as
such merry times are wont to do, until at last each man sought his couch
and silence fell on all things and all things seemed to sleep.

But Little John's tongue was ever one that was not easy of guidance,
so that, inch by inch, the whole story of his fight with the Tanner and
Robin's fight with Will Scarlet leaked out. And so I have told it that
you may laugh at the merry tale along with me.




Robin Hood and Allan a Dale

IT HAS just been told how three unlucky adventures fell upon Robin Hood
and Little John all in one day bringing them sore ribs and aching bones.
So next we will tell how they made up for those ill happenings by a good
action that came about not without some small pain to Robin.

Two days had passed by, and somewhat of the soreness had passed away
from Robin Hood's joints, yet still, when he moved of a sudden and
without thinking, pain here and there would, as it were, jog him,
crying, "Thou hast had a drubbing, good fellow."

The day was bright and jocund, and the morning dew still lay upon the
grass. Under the greenwood tree sat Robin Hood; on one side was Will
Scarlet, lying at full length upon his back, gazing up into the clear
sky, with hands clasped behind his head; upon the other side sat Little
John, fashioning a cudgel out of a stout crab-tree limb; elsewhere upon
the grass sat or lay many others of the band.

"By the faith of my heart," quoth merry Robin, "I do bethink me that we
have had no one to dine with us for this long time. Our money groweth
low in the purse, for no one hath come to pay a reckoning for many a
day. Now busk thee, good Stutely, and choose thee six men, and get thee
gone to Fosse Way or thereabouts, and see that thou bringest someone to
eat with us this evening. Meantime we will prepare a grand feast to do
whosoever may come the greater honor. And stay, good Stutely. I would
have thee take Will Scarlet with thee, for it is meet that he should
become acquaint with the ways of the forest."

"Now do I thank thee, good master," quoth Stutely, springing to his
feet, "that thou hast chosen me for this adventure. Truly, my limbs
do grow slack through abiding idly here. As for two of my six, I will
choose Midge the Miller and Arthur a Bland, for, as well thou knowest,
good master, they are stout fists at the quarterstaff. Is it not so,
Little John?"

At this all laughed but Little John and Robin, who twisted up his face.
"I can speak for Midge," said he, "and likewise for my cousin Scarlet.
This very blessed morn I looked at my ribs and found them as many colors
as a beggar's cloak."

So, having chosen four more stout fellows, Will Stutely and his band set
forth to Fosse Way, to find whether they might not come across some rich
guest to feast that day in Sherwood with Robin and his band.

For all the livelong day they abided near this highway. Each man had
brought with him a good store of cold meat and a bottle of stout March
beer to stay his stomach till the homecoming. So when high noontide
had come they sat them down upon the soft grass, beneath a green and
wide-spreading hawthorn bush, and held a hearty and jovial feast. After
this, one kept watch while the others napped, for it was a still and
sultry day.

Thus they passed the time pleasantly enow, but no guest such as they
desired showed his face in all the time that they lay hidden there. Many
passed along the dusty road in the glare of the sun: now it was a bevy
of chattering damsels merrily tripping along; now it was a plodding
tinker; now a merry shepherd lad; now a sturdy farmer; all gazing ahead
along the road, unconscious of the seven stout fellows that lay hidden
so near them. Such were the travelers along the way; but fat abbot, rich
esquire, or money-laden usurer came there none.

At last the sun began to sink low in the heavens; the light grew red
and the shadows long. The air grew full of silence, the birds twittered
sleepily, and from afar came, faint and clear, the musical song of the
milkmaid calling the kine home to the milking.

Then Stutely arose from where he was lying. "A plague of such ill luck!"
quoth he. "Here have we abided all day, and no bird worth the shooting,
so to speak, hath come within reach of our bolt. Had I gone forth on
an innocent errand, I had met a dozen stout priests or a score of pursy
money-lenders. But it is ever thus: the dun deer are never so scarce
as when one has a gray goose feather nipped betwixt the fingers. Come,
lads, let us pack up and home again, say I."

Accordingly, the others arose, and, coming forth from out the thicket,
they all turned their toes back again to Sherwood. After they had gone
some distance, Will Stutely, who headed the party, suddenly stopped.
"Hist!" quoth he, for his ears were as sharp as those of a five-year-old
fox. "Hark, lads! Methinks I hear a sound." At this all stopped and
listened with bated breath, albeit for a time they could hear nothing,
their ears being duller than Stutely's. At length they heard a faint and
melancholy sound, like someone in lamentation.

"Ha!" quoth Will Scarlet, "this must be looked into. There is someone in
distress nigh to us here."

"I know not," quoth Will Stutely, shaking his head doubtfully, "our
master is ever rash about thrusting his finger into a boiling pot; but,
for my part, I see no use in getting ourselves into mischievous coils.
Yon is a man's voice, if I mistake not, and a man should be always ready
to get himself out from his own pothers."

Then out spake Will Scarlet boldly. "Now out upon thee, to talk in that
manner, Stutely! Stay, if thou dost list. I go to see what may be the
trouble of this poor creature."

"Nay," quoth Stutely, "thou dost leap so quickly, thou'lt tumble into
the ditch. Who said I would not go? Come along, say I." Thus saying,
he led the way, the others following, till, after they had gone a short
distance, they came to a little opening in the woodland, whence a brook,
after gurgling out from under the tangle of overhanging bushes, spread
out into a broad and glassy-pebbled pool. By the side of this pool, and
beneath the branches of a willow, lay a youth upon his face, weeping
aloud, the sound of which had first caught the quick ears of Stutely.
His golden locks were tangled, his clothes were all awry, and everything
about him betokened sorrow and woe. Over his head, from the branches of
the osier, hung a beautiful harp of polished wood inlaid with gold and
silver in fantastic devices. Beside him lay a stout ashen bow and half a
score of fair, smooth arrows.

"Halloa!" shouted Will Stutely, when they had come out from the forest
into the little open spot. "Who art thou, fellow, that liest there
killing all the green grass with salt water?"

Hearing the voice, the stranger sprang to his feet and; snatching up
his bow and fitting a shaft, held himself in readiness for whatever ill
might befall him.

"Truly," said one of the yeomen, when they had seen the young stranger's
face, "I do know that lad right well. He is a certain minstrel that I
have seen hereabouts more than once. It was only a week ago I saw him
skipping across the hill like a yearling doe. A fine sight he was then,
with a flower at his ear and a cock's plume stuck in his cap; but now,
methinks, our cockerel is shorn of his gay feathers."

"Pah!" cried Will Stutely, coming up to the stranger, "wipe thine eyes,
man! I do hate to see a tall, stout fellow so sniveling like a girl
of fourteen over a dead tomtit. Put down thy bow, man! We mean thee no
harm."

But Will Scarlet, seeing how the stranger, who had a young and boyish
look, was stung by the words that Stutely had spoken, came to him and
put his hand upon the youth's shoulder. "Nay, thou art in trouble, poor
boy!" said he kindly. "Mind not what these fellows have said. They are
rough, but they mean thee well. Mayhap they do not understand a lad like
thee. Thou shalt come with us, and perchance we may find a certain one
that can aid thee in thy perplexities, whatsoever they may be."

"Yea, truly, come along," said Will Stutely gruffly. "I meant thee no
harm, and may mean thee some good. Take down thy singing tool from off
this fair tree, and away with us."

The youth did as he was bidden and, with bowed head and sorrowful step,
accompanied the others, walking beside Will Scarlet. So they wended
their way through the forest. The bright light faded from the sky and
a glimmering gray fell over all things. From the deeper recesses of the
forest the strange whispering sounds of night-time came to the ear; all
else was silent, saving only for the rattling of their footsteps amid
the crisp, dry leaves of the last winter. At last a ruddy glow shone
before them here and there through the trees; a little farther and they
came to the open glade, now bathed in the pale moonlight. In the center
of the open crackled a great fire, throwing a red glow on all around. At
the fire were roasting juicy steaks of venison, pheasants, capons, and
fresh fish from the river. All the air was filled with the sweet smell
of good things cooking.

The little band made its way across the glade, many yeomen turning with
curious looks and gazing after them, but none speaking or questioning
them. So, with Will Scarlet upon one side and Will Stutely upon the
other, the stranger came to where Robin Hood sat on a seat of moss under
the greenwood tree, with Little John standing beside him.

"Good even, fair friend," said Robin Hood, rising as the other drew
near. "And hast thou come to feast with me this day?"

"Alas! I know not," said the lad, looking around him with dazed eyes,
for he was bewildered with all that he saw. "Truly, I know not whether I
be in a dream," said he to himself in a low voice.

"Nay, marry," quoth Robin, laughing, "thou art awake, as thou wilt
presently find, for a fine feast is a-cooking for thee. Thou art our
honored guest this day."

Still the young stranger looked about him, as though in a dream.
Presently he turned to Robin. "Methinks," said he, "I know now where I
am and what hath befallen me. Art not thou the great Robin Hood?"

"Thou hast hit the bull's eye," quoth Robin, clapping him upon the
shoulder. "Men hereabouts do call me by that name. Sin' thou knowest me,
thou knowest also that he who feasteth with me must pay his reckoning. I
trust thou hast a full purse with thee, fair stranger."

"Alas!" said the stranger, "I have no purse nor no money either, saving
only the half of a sixpence, the other half of which mine own dear
love doth carry in her bosom, hung about her neck by a strand of silken
thread."

At this speech a great shout of laughter went up from those around,
whereat the poor boy looked as he would die of shame; but Robin Hood
turned sharply to Will Stutely. "Why, how now," quoth he, "is this the
guest that thou hast brought us to fill our purse? Methinks thou hast
brought but a lean cock to the market."

"Nay, good master," answered Will Stutely, grinning, "he is no guest of
mine; it was Will Scarlet that brought him thither."

Then up spoke Will Scarlet, and told how they had found the lad in
sorrow, and how he had brought him to Robin, thinking that he might
perchance aid him in his trouble. Then Robin Hood turned to the youth,
and, placing his hand upon the other's shoulder, held him off at arm's
length, scanning his face closely.

"A young face," quoth he in a low voice, half to himself, "a kind face,
a good face. 'Tis like a maiden's for purity, and, withal, the fairest
that e'er mine eyes did see; but, if I may judge fairly by thy looks,
grief cometh to young as well as to old." At these words, spoken so
kindly, the poor lad's eyes brimmed up with tears. "Nay, nay," said
Robin hastily, "cheer up, lad; I warrant thy case is not so bad that it
cannot be mended. What may be thy name?"

"Allen a Dale is my name, good master."

"Allen a Dale," repeated Robin, musing. "Allen a Dale. It doth seem to
me that the name is not altogether strange to mine ears. Yea, surely
thou art the minstrel of whom we have been hearing lately, whose voice
so charmeth all men. Dost thou not come from the Dale of Rotherstream,
over beyond Stavely?"

"Yea, truly," answered Allan, "I do come thence."

"How old art thou, Allan?" said Robin.

"I am but twenty years of age."

"Methinks thou art overyoung to be perplexed with trouble," quoth Robin
kindly; then, turning to the others, he cried, "Come, lads, busk ye and
get our feast ready; only thou, Will Scarlet, and thou, Little John,
stay here with me."

Then, when the others had gone, each man about his business, Robin
turned once more to the youth. "Now, lad," said he, "tell us thy
troubles, and speak freely. A flow of words doth ever ease the heart
of sorrows; it is like opening the waste weir when the mill dam is
overfull. Come, sit thou here beside me, and speak at thine ease."

Then straightway the youth told the three yeomen all that was in his
heart; at first in broken words and phrases, then freely and with
greater ease when he saw that all listened closely to what he said.
So he told them how he had come from York to the sweet vale of Rother,
traveling the country through as a minstrel, stopping now at castle, now
at hall, and now at farmhouse; how he had spent one sweet evening in a
certain broad, low farmhouse, where he sang before a stout franklin and
a maiden as pure and lovely as the first snowdrop of spring; how he had
played and sung to her, and how sweet Ellen o' the Dale had listened to
him and had loved him. Then, in a low, sweet voice, scarcely louder than
a whisper, he told how he had watched for her and met her now and then
when she went abroad, but was all too afraid in her sweet presence to
speak to her, until at last, beside the banks of Rother, he had spoken
of his love, and she had whispered that which had made his heartstrings
quiver for joy. Then they broke a sixpence between them, and vowed to be
true to one another forever.

Next he told how her father had discovered what was a-doing, and had
taken her away from him so that he never saw her again, and his heart
was sometimes like to break; how this morn, only one short month and a
half from the time that he had seen her last, he had heard and knew
it to be so, that she was to marry old Sir Stephen of Trent, two days
hence, for Ellen's father thought it would be a grand thing to have his
daughter marry so high, albeit she wished it not; nor was it wonder
that a knight should wish to marry his own sweet love, who was the most
beautiful maiden in all the world.

To all this the yeomen listened in silence, the clatter of many voices,
jesting and laughing, sounding around them, and the red light of the
fire shining on their faces and in their eyes. So simple were the
poor boy's words, and so deep his sorrow, that even Little John felt a
certain knotty lump rise in his throat.

"I wonder not," said Robin, after a moment's silence, "that thy true
love loved thee, for thou hast surely a silver cross beneath thy tongue,
even like good Saint Francis, that could charm the birds of the air by
his speech."

"By the breath of my body," burst forth Little John, seeking to cover
his feelings with angry words, "I have a great part of a mind to go
straightway and cudgel the nasty life out of the body of that same vile
Sir Stephen. Marry, come up, say I--what a plague--does an old weazen
think that tender lasses are to be bought like pullets o' a market day?
Out upon him!--I--but no matter, only let him look to himself."

Then up spoke Will Scarlet. "Methinks it seemeth but ill done of
the lass that she should so quickly change at others' bidding, more
especially when it cometh to the marrying of a man as old as this same
Sir Stephen. I like it not in her, Allan."

"Nay," said Allan hotly, "thou dost wrong her. She is as soft and gentle
as a stockdove. I know her better than anyone in all the world. She may
do her father's bidding, but if she marries Sir Stephen, her heart will
break and she will die. My own sweet dear, I--" He stopped and shook his
head, for he could say nothing further.

While the others were speaking, Robin Hood had been sunk in thought.
"Methinks I have a plan might fit thy case, Allan," said he. "But tell
me first, thinkest thou, lad, that thy true love hath spirit enough
to marry thee were ye together in church, the banns published, and the
priest found, even were her father to say her nay?"

"Ay, marry would she," cried Allan eagerly.

"Then, if her father be the man that I take him to be, I will undertake
that he shall give you both his blessing as wedded man and wife, in the
place of old Sir Stephen, and upon his wedding morn. But stay, now I
bethink me, there is one thing reckoned not upon--the priest. Truly,
those of the cloth do not love me overmuch, and when it comes to
doing as I desire in such a matter, they are as like as not to prove
stiff-necked. As to the lesser clergy, they fear to do me a favor
because of abbot or bishop.

"Nay," quoth Will Scarlet, laughing, "so far as that goeth, I know of a
certain friar that, couldst thou but get on the soft side of him, would
do thy business even though Pope Joan herself stood forth to ban him. He
is known as the Curtal Friar of Fountain Abbey, and dwelleth in Fountain
Dale."

"But," quoth Robin, "Fountain Abbey is a good hundred miles from here.
An we would help this lad, we have no time to go thither and back before
his true love will be married. Nought is to be gained there, coz."

"Yea," quoth Will Scarlet, laughing again, "but this Fountain Abbey is
not so far away as the one of which thou speakest, uncle. The Fountain
Abbey of which I speak is no such rich and proud place as the other,
but a simple little cell; yet, withal, as cosy a spot as ever stout
anchorite dwelled within. I know the place well, and can guide thee
thither, for, though it is a goodly distance, yet methinks a stout pair
of legs could carry a man there and back in one day."

"Then give me thy hand, Allan," cried Robin, "and let me tell thee, I
swear by the bright hair of Saint AElfrida that this time two days hence
Ellen a Dale shall be thy wife. I will seek this same Friar of Fountain
Abbey tomorrow day, and I warrant I will get upon the soft side of him,
even if I have to drub one soft."

At this Will Scarlet laughed again. "Be not too sure of that, good
uncle," quoth he, "nevertheless, from what I know of him, I think this
Curtal Friar will gladly join two such fair lovers, more especially if
there be good eating and drinking afoot thereafter."

But now one of the band came to say that the feast was spread upon
the grass; so, Robin leading the way, the others followed to where
the goodly feast was spread. Merry was the meal. Jest and story passed
freely, and all laughed till the forest rang again. Allan laughed with
the rest, for his cheeks were flushed with the hope that Robin Hood had
given him.

At last the feast was done, and Robin Hood turned to Allan, who sat
beside him. "Now, Allan," quoth he, "so much has been said of thy
singing that we would fain have a taste of thy skill ourselves. Canst
thou not give us something?"

"Surely," answered Allan readily; for he was no third-rate songster
that must be asked again and again, but said "yes" or "no" at the first
bidding; so, taking up his harp, he ran his fingers lightly over the
sweetly sounding strings, and all was hushed about the cloth. Then,
backing his voice with sweet music on his harp, he sang:


MAY ELLEN'S WEDDING

(Giving an account of how she was beloved by a fairy prince, who took
her to his own home.)

     "_May Ellen sat beneath a thorn
     And in a shower around
     The blossoms fell at every breeze
     Like snow upon the ground,
     And in a lime tree near was heard
     The sweet song of a strange, wild bird.

     "O sweet, sweet, sweet, O piercing sweet,
     O lingering sweet the strain!
     May Ellen's heart within her breast
     Stood still with blissful pain:
     And so, with listening, upturned face,
     She sat as dead in that fair place.

     "'Come down from out the blossoms, bird!
     Come down from out the tree,
     And on my heart I'll let thee lie,
     And love thee tenderly!'
     Thus cried May Ellen, soft and low,
     From where the hawthorn shed its snow.

     "Down dropped the bird on quivering wing,
     From out the blossoming tree,
     And nestled in her snowy breast.
     'My love! my love!' cried she;
     Then straightway home, 'mid sun and flower,
     She bare him to her own sweet bower.

     "The day hath passed to mellow night,
     The moon floats o'er the lea,
     And in its solemn, pallid light
     A youth stands silently:
     A youth of beauty strange and rare,
     Within May Ellen's bower there.

     "He stood where o'er the pavement cold
     The glimmering moonbeams lay.
     May Ellen gazed with wide, scared eyes,
     Nor could she turn away,
     For, as in mystic dreams we see
     A spirit, stood he silently.

     "All in a low and breathless voice,
     'Whence comest thou?' said she;
     'Art thou the creature of a dream,
     Or a vision that I see?'
     Then soft spake he, as night winds shiver
     Through straining reeds beside the river.

     "'I came, a bird on feathered wing,
     From distant Faeryland
     Where murmuring waters softly sing
     Upon the golden strand,
     Where sweet trees are forever green;
     And there my mother is the queen.'

     "No more May Ellen leaves her bower
     To grace the blossoms fair;
     But in the hushed and midnight hour
     They hear her talking there,
     Or, when the moon is shining white,
     They hear her singing through the night.

     "'Oh, don thy silks and jewels fine,'
     May Ellen's mother said,
     'For hither comes the Lord of Lyne
     And thou this lord must wed.'
     May Ellen said, 'It may not be.
     He ne'er shall find his wife in me.'

     "Up spoke her brother, dark and grim:
     'Now by the bright blue sky,
     E'er yet a day hath gone for him
     Thy wicked bird shall die!
     For he hath wrought thee bitter harm,
     By some strange art or cunning charm.'

     "Then, with a sad and mournful song,
     Away the bird did fly,
     And o'er the castle eaves, and through
     The gray and windy sky.
     'Come forth!' then cried the brother grim,
     'Why dost thou gaze so after him?'

     "It is May Ellen's wedding day,
     The sky is blue and fair,
     And many a lord and lady gay
     In church are gathered there.
     The bridegroom was Sir Hugh the Bold,
     All clad in silk and cloth of gold.

     "In came the bride in samite white
     With a white wreath on her head;
     Her eyes were fixed with a glassy look,
     Her face was as the dead,
     And when she stood among the throng,
     She sang a wild and wondrous song.

     "Then came a strange and rushing sound
     Like the coming wind doth bring,
     And in the open windows shot
     Nine swans on whistling wing,
     And high above the heads they flew,
     In gleaming fight the darkness through.

     "Around May Ellen's head they flew
     In wide and windy fight,
     And three times round the circle drew.
     The guests shrank in affright,
     And the priest beside the altar there,
     Did cross himself with muttered prayer.

     "But the third time they flew around,
     Fair Ellen straight was gone,
     And in her place, upon the ground,
     There stood a snow-white swan.
     Then, with a wild and lovely song,
     It joined the swift and winged throng.

     "There's ancient men at weddings been,
     For sixty years and more,
     But such a wondrous wedding day,
     They never saw before.
     But none could check and none could stay,
     The swans that bore the bride away_."

Not a sound broke the stillness when Allan a Dale had done, but all sat
gazing at the handsome singer, for so sweet was his voice and the music
that each man sat with bated breath, lest one drop more should come and
he should lose it.

"By my faith and my troth," quoth Robin at last, drawing a deep breath,
"lad, thou art--Thou must not leave our company, Allan! Wilt thou not
stay with us here in the sweet green forest? Truly, I do feel my heart
go out toward thee with great love."

Then Allan took Robin's hand and kissed it. "I will stay with thee
always, dear master," said he, "for never have I known such kindness as
thou hast shown me this day."

Then Will Scarlet stretched forth his hand and shook Allan's in token
of fellowship, as did Little John likewise. And thus the famous Allan a
Dale became one of Robin Hood's band.




Robin Hood Seeks the Curtal Friar

THE STOUT YEOMEN of Sherwood Forest were ever early risers of a morn,
more especially when the summertime had come, for then in the freshness
of the dawn the dew was always the brightest, and the song of the small
birds the sweetest.

Quoth Robin, "Now will I go to seek this same Friar of Fountain Abbey of
whom we spake yesternight, and I will take with me four of my good men,
and these four shall be Little John, Will Scarlet, David of Doncaster,
and Arthur a Bland. Bide the rest of you here, and Will Stutely shall be
your chief while I am gone." Then straightway Robin Hood donned a fine
steel coat of chain mail, over which he put on a light jacket of Lincoln
green. Upon his head he clapped a steel cap, and this he covered by one
of soft white leather, in which stood a nodding cock's plume. By his
side he hung a good broadsword of tempered steel, the bluish blade
marked all over with strange figures of dragons, winged women, and what
not. A gallant sight was Robin so arrayed, I wot, the glint of steel
showing here and there as the sunlight caught brightly the links of
polished mail that showed beneath his green coat.

So, having arrayed himself, he and the four yeomen set forth upon their
way, Will Scarlet taking the lead, for he knew better than the others
whither to go. Thus, mile after mile, they strode along, now across a
brawling stream, now along a sunlit road, now adown some sweet forest
path, over which the trees met in green and rustling canopy, and at the
end of which a herd of startled deer dashed away, with rattle of leaves
and crackle of branches. Onward they walked with song and jest and
laughter till noontide was passed, when at last they came to the banks
of a wide, glassy, and lily-padded stream. Here a broad, beaten path
stretched along beside the banks, on which path labored the horses that
tugged at the slow-moving barges, laden with barley meal or what not,
from the countryside to the many-towered town. But now, in the hot
silence of the midday, no horse was seen nor any man besides themselves.
Behind them and before them stretched the river, its placid bosom
ruffled here and there by the purple dusk of a small breeze.

"Now, good uncle," quoth Will Scarlet at last, when they had walked for
a long time beside this sweet, bright river, "just beyond yon bend ahead
of us is a shallow ford which in no place is deeper than thy mid-thigh,
and upon the other side of the stream is a certain little hermitage
hidden amidst the bosky tangle of the thickets wherein dwelleth the
Friar of Fountain Dale. Thither will I lead thee, for I know the way;
albeit it is not overhard to find."

"Nay," quoth jolly Robin, stopping suddenly, "had I thought that I
should have had to wade water, even were it so crystal a stream as this,
I had donned other clothes than I have upon me. But no matter now, for
after all a wetting will not wash the skin away, and what must be, must.
But bide ye here, lads, for I would enjoy this merry adventure alone.
Nevertheless, listen well, and if ye hear me sound upon my bugle horn,
come quickly." So saying, he turned and left them, striding onward
alone.

Robin had walked no farther than where the bend of the road hid his
good men from his view, when he stopped suddenly, for he thought that
he heard voices. He stood still and listened, and presently heard words
passed back and forth betwixt what seemed to be two men, and yet the two
voices were wondrously alike. The sound came from over behind the bank,
that here was steep and high, dropping from the edge of the road a half
a score of feet to the sedgy verge of the river.

"'Tis strange," muttered Robin to himself after a space, when the voices
had ceased their talking, "surely there be two people that spoke the one
to the other, and yet methinks their voices are mightily alike. I make
my vow that never have I heard the like in all my life before. Truly, if
this twain are to be judged by their voices, no two peas were ever more
alike. I will look into this matter." So saying, he came softly to the
river bank and laying him down upon the grass, peered over the edge and
down below.

All was cool and shady beneath the bank. A stout osier grew, not
straight upward, but leaning across the water, shadowing the spot with
its soft foliage. All around grew a mass of feathery ferns such as hide
and nestle in cool places, and up to Robin's nostrils came the tender
odor of the wild thyme, that loves the moist verges of running streams.
Here, with his broad back against the rugged trunk of the willow tree,
and half hidden by the soft ferns around him, sat a stout, brawny
fellow, but no other man was there. His head was as round as a ball, and
covered with a mat of close-clipped, curly black hair that grew low down
on his forehead. But his crown was shorn as smooth as the palm of one's
hand, which, together with his loose robe, cowl, and string of beads,
showed that which his looks never would have done, that he was a friar.
His cheeks were as red and shining as a winter crab, albeit they were
nearly covered over with a close curly black beard, as were his chin
and upper lip likewise. His neck was thick like that of a north country
bull, and his round head closely set upon shoulders e'en a match for
those of Little John himself. Beneath his bushy black brows danced a
pair of little gray eyes that could not stand still for very drollery
of humor. No man could look into his face and not feel his heartstrings
tickled by the merriment of their look. By his side lay a steel cap,
which he had laid off for the sake of the coolness to his crown. His
legs were stretched wide apart, and betwixt his knees he held a great
pasty compounded of juicy meats of divers kinds made savory with tender
young onions, both meat and onions being mingled with a good rich gravy.
In his right fist he held a great piece of brown crust at which he
munched sturdily, and every now and then he thrust his left hand into
the pie and drew it forth full of meat; anon he would take a mighty pull
at a great bottle of Malmsey that lay beside him.

"By my faith," quoth Robin to himself, "I do verily believe that this
is the merriest feast, the merriest wight, the merriest place, and the
merriest sight in all merry England. Methought there was another here,
but it must have been this holy man talking to himself."

So Robin lay watching the Friar, and the Friar, all unknowing that he
was so overlooked, ate his meal placidly. At last he was done, and,
having first wiped his greasy hands upon the ferns and wild thyme (and
sweeter napkin ne'er had king in all the world), he took up his
flask and began talking to himself as though he were another man, and
answering himself as though he were somebody else.

"Dear lad, thou art the sweetest fellow in all the world, I do love thee
as a lover loveth his lass. La, thou dost make me shamed to speak so to
me in this solitary place, no one being by, and yet if thou wilt have me
say so, I do love thee as thou lovest me. Nay then, wilt thou not take a
drink of good Malmsey? After thee, lad, after thee. Nay, I beseech thee,
sweeten the draught with thy lips (here he passed the flask from his
right hand to his left). An thou wilt force it on me so, I must needs
do thy bidding, yet with the more pleasure do I so as I drink thy very
great health (here he took a long, deep draught). And now, sweet lad,
'tis thy turn next (here he passed the bottle from his left hand back
again to his right). I take it, sweet chuck, and here's wishing thee as
much good as thou wishest me." Saying this, he took another draught, and
truly he drank enough for two.

All this time merry Robin lay upon the bank and listened, while his
stomach so quaked with laughter that he was forced to press his palm
across his mouth to keep it from bursting forth; for, truly, he would
not have spoiled such a goodly jest for the half of Nottinghamshire.

Having gotten his breath from his last draught, the Friar began talking
again in this wise: "Now, sweet lad, canst thou not sing me a song? La,
I know not, I am but in an ill voice this day; prythee ask me not; dost
thou not hear how I croak like a frog? Nay, nay, thy voice is as sweet
as any bullfinch; come, sing, I prythee, I would rather hear thee sing
than eat a fair feast. Alas, I would fain not sing before one that
can pipe so well and hath heard so many goodly songs and ballads,
ne'ertheless, an thou wilt have it so, I will do my best. But now
methinks that thou and I might sing some fair song together; dost thou
not know a certain dainty little catch called 'The Loving Youth and the
Scornful Maid'? Why, truly, methinks I have heard it ere now. Then dost
thou not think that thou couldst take the lass's part if I take the
lad's? I know not but I will try; begin thou with the lad and I will
follow with the lass."

Then, singing first with a voice deep and gruff, and anon in one high
and squeaking, he blithely trolled the merry catch of


THE LOVING YOUTH AND THE SCORNFUL MAID

     "_Ah, it's wilt thou come with me, my love?
     And it's wilt thou, love, be mine?
     For I will give unto thee, my love,
     Gay knots and ribbons so fine.
     I'll woo thee, love, on my bended knee,
     And I'll pipe sweet songs to none but thee.
     Then it's hark! hark! hark!
     To the winged lark
     And it's hark to the cooing dove!
     And the bright daffodil
     Groweth down by the rill,
     So come thou and be my love.

     SHE
     "Now get thee away, young man so fine;
     Now get thee away, I say;
     For my true love shall never be thine,
     And so thou hadst better not stay.
     Thou art not a fine enough lad for me,
     So I'll wait till a better young man I see.
     For it's hark! hark! hark!
     To the winged lark,
     And it's hark to the cooing dove!
     And the bright daffodil
     Groweth down by the rill,
     Yet never I'll be thy love.

     HE
     "Then straight will I seek for another fair she,
     For many a maid can be found,
     And as thou wilt never have aught of me,
     By thee will I never be bound.
     For never is a blossom in the field so rare,
     But others are found that are just as fair.
     So it's hark! hark! hark!
     To the joyous lark
     And it's hark to the cooing dove!
     And the bright daffodil
     Groweth down by the rill,
     And I'll seek me another dear love.

     SHE
     "Young man, turn not so very quick away
     Another fair lass to find.
     Methinks I have spoken in haste today,
     Nor have I made up my mind,

     And if thou only wilt stay with me,
     I'll love no other, sweet lad, but thee_."

Here Robin could contain himself no longer but burst forth into a mighty
roar of laughter; then, the holy Friar keeping on with the song, he
joined in the chorus, and together they sang, or, as one might say,
bellowed:

     "_So it's hark! hark! hark!
     To the joyous lark
     And it's hark to the cooing dove!
     For the bright daffodil
     Groweth down by the rill
     And I'll be thine own true love_."

So they sang together, for the stout Friar did not seem to have heard
Robin's laughter, neither did he seem to know that the yeoman had joined
in with the song, but, with eyes half closed, looking straight before
him and wagging his round head from side to side in time to the music,
he kept on bravely to the end, he and Robin finishing up with a mighty
roar that might have been heard a mile. But no sooner had the last word
been sung than the holy man seized his steel cap, clapped it on his
head, and springing to his feet, cried in a great voice, "What spy have
we here? Come forth, thou limb of evil, and I will carve thee into
as fine pudding meat as e'er a wife in Yorkshire cooked of a Sunday."
Hereupon he drew from beneath his robes a great broadsword full as stout
as was Robin's.

"Nay, put up thy pinking iron, friend," quoth Robin, standing up with
the tears of laughter still on his cheeks. "Folk who have sung so
sweetly together should not fight thereafter." Hereupon he leaped down
the bank to where the other stood. "I tell thee, friend," said he, "my
throat is as parched with that song as e'er a barley stubble in October.
Hast thou haply any Malmsey left in that stout pottle?"

"Truly," said the Friar in a glum voice, "thou dost ask thyself freely
where thou art not bidden. Yet I trust I am too good a Christian to
refuse any man drink that is athirst. Such as there is o't thou art
welcome to a drink of the same." And he held the pottle out to Robin.

Robin took it without more ado and putting it to his lips, tilted his
head back, while that which was within said "glug!" "lug! glug!" for more
than three winks, I wot. The stout Friar watched Robin anxiously the
while, and when he was done took the pottle quickly. He shook it, held
it betwixt his eyes and the light, looked reproachfully at the yeoman,
and straightway placed it at his own lips. When it came away again there
was nought within it.

"Doss thou know the country hereabouts, thou good and holy man?" asked
Robin, laughing.

"Yea, somewhat," answered the other dryly.

"And dost thou know of a certain spot called Fountain Abbey?"

"Yea, somewhat."

"Then perchance thou knowest also of a certain one who goeth by the name
of the Curtal Friar of Fountain Abbey."

"Yea, somewhat."

"Well then, good fellow, holy father, or whatever thou art," quoth
Robin, "I would know whether this same Friar is to be found upon this
side of the river or the other."

"That," quoth the Friar, "is a practical question upon which the cunning
rules appertaining to logic touch not. I do advise thee to find that out
by the aid of thine own five senses; sight, feeling, and what not."

"I do wish much," quoth Robin, looking thoughtfully at the stout priest,
"to cross yon ford and strive to find this same good Friar."

"Truly," said the other piously, "it is a goodly wish on the part of one
so young. Far be it from me to check thee in so holy a quest. Friend,
the river is free to all."

"Yea, good father," said Robin, "but thou seest that my clothes are of
the finest and I fain would not get them wet. Methinks thy shoulders
are stout and broad; couldst thou not find it in thy heart to carry me
across?"

"Now, by the white hand of the holy Lady of the Fountain!" burst forth
the Friar in a mighty rage, "dost thou, thou poor puny stripling, thou
kiss-my-lady-la poppenjay; thou--thou What shall I call thee? Dost thou
ask me, the holy Tuck, to carry thee? Now I swear--" Here he paused
suddenly, then slowly the anger passed from his face, and his little
eyes twinkled once more. "But why should I not?" quoth he piously.

"Did not the holy Saint Christopher ever carry the stranger across the
river? And should I, poor sinner that I am, be ashamed to do likewise?
Come with me, stranger, and I will do thy bidding in an humble frame of
mind." So saying, he clambered up the bank, closely followed by Robin,
and led the way to the shallow pebbly ford, chuckling to himself the
while as though he were enjoying some goodly jest within himself.

Having come to the ford, he girded up his robes about his loins, tucked
his good broadsword beneath his arm, and stooped his back to take Robin
upon it. Suddenly he straightened up. "Methinks," quoth he, "thou'lt get
thy weapon wet. Let me tuck it beneath mine arm along with mine own."

"Nay, good father," said Robin, "I would not burden thee with aught of
mine but myself."

"Dost thou think," said the Friar mildly, "that the good Saint
Christopher would ha' sought his own ease so? Nay, give me thy tool as I
bid thee, for I would carry it as a penance to my pride."

Upon this, without more ado, Robin Hood unbuckled his sword from his
side and handed it to the other, who thrust it with his own beneath his
arm. Then once more the Friar bent his back, and, Robin having mounted
upon it, he stepped sturdily into the water and so strode onward,
splashing in the shoal, and breaking all the smooth surface into
ever-widening rings. At last he reached the other side and Robin leaped
lightly from his back.

"Many thanks, good father," quoth he. "Thou art indeed a good and holy
man. Prythee give me my sword and let me away, for I am in haste."

At this the stout Friar looked upon Robin for a long time, his head
on one side, and with a most waggish twist to his face; then he slowly
winked his right eye. "Nay, good youth," said he gently, "I doubt not
that thou art in haste with thine affairs, yet thou dost think nothing
of mine. Thine are of a carnal nature; mine are of a spiritual nature,
a holy work, so to speak; moreover, mine affairs do lie upon the other
side of this stream. I see by thy quest of this same holy recluse that
thou art a good young man and most reverent to the cloth. I did get wet
coming hither, and am sadly afraid that should I wade the water again
I might get certain cricks and pains i' the joints that would mar my
devotions for many a day to come. I know that since I have so humbly
done thy bidding thou wilt carry me back again. Thou seest how Saint
Godrick, that holy hermit whose natal day this is, hath placed in my
hands two swords and in thine never a one. Therefore be persuaded, good
youth, and carry me back again."

Robin Hood looked up and he looked down, biting his nether lip. Quoth
he, "Thou cunning Friar, thou hast me fair and fast enow. Let me tell
thee that not one of thy cloth hath so hoodwinked me in all my life
before. I might have known from thy looks that thou wert no such holy
man as thou didst pretend to be."

"Nay," interrupted the Friar, "I bid thee speak not so scurrilously
neither, lest thou mayst perchance feel the prick of an inch or so of
blue steel."

"Tut, tut," said Robin, "speak not so, Friar; the loser hath ever the
right to use his tongue as he doth list. Give me my sword; I do promise
to carry thee back straightway. Nay, I will not lift the weapon against
thee."

"Marry, come up," quoth the Friar, "I fear thee not, fellow. Here is thy
skewer; and get thyself presently ready, for I would hasten back."

So Robin took his sword again and buckled it at his side; then he bent
his stout back and took the Friar upon it.

Now I wot Robin Hood had a heavier load to carry in the Friar than
the Friar had in him. Moreover he did not know the ford, so he went
stumbling among the stones, now stepping into a deep hole, and now
nearly tripping over a boulder, while the sweat ran down his face in
beads from the hardness of his journey and the heaviness of his load.
Meantime, the Friar kept digging his heels into Robin's sides and
bidding him hasten, calling him many ill names the while. To all this
Robin answered never a word, but, having softly felt around till he
found the buckle of the belt that held the Friar's sword, he worked
slyly at the fastenings, seeking to loosen them. Thus it came about
that, by the time he had reached the other bank with his load, the
Friar's sword belt was loose albeit he knew it not; so when Robin stood
on dry land and the Friar leaped from his back, the yeoman gripped hold
of the sword so that blade, sheath, and strap came away from the holy
man, leaving him without a weapon.

"Now then," quoth merry Robin, panting as he spake and wiping the sweat
from his brow, "I have thee, fellow. This time that same saint of whom
thou didst speak but now hath delivered two swords into my hand and hath
stripped thine away from thee. Now if thou dost not carry me back, and
that speedily, I swear I will prick thy skin till it is as full of holes
as a slashed doublet."

The good Friar said not a word for a while, but he looked at Robin with
a grim look. "Now," said he at last, "I did think that thy wits were of
the heavy sort and knew not that thou wert so cunning. Truly, thou hast
me upon the hip. Give me my sword, and I promise not to draw it against
thee save in self-defense; also, I promise to do thy bidding and take
thee upon my back and carry thee."

So jolly Robin gave him his sword again, which the Friar buckled to
his side, and this time looked to it that it was more secure in its
fastenings; then tucking up his robes once more, he took Robin Hood upon
his back and without a word stepped into the water, and so waded on in
silence while Robin sat laughing upon his back. At last he reached the
middle of the ford where the water was deepest. Here he stopped for
a moment, and then, with a sudden lift of his hand and heave of his
shoulders, fairly shot Robin over his head as though he were a sack of
grain.

Down went Robin into the water with a mighty splash. "There," quoth the
holy man, calmly turning back again to the shore, "let that cool thy hot
spirit, if it may."

Meantime, after much splashing, Robin had gotten to his feet and stood
gazing about him all bewildered, the water running from him in pretty
little rills. At last he shot the water out of his ears and spat some
out of his mouth, and, gathering his scattered wits together, saw the
stout Friar standing on the bank and laughing. Then, I wot, was Robin
Hood a mad man. "Stay, thou villain!" roared he, "I am after thee
straight, and if I do not carve thy brawn for thee this day, may I never
lift finger again!" So saying, he dashed, splashing, to the bank.

"Thou needst not hasten thyself unduly," quoth the stout Friar. "Fear
not; I will abide here, and if thou dost not cry 'Alack-a-day' ere long
time is gone, may I never more peep through the brake at a fallow deer."

And now Robin, having reached the bank, began, without more ado, to roll
up his sleeves above his wrists. The Friar, also, tucked his robes more
about him, showing a great, stout arm on which the muscles stood out
like humps of an aged tree. Then Robin saw, what he had not wotted of
before, that the Friar had also a coat of chain mail beneath his gown.

"Look to thyself," cried Robin, drawing his good sword.

"Ay, marry," quoth the Friar, who held his already in his hand. So,
without more ado, they came together, and thereupon began a fierce and
mighty battle. Right and left, and up and down and back and forth they
fought. The swords flashed in the sun and then met with a clash that
sounded far and near. I wot this was no playful bout at quarterstaff,
but a grim and serious fight of real earnest. Thus they strove for an
hour or more, pausing every now and then to rest, at which times each
looked at the other with wonder, and thought that never had he seen so
stout a fellow; then once again they would go at it more fiercely than
ever. Yet in all this time neither had harmed the other nor caused his
blood to flow. At last merry Robin cried, "Hold thy hand, good friend!"
whereupon both lowered their swords.

"Now I crave a boon ere we begin again," quoth Robin, wiping the sweat
from his brow; for they had striven so long that he began to think that
it would be an ill-done thing either to be smitten himself or to smite
so stout and brave a fellow.

"What wouldst thou have of me?" asked the Friar.

"Only this," quoth Robin; "that thou wilt let me blow thrice upon my
bugle horn."

The Friar bent his brows and looked shrewdly at Robin Hood. "Now I
do verily think that thou hast some cunning trick in this," quoth
he. "Ne'ertheless, I fear thee not, and will let thee have thy wish,
providing thou wilt also let me blow thrice upon this little whistle."

"With all my heart," quoth Robin, "so, here goes for one." So saying,
he raised his silver horn to his lips and blew thrice upon it, clear and
high.

Meantime, the Friar stood watching keenly for what might come to pass,
holding in his fingers the while a pretty silver whistle, such as
knights use for calling their hawks back to their wrists, which whistle
always hung at his girdle along with his rosary.

Scarcely had the echo of the last note of Robin's bugle come winding
back from across the river, when four tall men in Lincoln green came
running around the bend of the road, each with a bow in his hand and an
arrow ready nocked upon the string.

"Ha! Is it thus, thou traitor knave!" cried the Friar. "Then, marry,
look to thyself!" So saying, he straightway clapped the hawk's whistle
to his lips and blew a blast that was both loud and shrill. And now
there came a crackling of the bushes that lined the other side of the
road, and presently forth from the covert burst four great, shaggy
hounds. "At 'em, Sweet Lips! At 'em, Bell Throat! At 'em, Beauty! At
'em, Fangs!" cried the Friar, pointing at Robin.

And now it was well for that yeoman that a tree stood nigh him beside
the road, else had he had an ill chance of it. Ere one could say "Gaffer
Downthedale" the hounds were upon him, and he had only time to drop his
sword and leap lightly into the tree, around which the hounds gathered,
looking up at him as though he were a cat on the eaves. But the Friar
quickly called off his dogs. "At 'em!" cried he, pointing down the road
to where the yeomen were standing stock still with wonder of what they
saw. As the hawk darts down upon its quarry, so sped the four dogs at
the yeomen; but when the four men saw the hounds so coming, all with one
accord, saving only Will Scarlet, drew each man his goose feather to his
ear and let fly his shaft.

And now the old ballad telleth of a wondrous thing that happened, for
thus it says, that each dog so shot at leaped lightly aside, and as the
arrow passed him whistling, caught it in his mouth and bit it in twain.
Now it would have been an ill day for these four good fellows had not
Will Scarlet stepped before the others and met the hounds as they came
rushing. "Why, how now, Fangs!" cried he sternly. "Down, Beauty! Down,
sirrah! What means this?"

At the sound of his voice each dog shrank back quickly and then
straightway came to him and licked his hands and fawned upon him, as
is the wont of dogs that meet one they know. Then the four yeomen came
forward, the hounds leaping around Will Scarlet joyously. "Why, how
now!" cried the stout Friar, "what means this? Art thou wizard to turn
those wolves into lambs? Ha!" cried he, when they had come still nearer,
"can I trust mine eyes? What means it that I see young Master William
Gamwell in such company?"

"Nay, Tuck," said the young man, as the four came forward to where Robin
was now clambering down from the tree in which he had been roosting, he
having seen that all danger was over for the time; "nay, Tuck, my name
is no longer Will Gamwell, but Will Scarlet; and this is my good uncle,
Robin Hood, with whom I am abiding just now."

"Truly, good master," said the Friar, looking somewhat abashed and
reaching out his great palm to Robin, "I ha' oft heard thy name both
sung and spoken of, but I never thought to meet thee in battle. I crave
thy forgiveness, and do wonder not that I found so stout a man against
me."

"Truly, most holy father," said Little John, "I am more thankful than
e'er I was in all my life before that our good friend Scarlet knew thee
and thy dogs. I tell thee seriously that I felt my heart crumble away
from me when I saw my shaft so miss its aim, and those great beasts of
thine coming straight at me."

"Thou mayst indeed be thankful, friend," said the Friar gravely. "But,
Master Will, how cometh it that thou dost now abide in Sherwood?"

"Why, Tuck, dost thou not know of my ill happening with my father's
steward?" answered Scarlet.

"Yea, truly, yet I knew not that thou wert in hiding because of it.
Marry, the times are all awry when a gentleman must lie hidden for so
small a thing."

"But we are losing time," quoth Robin, "and I have yet to find that same
Curtal Friar."

"Why, uncle, thou hast not far to go," said Will Scarlet, pointing to
the Friar, "for there he stands beside thee."

"How?" quoth Robin, "art thou the man that I have been at such pains to
seek all day, and have got such a ducking for?"

"Why, truly," said the Friar demurely, "some do call me the Curtal Friar
of Fountain Dale; others again call me in jest the Abbot of Fountain
Abbey; others still again call me simple Friar Tuck."

"I like the last name best," quoth Robin, "for it doth slip more glibly
off the tongue. But why didst thou not tell me thou wert he I sought,
instead of sending me searching for black moonbeams?"

"Why, truly, thou didst not ask me, good master," quoth stout Tuck; "but
what didst thou desire of me?"

"Nay," quoth Robin, "the day groweth late, and we cannot stand longer
talking here. Come back with us to Sherwood, and I will unfold all to
thee as we travel along."

So, without tarrying longer, they all departed, with the stout dogs at
their heels, and wended their way back to Sherwood again; but it was
long past nightfall ere they reached the greenwood tree.

Now listen, for next I will tell how Robin Hood compassed the happiness
of two young lovers, aided by the merry Friar Tuck of Fountain Dale.




Robin Hood Compasses a Marriage

AND NOW had come the morning when fair Ellen was to be married, and on
which merry Robin had sworn that Allan a Dale should, as it were, eat
out of the platter that had been filled for Sir Stephen of Trent. Up
rose Robin Hood, blithe and gay, up rose his merry men one and all, and
up rose last of all stout Friar Tuck, winking the smart of sleep from
out his eyes. Then, while the air seemed to brim over with the song of
many birds, all blended together and all joying in the misty morn, each
man raved face and hands in the leaping brook, and so the day began.

"Now," quoth Robin, when they had broken their fast, and each man had
eaten his fill, "it is time for us to set forth upon the undertaking
that we have in hand for today. I will choose me one score of my good
men to go with me, for I may need aid; and thou, Will Scarlet, wilt
abide here and be the chief while I am gone." Then searching through
all the band, each man of whom crowded forward eager to be chosen, Robin
called such as he wished by name, until he had a score of stout fellows,
the very flower of his yeomanrie. Besides Little John and Will Stutely
were nigh all those famous lads of whom I have already told you. Then,
while those so chosen ran leaping, full of joy, to arm themselves with
bow and shaft and broadsword, Robin Hood stepped aside into the covert,
and there donned a gay, beribboned coat such as might have been worn
by some strolling minstrel, and slung a harp across his shoulder, the
better to carry out that part.

All the band stared and many laughed, for never had they seen their
master in such a fantastic guise before.

"Truly," quoth Robin, holding up his arms and looking down at himself,
"I do think it be somewhat of a gay, gaudy, grasshopper dress; but it
is a pretty thing for all that, and doth not ill befit the turn of my
looks, albeit I wear it but for the nonce. But stay, Little John, here
are two bags that I would have thee carry in thy pouch for the sake of
safekeeping. I can ill care for them myself beneath this motley."

"Why, master," quoth Little John, taking the bags and weighing them in
his hand, "here is the chink of gold."

"Well, what an there be," said Robin, "it is mine own coin and the band
is none the worse for what is there. Come, busk ye, lads," and he turned
quickly away. "Get ye ready straightway." Then gathering the score
together in a close rank, in the midst of which were Allan a Dale and
Friar Tuck, he led them forth upon their way from the forest shades.

So they walked on for a long time till they had come out of Sherwood and
to the vale of Rotherstream. Here were different sights from what one
saw in the forest; hedgerows, broad fields of barley corn, pasture lands
rolling upward till they met the sky and all dotted over with flocks of
white sheep, hayfields whence came the odor of new-mown hay that lay in
smooth swathes over which skimmed the swifts in rapid flight; such they
saw, and different was it, I wot, from the tangled depths of the sweet
woodlands, but full as fair. Thus Robin led his band, walking blithely
with chest thrown out and head thrown back, snuffing the odors of the
gentle breeze that came drifting from over the hayfields.

"Truly," quoth he, "the dear world is as fair here as in the woodland
shades. Who calls it a vale of tears? Methinks it is but the darkness in
our minds that bringeth gloom to the world. For what sayeth that merry
song thou singest, Little John? Is it not thus?

     "_For when my love's eyes do thine, do thine,
     And when her lips smile so rare,
     The day it is jocund and fine, so fine,
     Though let it be wet or be fair
     And when the stout ale is all flowing so fast,
     Our sorrows and troubles are things of the past_."

"Nay," said Friar Tuck piously, "ye do think of profane things and of
nought else; yet, truly, there be better safeguards against care and woe
than ale drinking and bright eyes, to wit, fasting and meditation. Look
upon me, have I the likeness of a sorrowful man?"

At this a great shout of laughter went up from all around, for the night
before the stout Friar had emptied twice as many canakins of ale as any
one of all the merry men.

"Truly," quoth Robin, when he could speak for laughter, "I should say
that thy sorrows were about equal to thy goodliness."

So they stepped along, talking, singing, jesting, and laughing, until
they had come to a certain little church that belonged to the great
estates owned by the rich Priory of Emmet. Here it was that fair Ellen
was to be married on that morn, and here was the spot toward which the
yeomen had pointed their toes. On the other side of the road from where
the church stood with waving fields of barley around, ran a stone wall
along the roadside. Over the wall from the highway was a fringe of young
trees and bushes, and here and there the wall itself was covered by a
mass of blossoming woodbine that filled all the warm air far and near
with its sweet summer odor. Then straightway the yeomen leaped over the
wall, alighting on the tall soft grass upon the other side, frightening
a flock of sheep that lay there in the shade so that they scampered away
in all directions. Here was a sweet cool shadow both from the wall and
from the fair young trees and bushes, and here sat the yeomen down, and
glad enough they were to rest after their long tramp of the morning.

"Now," quoth Robin, "I would have one of you watch and tell me when he
sees anyone coming to the church, and the one I choose shall be young
David of Doncaster. So get thee upon the wall, David, and hide beneath
the woodbine so as to keep watch."

Accordingly young David did as he was bidden, the others stretching
themselves at length upon the grass, some talking together and others
sleeping. Then all was quiet save only for the low voices of those that
talked together, and for Allan's restless footsteps pacing up and down,
for his soul was so full of disturbance that he could not stand still,
and saving, also, for the mellow snoring of Friar Tuck, who enjoyed his
sleep with a noise as of one sawing soft wood very slowly. Robin lay
upon his back and gazed aloft into the leaves of the trees, his thought
leagues away, and so a long time passed.

Then up spoke Robin, "Now tell us, young David of Doncaster, what dost
thou see?"

Then David answered, "I see the white clouds floating and I feel the
wind a-blowing and three black crows are flying over the wold; but
nought else do I see, good master."

So silence fell again and another time passed, broken only as I have
said, till Robin, growing impatient, spake again. "Now tell me, young
David, what dost thou see by this?"

And David answered, "I see the windmills swinging and three tall poplar
trees swaying against the sky, and a flock of fieldfares are flying over
the hill; but nought else do I see, good master."

So another time passed, till at last Robin asked young David once more
what he saw; and David said, "I hear the cuckoo singing, and I see how
the wind makes waves in the barley field; and now over the hill to the
church cometh an old friar, and in his hands he carries a great bunch of
keys; and lo! Now he cometh to the church door."

Then up rose Robin Hood and shook Friar Tuck by the shoulder. "Come,
rouse thee, holy man!" cried he; whereupon, with much grunting, the
stout Tuck got to his feet. "Marry, bestir thyself," quoth Robin, "for
yonder, in the church door, is one of thy cloth. Go thou and talk to
him, and so get thyself into the church, that thou mayst be there when
thou art wanted; meantime, Little John, Will Stutely, and I will follow
thee anon."

So Friar Tuck clambered over the wall, crossed the road, and came to the
church, where the old friar was still laboring with the great key, the
lock being somewhat rusty and he somewhat old and feeble.

"Hilloa, brother," quoth Tuck, "let me aid thee." So saying, he took the
key from the other's hand and quickly opened the door with a turn of it.

"Who art thou, good brother?" asked the old friar, in a high, wheezing
voice. "Whence comest thou, and whither art thou going?" And he winked
and blinked at stout Friar Tuck like an owl at the sun.

"Thus do I answer thy questions, brother," said the other. "My name is
Tuck, and I go no farther than this spot, if thou wilt haply but let me
stay while this same wedding is going forward. I come from Fountain Dale
and, in truth, am a certain poor hermit, as one may say, for I live in a
cell beside the fountain blessed by that holy Saint Ethelrada. But, if
I understand aught, there is to be a gay wedding here today; so, if thou
mindest not, I would fain rest me in the cool shade within, for I would
like to see this fine sight."

"Truly, thou art welcome, brother," said the old man, leading the way
within. Meantime, Robin Hood, in his guise of harper, together with
Little John and Will Stutely, had come to the church. Robin sat him down
on a bench beside the door, but Little John, carrying the two bags of
gold, went within, as did Will Stutely.

So Robin sat by the door, looking up the road and down the road to see
who might come, till, after a time, he saw six horsemen come riding
sedately and slowly, as became them, for they were churchmen in high
orders. Then, when they had come nearer, Robin saw who they were, and
knew them. The first was the Bishop of Hereford, and a fine figure he
cut, I wot. His vestments were of the richest silk, and around his neck
was a fair chain of beaten gold. The cap that hid his tonsure was
of black velvet, and around the edges of it were rows of jewels that
flashed in the sunlight, each stone being set in gold. His hose were
of flame-colored silk, and his shoes of black velvet, the long, pointed
toes being turned up and fastened to his knees, and on either instep was
embroidered a cross in gold thread. Beside the Bishop rode the Prior of
Emmet upon a mincing palfrey. Rich were his clothes also, but not so gay
as the stout Bishop's. Behind these were two of the higher brethren of
Emmet, and behind these again two retainers belonging to the Bishop; for
the Lord Bishop of Hereford strove to be as like the great barons as was
in the power of one in holy orders.

When Robin saw this train drawing near, with flash of jewels and silk
and jingle of silver bells on the trappings of the nags, he looked
sourly upon them. Quoth he to himself, "Yon Bishop is overgaudy for
a holy man. I do wonder whether his patron, who, methinks, was Saint
Thomas, was given to wearing golden chains about his neck, silk clothing
upon his body, and pointed shoes upon his feet; the money for all of
which, God wot, hath been wrung from the sweat of poor tenants. Bishop,
Bishop, thy pride may have a fall ere thou wottest of it."

So the holy men came to the church; the Bishop and the Prior jesting and
laughing between themselves about certain fair dames, their words more
befitting the lips of laymen, methinks, than holy clerks. Then they
dismounted, and the Bishop, looking around, presently caught sight of
Robin standing in the doorway. "Hilloa, good fellow," quoth he in a
jovial voice, "who art thou that struttest in such gay feathers?"

"A harper am I from the north country," quoth Robin, "and I can touch
the strings, I wot, as never another man in all merry England can do.
Truly, good Lord Bishop, many a knight and burgher, clerk and layman,
have danced to my music, willy-nilly, and most times greatly against
their will; such is the magic of my harping. Now this day, my Lord
Bishop, if I may play at this wedding, I do promise that I will cause
the fair bride to love the man she marries with a love that shall last
as long as that twain shall live together."

"Ha! is it so?" cried the Bishop. "Meanest thou this in sooth?" And he
looked keenly at Robin, who gazed boldly back again into his eyes. "Now,
if thou wilt cause this maiden (who hath verily bewitched my poor cousin
Stephen) thus to love the man she is to marry, as thou sayst thou canst,
I will give thee whatsoever thou wilt ask me in due measure. Let me have
a taste of thy skill, fellow."

"Nay," quoth Robin, "my music cometh not without I choose, even at a
lord bishop's bidding. In sooth, I will not play until the bride and
bridegroom come."

"Now, thou art a saucy varlet to speak so to my crest," quoth the
Bishop, frowning on Robin. "Yet, I must needs bear with thee. Look,
Prior, hither cometh our cousin Sir Stephen, and his ladylove."

And now, around the bend of the highroad, came others, riding upon
horses. The first of all was a tall, thin man, of knightly bearing,
dressed all in black silk, with a black velvet cap upon his head,
turned up with scarlet. Robin looked, and had no doubt that this was Sir
Stephen, both because of his knightly carriage and of his gray hairs.
Beside him rode a stout Saxon franklin, Ellen's father, Edward of
Deirwold; behind those two came a litter borne by two horses, and
therein was a maiden whom Robin knew must be Ellen. Behind this litter
rode six men-at-arms, the sunlight flashing on their steel caps as they
came jingling up the dusty road.

So these also came to the church, and there Sir Stephen leaped from his
horse and, coming to the litter, handed fair Ellen out therefrom. Then
Robin Hood looked at her, and could wonder no longer how it came about
that so proud a knight as Sir Stephen of Trent wished to marry a common
franklin's daughter; nor did he wonder that no ado was made about the
matter, for she was the fairest maiden that ever he had beheld. Now,
however, she was all pale and drooping, like a fair white lily snapped
at the stem; and so, with bent head and sorrowful look, she went within
the church, Sir Stephen leading her by the hand.

"Why dost thou not play, fellow?" quoth the Bishop, looking sternly at
Robin.

"Marry," said Robin calmly, "I will play in greater wise than Your
Lordship thinks, but not till the right time hath come."

Said the Bishop to himself, while he looked grimly at Robin, "When this
wedding is gone by I will have this fellow well whipped for his saucy
tongue and bold speech."

And now fair Ellen and Sir Stephen stood before the altar, and the
Bishop himself came in his robes and opened his book, whereat fair Ellen
looked up and about her in bitter despair, like the fawn that finds the
hounds on her haunch. Then, in all his fluttering tags and ribbons of
red and yellow, Robin Hood strode forward. Three steps he took from the
pillar whereby he leaned, and stood between the bride and bridegroom.

"Let me look upon this lass," he said in a loud voice. "Why, how now!
What have we here? Here be lilies in the cheeks, and not roses such as
befit a bonny bride. This is no fit wedding. Thou, Sir Knight, so old,
and she so young, and thou thinkest to make her thy wife? I tell thee it
may not be, for thou art not her own true love."

At this all stood amazed, and knew not where to look nor what to think
or say, for they were all bewildered with the happening; so, while
everyone looked at Robin as though they had been changed to stone, he
clapped his bugle horn to his lips and blew three blasts so loud and
clear, they echoed from floor to rafter as though they were sounded by
the trump of doom. Then straightway Little John and Will Stutely came
leaping and stood upon either side of Robin Hood, and quickly drew their
broadswords, the while a mighty voice rolled over the heads of all,
"Here be I, good master, when thou wantest me;" for it was Friar Tuck
that so called from the organ loft.

And now all was hubbub and noise. Stout Edward strode forward raging,
and would have seized his daughter to drag her away, but Little John
stepped between and thrust him back. "Stand back, old man," said he,
"thou art a hobbled horse this day."

"Down with the villains!" cried Sir Stephen, and felt for his sword, but
it hung not beside him on his wedding day.

Then the men-at-arms drew their swords, and it seemed like that blood
would wet the stones; but suddenly came a bustle at the door and loud
voices, steel flashed in the light, and the crash of blows sounded.
The men-at-arms fell back, and up the aisle came leaping eighteen stout
yeomen all clad in Lincoln green, with Allan a Dale at their head. In
his hand he bore Robin Hood's good stout trusty bow of yew, and this he
gave to him, kneeling the while upon one knee.

Then up spake Edward of Deirwold in a deep voice of anger, "Is it thou,
Allan a Dale, that hath bred all this coil in a church?"

"Nay," quoth merry Robin, "that have I done, and I care not who knoweth
it, for my name is Robin Hood."

At this name a sudden silence fell. The Prior of Emmet and those that
belonged to him gathered together like a flock of frightened sheep when
the scent of the wolf is nigh, while the Bishop of Hereford, laying
aside his book, crossed himself devoutly. "Now Heaven keep us this day,"
said he, "from that evil man!"

"Nay," quoth Robin, "I mean you no harm; but here is fair Ellen's
betrothed husband, and she shall marry him or pain will be bred to some
of you."

Then up spake stout Edward in a loud and angry voice, "Now I say nay! I
am her father, and she shall marry Sir Stephen and none other."

Now all this time, while everything was in turmoil about him, Sir
Stephen had been standing in proud and scornful silence. "Nay, fellow,"
said he coldly, "thou mayst take thy daughter back again; I would
not marry her after this day's doings could I gain all merry England
thereby. I tell thee plainly, I loved thy daughter, old as I am, and
would have taken her up like a jewel from the sty, yet, truly, I knew
not that she did love this fellow, and was beloved by him. Maiden, if
thou dost rather choose a beggarly minstrel than a high-born knight,
take thy choice. I do feel it shame that I should thus stand talking
amid this herd, and so I will leave you." Thus saying, he turned and,
gathering his men about him, walked proudly down the aisle. Then all the
yeomen were silenced by the scorn of his words. Only Friar Tuck leaned
over the edge of the choir loft and called out to him ere he had gone,
"Good den, Sir Knight. Thou wottest old bones must alway make room for
young blood." Sir Stephen neither answered nor looked up, but passed out
from the church as though he had heard nought, his men following him.

Then the Bishop of Hereford spoke hastily, "I, too, have no business
here, and so will depart." And he made as though he would go. But Robin
Hood laid hold of his clothes and held him. "Stay, my Lord Bishop," said
he, "I have yet somewhat to say to thee." The Bishop's face fell, but he
stayed as Robin bade him, for he saw he could not go.

Then Robin Hood turned to stout Edward of Deirwold, and said he, "Give
thy blessing on thy daughter's marriage to this yeoman, and all will be
well. Little John, give me the bags of gold. Look, farmer. Here are two
hundred bright golden angels; give thy blessing, as I say, and I will
count them out to thee as thy daughter's dower. Give not thy blessing,
and she shall be married all the same, but not so much as a cracked
farthing shall cross thy palm. Choose."

Then Edward looked upon the ground with bent brows, turning the matter
over and over in his mind; but he was a shrewd man and one, withal, that
made the best use of a cracked pipkin; so at last he looked up and said,
but in no joyous tone, "If the wench will go her own gait, let her go. I
had thought to make a lady of her; yet if she chooses to be what she is
like to be, I have nought to do with her henceforth. Ne'ertheless I will
give her my blessing when she is duly wedded."

"It may not be," spake up one of those of Emmet. "The banns have not
been duly published, neither is there any priest here to marry them."

"How sayst thou?" roared Tuck from the choir loft. "No priest? Marry,
here stands as holy a man as thou art, any day of the week, a clerk in
orders, I would have thee know. As for the question of banns, stumble
not over that straw, brother, for I will publish them." So saying, he
called the banns; and, says the old ballad, lest three times should not
be enough, he published them nine times o'er. Then straightway he came
down from the loft and forthwith performed the marriage service; and so
Allan and Ellen were duly wedded.

And now Robin counted out two hundred golden angels to Edward of
Deirwold, and he, upon his part, gave his blessing, yet not, I wot,
as though he meant it with overmuch good will. Then the stout yeomen
crowded around and grasped Allan's palm, and he, holding Ellen's hand
within his own, looked about him all dizzy with his happiness.

Then at last jolly Robin turned to the Bishop of Hereford, who had been
looking on at all that passed with a grim look. "My Lord Bishop," quoth
he, "thou mayst bring to thy mind that thou didst promise me that did I
play in such wise as to cause this fair lass to love her husband, thou
wouldst give me whatsoever I asked in reason. I have played my play, and
she loveth her husband, which she would not have done but for me; so
now fulfill thy promise. Thou hast upon thee that which, methinks, thou
wouldst be the better without; therefore, I prythee, give me that golden
chain that hangeth about thy neck as a wedding present for this fair
bride."

Then the Bishop's cheeks grew red with rage and his eyes flashed. He
looked at Robin with a fell look, but saw that in the yeoman's face
which bade him pause. Then slowly he took the chain from about his neck
and handed it to Robin, who flung it over Ellen's head so that it hung
glittering about her shoulders. Then said merry Robin, "I thank thee, on
the bride's part, for thy handsome gift, and truly thou thyself art more
seemly without it. Now, shouldst thou ever come nigh to Sherwood I much
hope that I shall give thee there such a feast as thou hast ne'er had in
all thy life before."

"May Heaven forfend!" cried the Bishop earnestly; for he knew right well
what manner of feast it was that Robin Hood gave his guests in Sherwood
Forest.

But now Robin Hood gathered his men together, and, with Allan and his
young bride in their midst, they all turned their footsteps toward the
woodlands. On the way thither Friar Tuck came close to Robin and plucked
him by the sleeve. "Thou dost lead a merry life, good master," quoth he,
"but dost thou not think that it would be for the welfare of all your
souls to have a good stout chaplain, such as I, to oversee holy matters?
Truly, I do love this life mightily." At this merry Robin Hood laughed
amain, and bade him stay and become one of their band if he wished.

That night there was such a feast held in the greenwood as
Nottinghamshire never saw before. To that feast you and I were not
bidden, and pity it is that we were not; so, lest we should both feel
the matter the more keenly, I will say no more about it.




Robin Hood Aids a Sorrowful Knight

SO PASSED the gentle springtime away in budding beauty; its silver
showers and sunshine, its green meadows and its flowers. So, likewise,
passed the summer with its yellow sunlight, its quivering heat and deep,
bosky foliage, its long twilights and its mellow nights, through which
the frogs croaked and fairy folk were said to be out on the hillsides.
All this had passed and the time of fall had come, bringing with it its
own pleasures and joyousness; for now, when the harvest was gathered
home, merry bands of gleaners roamed the country about, singing along
the roads in the daytime, and sleeping beneath the hedgerows and the
hay-ricks at night. Now the hips burned red in the tangled thickets and
the hews waxed black in the hedgerows, the stubble lay all crisp and
naked to the sky, and the green leaves were fast turning russet and
brown. Also, at this merry season, good things of the year are gathered
in in great store. Brown ale lies ripening in the cellar, hams and
bacon hang in the smoke-shed, and crabs are stowed away in the straw for
roasting in the wintertime, when the north wind piles the snow in drifts
around the gables and the fire crackles warm upon the hearth.

So passed the seasons then, so they pass now, and so they will pass in
time to come, while we come and go like leaves of the tree that fall and
are soon forgotten.


Quoth Robin Hood, snuffing the air, "Here is a fair day, Little John,
and one that we can ill waste in idleness. Choose such men as thou dost
need, and go thou east while I will wend to the west, and see that
each of us bringeth back some goodly guest to dine this day beneath the
greenwood tree."

"Marry," cried Little John, clapping his palms together for joy, "thy
bidding fitteth my liking like heft to blade. I'll bring thee back a
guest this day, or come not back mine own self."

Then they each chose such of the band as they wished, and so went forth
by different paths from the forest.

Now, you and I cannot go two ways at the same time while we join in
these merry doings; so we will e'en let Little John follow his own path
while we tuck up our skirts and trudge after Robin Hood. And here
is good company, too; Robin Hood, Will Scarlet, Allan a Dale, Will
Scathelock, Midge, the Miller's son, and others. A score or more of
stout fellows had abided in the forest, with Friar Tuck, to make ready
for the homecoming, but all the rest were gone either with Robin Hood or
Little John.

They traveled onward, Robin following his fancy and the others following
Robin. Now they wended their way through an open dale with cottage and
farm lying therein, and now again they entered woodlands once more.
Passing by fair Mansfield Town, with its towers and battlements and
spires all smiling in the sun, they came at last out of the forest
lands. Onward they journeyed, through highway and byway, through
villages where goodwives and merry lasses peeped through the casements
at the fine show of young men, until at last they came over beyond
Alverton in Derbyshire. By this time high noontide had come, yet they
had met no guest such as was worth their while to take back to Sherwood;
so, coming at last to a certain spot where a shrine stood at the
crossing of two roads, Robin called upon them to stop, for here on
either side was shelter of high hedgerows, behind which was good hiding,
whence they could watch the roads at their ease, while they ate their
midday meal. Quoth merry Robin, "Here, methinks, is good lodging, where
peaceful folk, such as we be, can eat in quietness; therefore we will
rest here, and see what may, perchance, fall into our luck-pot." So they
crossed a stile and came behind a hedgerow where the mellow sunlight was
bright and warm, and where the grass was soft, and there sat them down.
Then each man drew from the pouch that hung beside him that which he
had brought to eat, for a merry walk such as this had been sharpens
the appetite till it is as keen as a March wind. So no more words were
spoken, but each man saved his teeth for better use--munching at brown
crust and cold meat right lustily.

In front of them, one of the highroads crawled up the steep hill and
then dipped suddenly over its crest, sharp-cut with hedgerow and shaggy
grass against the sky. Over the top of the windy hill peeped the eaves
of a few houses of the village that fell back into the valley behind;
there, also, showed the top of a windmill, the sails slowly rising and
dipping from behind the hill against the clear blue sky, as the light
wind moved them with creaking and labored swing.

So the yeomen lay behind the hedge and finished their midday meal; but
still the time slipped along and no one came. At last, a man came slowly
riding over the hill and down the stony road toward the spot where Robin
and his band lay hidden. He was a good stout knight, but sorrowful of
face and downcast of mien. His clothes were plain and rich, but no chain
of gold, such as folk of his stand in life wore at most times, hung
around his neck, and no jewel was about him; yet no one could mistake
him for aught but one of proud and noble blood. His head was bowed upon
his breast and his hands drooped limp on either side; and so he came
slowly riding, as though sunk in sad thoughts, while even his good
horse, the reins loose upon his neck, walked with hanging head, as
though he shared his master's grief.

Quoth Robin Hood, "Yon is verily a sorry-looking gallant, and doth seem
to have donned ill-content with his jerkin this morning; nevertheless,
I will out and talk with him, for there may be some pickings here for
a hungry daw. Methinks his dress is rich, though he himself is so
downcast. Bide ye here till I look into this matter." So saying, he
arose and left them, crossed the road to the shrine, and there stood,
waiting for the sorrowful knight to come near him. So, presently, when
the knight came riding slowly along, jolly Robin stepped forward and
laid his hand upon the bridle rein. "Hold, Sir Knight," quoth he. "I
prythee tarry for a short time, for I have a few words to say to thee."

"What art thou, friend, who dost stop a traveler in this manner upon his
most gracious Majesty's highway?" said the Knight.

"Marry," quoth Robin, "that is a question hard to answer. One man
calleth me kind, another calleth me cruel; this one calleth me good
honest fellow, and that one, vile thief. Truly, the world hath as many
eyes to look upon a man withal as there are spots on a toad; so, with
what pair of eyes thou regardest me lieth entirely with thine own self.
My name is Robin Hood."

"Truly, good Robin," said the Knight, a smile twitching at the corners
of his mouth, "thou hast a quaint conceit. As for the pair of eyes with
which I regard thee, I would say that they are as favorable as may be,
for I hear much good of thee and little ill. What is thy will of me?"

"Now, I make my vow, Sir Knight," quoth Robin, "thou hast surely learned
thy wisdom of good Gaffer Swanthold, for he sayeth, 'Fair words are as
easy spoke as foul, and bring good will in the stead of blows.' Now I
will show thee the truth of this saying; for, if thou wilt go with me
this day to Sherwood Forest, I will give thee as merry a feast as ever
thou hadst in all thy life."

"Thou art indeed kind," said the Knight, "but methinks thou wilt find me
but an ill-seeming and sorrowful guest. Thou hadst best let me pass on
my way in peace."

"Nay," quoth Robin, "thou mightst go thine own way but for one thing,
and that I will tell thee. We keep an inn, as it were, in the very
depths of Sherwood, but so far from highroads and beaten paths that
guests do not often come nigh us; so I and my friends set off merrily
and seek them when we grow dull of ourselves. Thus the matter stands,
Sir Knight; yet I will furthermore tell thee that we count upon our
guests paying a reckoning."

"I take thy meaning, friend," said the Knight gravely, "but I am not thy
man, for I have no money by me."

"Is it sooth?" said Robin, looking at the Knight keenly. "I can scarce
choose but believe thee; yet, Sir Knight, there be those of thy order
whose word is not to be trusted as much as they would have others
believe. Thou wilt think no ill if I look for myself in this matter."
Then, still holding the horse by the bridle rein, he put his fingers
to his lips and blew a shrill whistle, whereupon fourscore yeomen came
leaping over the stile and ran to where the Knight and Robin stood.
"These," said Robin, looking upon them proudly, "are some of my merry
men. They share and share alike with me all joys and troubles, gains and
losses. Sir Knight, I prythee tell me what money thou hast about thee."

For a time the Knight said not a word, but a slow red arose into his
cheeks; at last he looked Robin in the face and said, "I know not why I
should be ashamed, for it should be no shame to me; but, friend, I tell
thee the truth, when I say that in my purse are ten shillings, and that
that is every groat that Sir Richard of the Lea hath in all the wide
world."

When Sir Richard ended a silence fell, until at last Robin said, "And
dost thou pledge me thy knightly word that this is all thou hast with
thee?"

"Yea," answered Sir Richard, "I do pledge thee my most solemn word, as a
true knight, that it is all the money I have in the world. Nay, here is
my purse, ye may find for yourselves the truth of what I say." And he
held his purse out to Robin.

"Put up thy purse, Sir Richard," quoth Robin. "Far be it from me to
doubt the word of so gentle a knight. The proud I strive to bring low,
but those that walk in sorrow I would aid if I could. Come, Sir Richard,
cheer up thy heart and go with us into the greenwood. Even I may
perchance aid thee, for thou surely knowest how the good Athelstane was
saved by the little blind mole that digged a trench over which he that
sought the king's life stumbled."

"Truly, friend," said Sir Richard, "methinks thou meanest kindness in
thine own way; nevertheless my troubles are such that it is not likely
that thou canst cure them. But I will go with thee this day into
Sherwood." Hereupon he turned his horse's head, and they all wended
their way to the woodlands, Robin walking on one side of the Knight and
Will Scarlet on the other, while the rest of the band trudged behind.

After they had traveled thus for a time Robin Hood spake. "Sir Knight,"
said he, "I would not trouble thee with idle questions; but dost thou
find it in thy heart to tell me thy sorrows?"

"Truly, Robin," quoth the Knight, "I see no reason why I should not do
so. Thus it is: My castle and my lands are in pawn for a debt that I
owe. Three days hence the money must be paid or else all mine estate is
lost forever, for then it falls into the hands of the Priory of Emmet,
and what they swallow they never give forth again."

Quoth Robin, "I understand not why those of thy kind live in such a
manner that all their wealth passeth from them like snow beneath the
springtide sun."

"Thou wrongest me, Robin," said the Knight, "for listen: I have a son
but twenty winters old, nevertheless he has won his spurs as knight.
Last year, on a certain evil day, the jousts were held at Chester, and
thither my son went, as did I and my lady wife. I wot it was a proud
time for us, for he unhorsed each knight that he tilted against. At last
he ran a course with a certain great knight, Sir Walter of Lancaster,
yet, though my son was so youthful, he kept his seat, albeit both spears
were shivered to the heft; but it happened that a splinter of my boy's
lance ran through the visor of Sir Walter's helmet and pierced through
his eye into his brain, so that he died ere his esquire could unlace his
helm. Now, Robin, Sir Walter had great friends at court, therefore
his kinsmen stirred up things against my son so that, to save him from
prison, I had to pay a ransom of six hundred pounds in gold. All might
have gone well even yet, only that, by ins and outs and crookedness of
laws, I was shorn like a sheep that is clipped to the quick. So it came
that I had to pawn my lands to the Priory of Emmet for more money, and
a hard bargain they drove with me in my hour of need. Yet I would have
thee understand I grieve so for my lands only because of my dear lady
wife."

"But where is thy son now?" asked Robin, who had listened closely to all
the Knight had said.

"In Palestine," said Sir Richard, "battling like a brave Christian
soldier for the cross and the holy sepulcher. Truly, England was an
ill place for him because of Sir Walter's death and the hate of the
Lancastrian's kinsmen."

"Truly," said Robin, much moved, "thine is a hard lot. But tell me, what
is owing to Emmet for thine estates?"

"Only four hundred pounds," said Sir Richard.

At this, Robin smote his thigh in anger. "O the bloodsuckers!" cried
he. "A noble estate to be forfeit for four hundred pounds! But what will
befall thee if thou dost lose thy lands, Sir Richard?"

"It is not mine own lot that doth trouble me in that case," said the
Knight, "but my dear lady's; for should I lose my land she will have
to betake herself to some kinsman and there abide in charity, which,
methinks, would break her proud heart. As for me, I will over the
salt sea, and so to Palestine to join my son in fight for the holy
sepulcher."

Then up spake Will Scarlet. "But hast thou no friend that will help thee
in thy dire need?"

"Never a man," said Sir Richard. "While I was rich enow at home, and had
friends, they blew great boasts of how they loved me. But when the oak
falls in the forest the swine run from beneath it lest they should be
smitten down also. So my friends have left me; for not only am I poor
but I have great enemies."

Then Robin said, "Thou sayst thou hast no friends, Sir Richard. I make
no boast, but many have found Robin Hood a friend in their troubles.
Cheer up, Sir Knight, I may help thee yet."

The Knight shook his head with a faint smile, but for all that, Robin's
words made him more blithe of heart, for in truth hope, be it never
so faint, bringeth a gleam into darkness, like a little rushlight that
costeth but a groat.

The day was well-nigh gone when they came near to the greenwood tree.
Even at a distance they saw by the number of men that Little John had
come back with some guest, but when they came near enough, whom should
they find but the Lord Bishop of Hereford! The good Bishop was in a fine
stew, I wot. Up and down he walked beneath the tree like a fox caught in
a hencoop. Behind him were three Black Friars standing close together in
a frightened group, like three black sheep in a tempest. Hitched to the
branches of the trees close at hand were six horses, one of them a
barb with gay trappings upon which the Bishop was wont to ride, and the
others laden with packs of divers shapes and kinds, one of which made
Robin's eyes glisten, for it was a box not overlarge, but heavily bound
with bands and ribs of iron.

When the Bishop saw Robin and those with him come into the open he
made as though he would have run toward the yeoman, but the fellow
that guarded the Bishop and the three friars thrust his quarterstaff in
front, so that his lordship was fain to stand back, though with frowning
brow and angry speech.

"Stay, my Lord Bishop," cried jolly Robin in a loud voice, when he saw
what had passed, "I will come to thee with all speed, for I would rather
see thee than any man in merry England." So saying, he quickened his
steps and soon came to where the Bishop stood fuming.

"How now," quoth the Bishop in a loud and angry voice, when Robin had so
come to him, "is this the way that thou and thy band treat one so high
in the church as I am? I and these brethren were passing peacefully
along the highroad with our pack horses, and a half score of men to
guard them, when up comes a great strapping fellow full seven feet high,
with fourscore or more men back of him, and calls upon me to
stop--me, the Lord Bishop of Hereford, mark thou! Whereupon my armed
guards--beshrew them for cowards!--straight ran away. But look ye; not
only did this fellow stop me, but he threatened me, saying that Robin
Hood would strip me as bare as a winter hedge. Then, besides all this,
he called me such vile names as 'fat priest,' 'man-eating bishop,'
'money-gorging usurer,' and what not, as though I were no more than a
strolling beggar or tinker."

At this, the Bishop glared like an angry cat, while even Sir Richard
laughed; only Robin kept a grave face. "Alas! my lord," said he, "that
thou hast been so ill-treated by my band! I tell thee truly that we
greatly reverence thy cloth. Little John, stand forth straightway."

At these words Little John came forward, twisting his face into a
whimsical look, as though he would say, "Ha' mercy upon me, good
master." Then Robin turned to the Bishop of Hereford and said, "Was this
the man who spake so boldly to Your Lordship?"

"Ay, truly it was the same," said the Bishop, "a naughty fellow, I wot.

"And didst thou, Little John," said Robin in a sad voice, "call his
lordship a fat priest?"

"Ay," said Little John sorrowfully.

"And a man-eating bishop?"

"Ay," said Little John, more sorrowfully than before.

"And a money-gorging usurer?"

"Ay," said Little John in so sorrowful a voice that it might have drawn
tears from the Dragon of Wentley.

"Alas, that these things should be!" said jolly Robin, turning to the
Bishop, "for I have ever found Little John a truthful man."

At this, a roar of laughter went up, whereat the blood rushed into the
Bishop's face till it was cherry red from crown to chin; but he said
nothing and only swallowed his words, though they well-nigh choked him.

"Nay, my Lord Bishop," said Robin, "we are rough fellows, but I trust
not such ill men as thou thinkest, after all. There is not a man here
that would harm a hair of thy reverence's head. I know thou art galled
by our jesting, but we are all equal here in the greenwood, for there
are no bishops nor barons nor earls among us, but only men, so thou must
share our life with us while thou dost abide here. Come, busk ye, my
merry men, and get the feast ready. Meantime, we will show our guests
our woodland sports."

So, while some went to kindle the fires for roasting meats, others ran
leaping to get their cudgels and longbows. Then Robin brought forward
Sir Richard of the Lea. "My Lord Bishop," said he, "here is another
guest that we have with us this day. I wish that thou mightest know
him better, for I and all my men will strive to honor you both at this
merrymaking."

"Sir Richard," said the Bishop in a reproachful tone, "methinks thou and
I are companions and fellow sufferers in this den of--" He was about to
say "thieves," but he stopped suddenly and looked askance at Robin Hood.

"Speak out, Bishop," quoth Robin, laughing. "We of Sherwood check not an
easy flow of words. 'Den of thieves' thou west about to say."

Quoth the Bishop, "Mayhap that was what I meant to say, Sir Richard; but
this I will say, that I saw thee just now laugh at the scurrilous jests
of these fellows. It would have been more becoming of thee, methinks, to
have checked them with frowns instead of spurring them on by laughter."

"I meant no harm to thee," said Sir Richard, "but a merry jest is a
merry jest, and I may truly say I would have laughed at it had it been
against mine own self."

But now Robin Hood called upon certain ones of his band who spread soft
moss upon the ground and laid deerskins thereon. Then Robin bade his
guests be seated, and so they all three sat down, some of the chief men,
such as Little John, Will Scarlet, Allan a Dale, and others, stretching
themselves upon the ground near by. Then a garland was set up at the
far end of the glade, and thereat the bowmen shot, and such shooting was
done that day as it would have made one's heart leap to see. And all the
while Robin talked so quaintly to the Bishop and the Knight that,
the one forgetting his vexation and the other his troubles, they both
laughed aloud again and again.

Then Allan a Dale came forth and tuned his harp, and all was hushed
around, and he sang in his wondrous voice songs of love, of war, of
glory, and of sadness, and all listened without a movement or a sound.
So Allan sang till the great round silver moon gleamed with its clear
white light amid the upper tangle of the mazy branches of the trees. At
last two fellows came to say that the feast was ready spread, so Robin,
leading his guests with either hand, brought them to where great smoking
dishes that sent savory smells far and near stood along the white linen
cloth spread on the grass. All around was a glare of torches that lit
everything up with a red light. Then, straightway sitting down, all fell
to with noise and hubbub, the rattling of platters blending with the
sound of loud talking and laughter. A long time the feast lasted, but at
last all was over, and the bright wine and humming ale passed briskly.
Then Robin Hood called aloud for silence, and all was hushed till he
spoke.

"I have a story to tell you all, so listen to what I have to say," quoth
he; whereupon, without more ado, he told them all about Sir Richard, and
how his lands were in pawn. But, as he went on, the Bishop's face, that
had erst been smiling and ruddy with merriment, waxed serious, and he
put aside the horn of wine he held in his hand, for he knew the story of
Sir Richard, and his heart sank within him with grim forebodings. Then,
when Robin Hood had done, he turned to the Bishop of Hereford. "Now, my
Lord Bishop," said he, "dost thou not think this is ill done of anyone,
much more of a churchman, who should live in humbleness and charity?"

To this the Bishop answered not a word but looked upon the ground with
moody eyes.

Quoth Robin, "Now, thou art the richest bishop in all England; canst
thou not help this needy brother?" But still the Bishop answered not a
word.

Then Robin turned to Little John, and quoth he, "Go thou and Will
Stutely and bring forth those five pack horses yonder." Whereupon the
two yeomen did as they were bidden, those about the cloth making room
on the green, where the light was brightest, for the five horses which
Little John and Will Stutely presently led forward.

"Who hath the score of the goods?" asked Robin Hood, looking at the
Black Friars.

Then up spake the smallest of all, in a trembling voice--an old man he
was, with a gentle, wrinkled face. "That have I; but, I pray thee, harm
me not."

"Nay," quoth Robin, "I have never harmed harmless man yet; but give it
to me, good father." So the old man did as he was bidden, and handed
Robin the tablet on which was marked down the account of the various
packages upon the horses. This Robin handed to Will Scarlet, bidding
him to read the same. So Will Scarlet, lifting his voice that all might
hear, began:

"Three bales of silk to Quentin, the mercer at Ancaster."

"That we touch not," quoth Robin, "for this Quentin is an honest fellow,
who hath risen by his own thrift." So the bales of silk were laid aside
unopened.

"One bale of silk velvet for the Abbey of Beaumont."

"What do these priests want of silk velvet?" quoth Robin. "Nevertheless,
though they need it not, I will not take all from them. Measure it off
into three lots, one to be sold for charity, one for us, and one for the
abbey." So this, too, was done as Robin Hood bade.

"Twoscore of great wax candles for the Chapel of Saint Thomas."

"That belongeth fairly to the chapel," quoth Robin, "so lay it to one
side. Far be it from us to take from the blessed Saint Thomas that which
belongeth to him." So this, also, was done according to Robin's bidding,
and the candles were laid to one side, along with honest Quentin's
unopened bales of silk. So the list was gone through with, and the goods
adjudged according to what Robin thought most fit. Some things were
laid aside untouched, and many were opened and divided into three equal
parts, for charity, for themselves, and for the owners. And now all the
ground in the torchlight was covered over with silks and velvets and
cloths of gold and cases of rich wines, and so they came to the last
line upon the tablet--"A box belonging to the Lord Bishop of Hereford."

At these words the Bishop shook as with a chill, and the box was set
upon the ground.

"My Lord Bishop, hast thou the key of this box?" asked Robin.

The Bishop shook his head.

"Go, Will Scarlet," said Robin, "thou art the strongest man here--bring
a sword straightway, and cut this box open, if thou canst." Then up rose
Will Scarlet and left them, coming back in a short time, bearing a great
two-handed sword. Thrice he smote that strong, ironbound box, and at the
third blow it burst open and a great heap of gold came rolling forth,
gleaming red in the light of the torches. At this sight a murmur went
all around among the band, like the sound of the wind in distant trees;
but no man came forward nor touched the money.

Quoth Robin, "Thou, Will Scarlet, thou, Allan a Dale, and thou, Little
John, count it over."

A long time it took to count all the money, and when it had been duly
scored up, Will Scarlet called out that there were fifteen hundred
golden pounds in all. But in among the gold they found a paper, and this
Will Scarlet read in a loud voice, and all heard that this money was
the rental and fines and forfeits from certain estates belonging to the
Bishopric of Hereford.

"My Lord Bishop," said Robin Hood, "I will not strip thee, as Little
John said, like a winter hedge, for thou shalt take back one third
of thy money. One third of it thou canst well spare to us for thy
entertainment and that of thy train, for thou art very rich; one third
of it thou canst better spare for charity, for, Bishop, I hear that thou
art a hard master to those beneath thee and a close hoarder of gains
that thou couldst better and with more credit to thyself give to charity
than spend upon thy own likings."

At this the Bishop looked up, but he could say never a word; yet he was
thankful to keep some of his wealth.

Then Robin turned to Sir Richard of the Lea, and quoth he, "Now, Sir
Richard, the church seemed like to despoil thee, therefore some of the
overplus of church gains may well be used in aiding thee. Thou shalt
take that five hundred pounds laid aside for people more in need than
the Bishop is, and shalt pay thy debts to Emmet therewith."

Sir Richard looked at Robin until something arose in his eyes that made
all the lights and the faces blur together. At last he said, "I thank
thee, friend, from my heart, for what thou doest for me; yet, think not
ill if I cannot take thy gift freely. But this I will do: I will take
the money and pay my debts, and in a year and a day hence will return it
safe either to thee or to the Lord Bishop of Hereford. For this I pledge
my most solemn knightly word. I feel free to borrow, for I know no man
that should be more bound to aid me than one so high in that church that
hath driven such a hard bargain." "Truly, Sir Knight," quoth Robin, "I
do not understand those fine scruples that weigh with those of thy kind;
but, nevertheless, it shall all be as thou dost wish. But thou hadst
best bring the money to me at the end of the year, for mayhap I may make
better use of it than the Bishop." Thereupon, turning to those near him,
he gave his orders, and five hundred pounds were counted out and tied up
in a leathern bag for Sir Richard. The rest of the treasure was divided,
and part taken to the treasurehouse of the band, and part put by with
the other things for the Bishop.

Then Sir Richard arose. "I cannot stay later, good friends," said he,
"for my lady will wax anxious if I come not home; so I crave leave to
depart."

Then Robin Hood and all his merry men arose, and Robin said, "We cannot
let thee go hence unattended, Sir Richard."

Then up spake Little John, "Good master, let me choose a score of stout
fellows from the band, and let us arm ourselves in a seemly manner
and so serve as retainers to Sir Richard till he can get others in our
stead."

"Thou hast spoken well, Little John, and it shall be done," said Robin.

Then up spake Will Scarlet, "Let us give him a golden chain to hang
about his neck, such as befits one of his blood, and also golden spurs
to wear at his heels."

Then Robin Hood said, "Thou hast spoken well, Will Scarlet, and it shall
be done."

Then up spake Will Stutely, "Let us give him yon bale of rich velvet
and yon roll of cloth of gold to take home to his noble lady wife as a
present from Robin Hood and his merry men all."

At this all clapped their hands for joy, and Robin said: "Thou hast well
spoken, Will Stutely, and it shall be done."

Then Sir Richard of the Lea looked all around and strove to speak, but
could scarcely do so for the feelings that choked him; at last he said
in a husky, trembling voice, "Ye shall all see, good friends, that Sir
Richard o' the Lea will ever remember your kindness this day. And if ye
be at any time in dire need or trouble, come to me and my lady, and the
walls of Castle Lea shall be battered down ere harm shall befall you.
I--" He could say nothing further, but turned hastily away.

But now Little John and nineteen stout fellows whom he had chosen for
his band, came forth all ready for the journey. Each man wore upon his
breast a coat of linked mail, and on his head a cap of steel, and at his
side a good stout sword. A gallant show they made as they stood all in a
row. Then Robin came and threw a chain of gold about Sir Richard's neck,
and Will Scarlet knelt and buckled the golden spurs upon his heel; and
now Little John led forward Sir Richard's horse, and the Knight mounted.
He looked down at Robin for a little time, then of a sudden stooped and
kissed his cheek. All the forest glades rang with the shout that went up
as the Knight and the yeomen marched off through the woodland with glare
of torches and gleam of steel, and so were gone.

Then up spake the Bishop of Hereford in a mournful voice, "I, too, must
be jogging, good fellow, for the night waxes late."

But Robin laid his hand upon the Bishop's arm and stayed him. "Be not so
hasty, Lord Bishop," said he. "Three days hence Sir Richard must pay his
debts to Emmet; until that time thou must be content to abide with me
lest thou breed trouble for the Knight. I promise thee that thou shalt
have great sport, for I know that thou art fond of hunting the dun deer.
Lay by thy mantle of melancholy, and strive to lead a joyous yeoman life
for three stout days. I promise thee thou shalt be sorry to go when the
time has come."

So the Bishop and his train abided with Robin for three days, and much
sport his lordship had in that time, so that, as Robin had said, when
the time had come for him to go he was sorry to leave the greenwood. At
the end of three days Robin set him free, and sent him forth from the
forest with a guard of yeomen to keep freebooters from taking what was
left of the packs and bundles.

But, as the Bishop rode away, he vowed within himself that he would
sometime make Robin rue the day that he stopped him in Sherwood.

But now we shall follow Sir Richard; so listen, and you shall hear what
befell him, and how he paid his debts at Emmet Priory, and likewise in
due season to Robin Hood.




How Sir Richard of the Lea Paid His Debts

THE LONG HIGHWAY stretched straight on, gray and dusty in the sun. On
either side were dikes full of water bordered by osiers, and far away
in the distance stood the towers of Emmet Priory with tall poplar trees
around.

Along the causeway rode a knight with a score of stout men-at-arms
behind him. The Knight was clad in a plain, long robe of gray serge,
gathered in at the waist with a broad leathern belt, from which hung
a long dagger and a stout sword. But though he was so plainly dressed
himself, the horse he rode was a noble barb, and its trappings were rich
with silk and silver bells.

So thus the band journeyed along the causeway between the dikes, till
at last they reached the great gate of Emmet Priory. There the Knight
called to one of his men and bade him knock at the porter's lodge with
the heft of his sword.

The porter was drowsing on his bench within the lodge, but at the knock
he roused himself and, opening the wicket, came hobbling forth and
greeted the Knight, while a tame starling that hung in a wicker cage
within piped out, "_In coelo quies! In coelo quies!_" such being the
words that the poor old lame porter had taught him to speak.

"Where is thy prior?" asked the Knight of the old porter.

"He is at meat, good knight, and he looketh for thy coming," quoth the
porter, "for, if I mistake not, thou art Sir Richard of the Lea."

"I am Sir Richard of the Lea; then I will go seek him forthwith," said
the Knight.

"But shall I not send thy horse to stable?" said the porter. "By Our
Lady, it is the noblest nag, and the best harnessed, that e'er I saw in
all my life before." And he stroked the horse's flank with his palm.

"Nay," quoth Sir Richard, "the stables of this place are not for me, so
make way, I prythee." So saying, he pushed forward, and, the gates being
opened, he entered the stony courtyard of the Priory, his men behind
him. In they came with rattle of steel and clashing of swords, and
ring of horses' feet on cobblestones, whereat a flock of pigeons that
strutted in the sun flew with flapping wings to the high eaves of the
round towers.


While the Knight was riding along the causeway to Emmet, a merry feast
was toward in the refectory there. The afternoon sun streamed in through
the great arched windows and lay in broad squares of light upon the
stone floor and across the board covered with a snowy linen cloth,
whereon was spread a princely feast. At the head of the table sat Prior
Vincent of Emmet all clad in soft robes of fine cloth and silk; on his
head was a black velvet cap picked out with gold, and around his neck
hung a heavy chain of gold, with a great locket pendant therefrom.
Beside him, on the arm of his great chair, roosted his favorite falcon,
for the Prior was fond of the gentle craft of hawking. On his right hand
sat the Sheriff of Nottingham in rich robes of purple all trimmed about
with fur, and on his left a famous doctor of law in dark and sober garb.
Below these sat the high cellarer of Emmet, and others chief among the
brethren.

Jest and laughter passed around, and all was as merry as merry could be.
The wizened face of the man of law was twisted into a wrinkled smile,
for in his pouch were fourscore golden angels that the Prior had paid
him in fee for the case betwixt him and Sir Richard of the Lea. The
learned doctor had been paid beforehand, for he had not overmuch trust
in the holy Vincent of Emmet.

Quoth the Sheriff of Nottingham, "But art thou sure, Sir Prior, that
thou hast the lands so safe?"

"Ay, marry," said Prior Vincent, smacking his lips after a deep draught
of wine, "I have kept a close watch upon him, albeit he was unawares of
the same, and I know right well that he hath no money to pay me withal."

"Ay, true," said the man of law in a dry, husky voice, "his land is
surely forfeit if he cometh not to pay; but, Sir Prior, thou must get a
release beneath his sign manual, or else thou canst not hope to hold the
land without trouble from him."

"Yea," said the Prior, "so thou hast told me ere now, but I know that
this knight is so poor that he will gladly sign away his lands for two
hundred pounds of hard money."

Then up spake the high cellarer, "Methinks it is a shame to so drive
a misfortunate knight to the ditch. I think it sorrow that the noblest
estate in Derbyshire should so pass away from him for a paltry five
hundred pounds. Truly, I--"

"How now," broke in the Prior in a quivering voice, his eyes glistening
and his cheeks red with anger, "dost thou prate to my very beard,
sirrah? By Saint Hubert, thou hadst best save thy breath to cool thy
pottage, else it may scald thy mouth."

"Nay," said the man of law smoothly, "I dare swear this same knight
will never come to settlement this day, but will prove recreant.
Nevertheless, we will seek some means to gain his lands from him, so
never fear."

But even as the doctor spoke, there came a sudden clatter of horses'
hoofs and a jingle of iron mail in the courtyard below. Then up spake
the Prior and called upon one of the brethren that sat below the salt,
and bade him look out of the window and see who was below, albeit he
knew right well it could be none but Sir Richard.

So the brother arose and went and looked, and he said, "I see below a
score of stout men-at-arms and a knight just dismounting from his
horse. He is dressed in long robes of gray which, methinks, are of poor
seeming; but the horse he rideth upon hath the richest coursing that
ever I saw. The Knight dismounts and they come this way, and are even
now below in the great hall."

"Lo, see ye there now," quoth Prior Vincent. "Here ye have a knight with
so lean a purse as scarce to buy him a crust of bread to munch, yet he
keeps a band of retainers and puts rich trappings upon his horse's hide,
while his own back goeth bare. Is it not well that such men should be
brought low?"

"But art thou sure," said the little doctor tremulously, "that this
knight will do us no harm? Such as he are fierce when crossed, and he
hath a band of naughty men at his heels. Mayhap thou hadst better give
an extension of his debt." Thus he spake, for he was afraid Sir Richard
might do him a harm.

"Thou needst not fear," said the Prior, looking down at the little man
beside him. "This knight is gentle and would as soon think of harming an
old woman as thee."

As the Prior finished, a door at the lower end of the refectory swung
open, and in came Sir Richard, with folded hands and head bowed upon his
breast. Thus humbly he walked slowly up the hall, while his men-at-arms
stood about the door. When he had come to where the Prior sat, he knelt
upon one knee. "Save and keep thee, Sir Prior," said he, "I am come to
keep my day."

Then the first word that the Prior said to him was "Hast thou brought my
money?"

"Alas! I have not so much as one penny upon my body," said the Knight;
whereat the Prior's eyes sparkled.

"Now, thou art a shrewd debtor, I wot," said he. Then, "Sir Sheriff, I
drink to thee."

But still the Knight kneeled upon the hard stones, so the Prior turned
to him again. "What wouldst thou have?" quoth he sharply.

At these words, a slow red mounted into the Knight's cheeks; but still
he knelt. "I would crave thy mercy," said he. "As thou hopest for
Heaven's mercy, show mercy to me. Strip me not of my lands and so reduce
a true knight to poverty."

"Thy day is broken and thy lands forfeit," said the man of law, plucking
up his spirits at the Knight's humble speech.

Quoth Sir Richard, "Thou man of law, wilt thou not befriend me in mine
hour of need?"

"Nay," said the other, "I hold with this holy Prior, who hath paid me my
fees in hard gold, so that I am bounder to him."

"Wilt thou not be my friend, Sir Sheriff?" said Sir Richard.

"Nay, 'fore Heaven," quoth the Sheriff of Nottingham, "this is no
business of mine, yet I will do what I may," and he nudged the Prior
beneath the cloth with his knee. "Wilt thou not ease him of some of his
debts, Sir Prior?"

At this the Prior smiled grimly. "Pay me three hundred pounds, Sir
Richard," said he, "and I will give thee quittance of thy debt."

"Thou knowest, Sir Prior, that it is as easy for me to pay four hundred
pounds as three hundred," said Sir Richard. "But wilt thou not give me
another twelvemonth to pay my debt?"

"Not another day," said the Prior sternly.

"And is this all thou wilt do for me?" asked the Knight.

"Now, out upon thee, false knight!" cried the Prior, bursting forth in
anger. "Either pay thy debt as I have said, or release thy land and get
thee gone from out my hall."

Then Sir Richard arose to his feet. "Thou false, lying priest!" said
he in so stern a voice that the man of law shrunk affrighted, "I am no
false knight, as thou knowest full well, but have even held my place
in the press and the tourney. Hast thou so little courtesy that thou
wouldst see a true knight kneel for all this time, or see him come into
thy hall and never offer him meat or drink?"

Then quoth the man of law in a trembling voice, "This is surely an
ill way to talk of matters appertaining to business; let us be mild in
speech. What wilt thou pay this knight, Sir Prior, to give thee release
of his land?"

"I would have given him two hundred pounds," quoth the Prior, "but since
he hath spoken so vilely to my teeth, not one groat over one hundred
pounds will he get."

"Hadst thou offered me a thousand pounds, false prior," said the Knight,
"thou wouldst not have got an inch of my land." Then turning to where
his men-at-arms stood near the door, he called, "Come hither," and
beckoned with his finger; whereupon the tallest of them all came forward
and handed him a long leathern bag. Sir Richard took the bag and shot
from it upon the table a glittering stream of golden money. "Bear in
mind, Sir Prior," said he, "that thou hast promised me quittance for
three hundred pounds. Not one farthing above that shalt thou get." So
saying, he counted out three hundred pounds and pushed it toward the
Prior.

But now the Prior's hands dropped at his sides and the Prior's head hung
upon his shoulder, for not only had he lost all hopes of the land,
but he had forgiven the Knight one hundred pounds of his debt and had
needlessly paid the man of law fourscore angels. To him he turned, and
quoth he, "Give me back my money that thou hast."

"Nay," cried the other shrilly, "it is but my fee that thou didst pay
me, and thou gettest it not back again." And he hugged his gown about
him.

"Now, Sir Prior," quoth Sir Richard, "I have held my day and paid all
the dues demanded of me; so, as there is no more betwixt us, I leave
this vile place straightway." So saying, he turned upon his heel and
strode away.

All this time the Sheriff had been staring with wide-open eyes and mouth
agape at the tall man-at-arms, who stood as though carved out of stone.
At last he gasped out, "Reynold Greenleaf!"

At this, the tall man-at-arms, who was no other than Little John,
turned, grinning, to the Sheriff. "I give thee good den, fair gossip,"
quoth he. "I would say, sweet Sheriff, that I have heard all thy pretty
talk this day, and it shall be duly told unto Robin Hood. So, farewell
for the nonce, till we meet again in Sherwood Forest." Then he, also,
turned and followed Sir Richard down the hall, leaving the Sheriff, all
pale and amazed, shrunk together upon his chair.

A merry feast it was to which Sir Richard came, but a sorry lot he left
behind him, and little hunger had they for the princely food spread
before them. Only the learned doctor was happy, for he had his fee.


Now a twelvemonth and a day passed since Prior Vincent of Emmet sat at
feast, and once more the mellow fall of another year had come. But the
year had brought great change, I wot, to the lands of Sir Richard of the
Lea; for, where before shaggy wild grasses grew upon the meadow lands,
now all stretch away in golden stubble, betokening that a rich and
plentiful crop had been gathered therefrom. A year had made a great
change in the castle, also, for, where were empty moats and the
crumbling of neglect, all was now orderly and well kept.

Bright shone the sun on battlement and tower, and in the blue air
overhead a Hock of clattering jackdaws flew around the gilded weather
vane and spire. Then, in the brightness of the morning, the drawbridge
fell across the moat with a rattle and clank of chains, the gate of the
castle swung slowly open, and a goodly array of steel-clad men-at-arms,
with a knight all clothed in chain mail, as white as frost on brier and
thorn of a winter morning, came flashing out from the castle courtyard.
In his hand the Knight held a great spear, from the point of which
fluttered a blood-red pennant as broad as the palm of one's hand. So
this troop came forth from the castle, and in the midst of them walked
three pack horses laden with parcels of divers shapes and kinds.

Thus rode forth good Sir Richard of the Lea to pay his debt to Robin
Hood this bright and merry morn. Along the highway they wended their
way, with measured tramp of feet and rattle and jingle of sword and
harness. Onward they marched till they came nigh to Denby, where, from
the top of a hill, they saw, over beyond the town, many gay flags and
streamers floating in the bright air. Then Sir Richard turned to the
man-at-arms nearest to him. "What is toward yonder at Denby today?"
quoth he.

"Please Your Worship," answered the man-at-arms, "a merry fair is held
there today, and a great wrestling match, to which many folk have come,
for a prize hath been offered of a pipe of red wine, a fair golden ring,
and a pair of gloves, all of which go to the best wrestler."

"Now, by my faith," quoth Sir Richard, who loved good manly sports right
well, "this will be a goodly thing to see. Methinks we have to stay a
little while on our journey, and see this merry sport." So he turned his
horse's head aside toward Denby and the fair, and thither he and his men
made their way.

There they found a great hubbub of merriment. Flags and streamers were
floating, tumblers were tumbling on the green, bagpipes were playing,
and lads and lasses were dancing to the music. But the crowd were
gathered most of all around a ring where the wrestling was going
forward, and thither Sir Richard and his men turned their steps.

Now when the judges of the wrestling saw Sir Richard coming and knew
who he was, the chief of them came down from the bench where he and the
others sat, and went to the Knight and took him by the hand, beseeching
him to come and sit with them and judge the sport. So Sir Richard got
down from his horse and went with the others to the bench raised beside
the ring.

Now there had been great doings that morning, for a certain yeoman named
Egbert, who came from Stoke over in Staffordshire, had thrown with ease
all those that came against him; but a man of Denby, well known through
all the countryside as William of the Scar, had been biding his time
with the Stoke man; so, when Egbert had thrown everyone else, stout
William leaped into the ring. Then a tough bout followed, and at last he
threw Egbert heavily, whereat there was a great shouting and shaking of
hands, for all the Denby men were proud of their wrestler.

When Sir Richard came, he found stout William, puffed up by the shouts
of his friends, walking up and down the ring, daring anyone to come and
try a throw with him. "Come one, come all!" quoth he. "Here stand I,
William of the Scar, against any man. If there is none in Derbyshire to
come against me, come all who will, from Nottingham, Stafford, or York,
and if I do not make them one and all root the ground with their noses
like swine in the forests, call me no more brave William the wrestler."

At this all laughed; but above all the laughter a loud voice was
heard to cry out, "Sin' thou talkest so big, here cometh one from
Nottinghamshire to try a fall with thee, fellow;" and straightway a tall
youth with a tough quarterstaff in his hand came pushing his way through
the crowd and at last leaped lightly over the rope into the ring. He
was not as heavy as stout William, but he was taller and broader in the
shoulders, and all his joints were well knit. Sir Richard looked upon
him keenly, then, turning to one of the judges, he said, "Knowest thou
who this youth is? Methinks I have seen him before."

"Nay," said the judge, "he is a stranger to me."

Meantime, without a word, the young man, laying aside his quarterstaff,
began to take off his jerkin and body clothing until he presently stood
with naked arms and body; and a comely sight he was when so bared to
the view, for his muscles were cut round and smooth and sharp like
swift-running water.

And now each man spat upon his hands and, clapping them upon his knees,
squatted down, watching the other keenly, so as to take the vantage of
him in the grip. Then like a flash they leaped together, and a great
shout went up, for William had gotten the better hold of the two. For
a short time they strained and struggled and writhed, and then stout
William gave his most cunning trip and throw, but the stranger met it
with greater skill than his, and so the trip came to nought. Then, of a
sudden, with a twist and a wrench, the stranger loosed himself, and he
of the scar found himself locked in a pair of arms that fairly made
his ribs crack. So, with heavy, hot breathing, they stood for a while
straining, their bodies all glistening with sweat, and great drops of
sweat trickling down their faces. But the stranger's hug was so close
that at last stout William's muscles softened under his grip, and he
gave a sob. Then the youth put forth all his strength and gave a sudden
trip with his heel and a cast over his right hip, and down stout William
went, with a sickening thud, and lay as though he would never move hand
nor foot again.

But now no shout went up for the stranger, but an angry murmur was heard
among the crowd, so easily had he won the match. Then one of the judges,
a kinsman to William of the Scar, rose with trembling lip and baleful
look. Quoth he, "If thou hath slain that man it will go ill with thee,
let me tell thee, fellow." But the stranger answered boldly, "He took
his chance with me as I took mine with him. No law can touch me to harm
me, even if I slew him, so that it was fairly done in the wrestling
ring."

"That we shall see," said the judge, scowling upon the youth, while once
more an angry murmur ran around the crowd; for, as I have said, the men
of Denby were proud of stout William of the Scar.

Then up spoke Sir Richard gently. "Nay," said he, "the youth is right;
if the other dieth, he dieth in the wrestling ring, where he took his
chance, and was cast fairly enow."

But in the meantime three men had come forward and lifted stout William
from the ground and found that he was not dead, though badly shaken
by his heavy fall. Then the chief judge rose and said, "Young man, the
prize is duly thine. Here is the red-gold ring, and here the gloves, and
yonder stands the pipe of wine to do with whatsoever thou dost list."

At this, the youth, who had donned his clothes and taken up his staff
again, bowed without a word, then, taking the gloves and the ring, and
thrusting the one into his girdle and slipping the other upon his
thumb, he turned and, leaping lightly over the ropes again, made his way
through the crowd, and was gone.

"Now, I wonder who yon youth may be," said the judge, turning to Sir
Richard, "he seemeth like a stout Saxon from his red cheeks and fair
hair. This William of ours is a stout man, too, and never have I seen
him cast in the ring before, albeit he hath not yet striven with such
great wrestlers as Thomas of Cornwall, Diccon of York, and young David
of Doncaster. Hath he not a firm foot in the ring, thinkest thou, Sir
Richard?"

"Ay, truly, and yet this youth threw him fairly, and with wondrous ease.
I much wonder who he can be." Thus said Sir Richard in a thoughtful
voice.

For a time the Knight stood talking to those about him, but at last
he arose and made ready to depart, so he called his men about him and,
tightening the girths of his saddle, he mounted his horse once more.

Meanwhile the young stranger had made his way through the crowd, but, as
he passed, he heard all around him such words muttered as "Look at the
cockerel!" "Behold how he plumeth himself!" "I dare swear he cast good
William unfairly!" "Yea, truly, saw ye not birdlime upon his hands?" "It
would be well to cut his cock's comb!" To all this the stranger paid no
heed, but strode proudly about as though he heard it not. So he walked
slowly across the green to where the booth stood wherein was dancing,
and standing at the door he looked in on the sport. As he stood thus, a
stone struck his arm of a sudden with a sharp jar, and, turning, he saw
that an angry crowd of men had followed him from the wrestling ring.
Then, when they saw him turn so, a great hooting and yelling arose from
all, so that the folk came running out from the dancing booth to see
what was to do. At last a tall, broad-shouldered, burly blacksmith
strode forward from the crowd swinging a mighty blackthorn club in his
hand.

"Wouldst thou come here to our fair town of Denby, thou Jack in the Box,
to overcome a good honest lad with vile, juggling tricks?" growled he in
a deep voice like the bellow of an angry bull. "Take that, then!" And of
a sudden he struck a blow at the youth that might have felled an ox.
But the other turned the blow deftly aside, and gave back another so
terrible that the Denby man went down with a groan, as though he had
been smitten by lightning. When they saw their leader fall, the crowd
gave another angry shout; but the stranger placed his back against the
tent near which he stood, swinging his terrible staff, and so fell had
been the blow that he struck the stout smith that none dared to come
within the measure of his cudgel, so the press crowded back, like a pack
of dogs from a bear at bay. But now some coward hand from behind threw
a sharp jagged stone that smote the stranger on the crown, so that he
staggered back, and the red blood gushed from the cut and ran down his
face and over his jerkin. Then, seeing him dazed with this vile blow,
the crowd rushed upon him, so that they overbore him and he fell beneath
their feet.

Now it might have gone ill with the youth, even to the losing of his
young life, had not Sir Richard come to this fair; for of a sudden,
shouts were heard, and steel flashed in the air, and blows were given
with the flat of swords, while through the midst of the crowd Sir
Richard of the Lea came spurring on his white horse. Then the crowd,
seeing the steel-clad knight and the armed men, melted away like snow
on the warm hearth, leaving the young man all bloody and dusty upon the
ground.

Finding himself free, the youth arose and, wiping the blood from his
face, looked up. Quoth he, "Sir Richard of the Lea, mayhap thou hast
saved my life this day."

"Who art thou that knowest Sir Richard of the Lea so well?" quoth the
Knight. "Methinks I have seen thy face before, young man."

"Yea, thou hast," said the youth, "for men call me David of Doncaster."

"Ha!" said Sir Richard, "I wonder that I knew thee not, David; but thy
beard hath grown longer, and thou thyself art more set in manhood since
this day twelvemonth. Come hither into the tent, David, and wash the
blood from thy face. And thou, Ralph, bring him straightway a clean
jerkin. Now I am sorry for thee, yet I am right glad that I have had
a chance to pay a part of my debt of kindness to thy good master Robin
Hood, for it might have gone ill with thee had I not come, young man."

So saying, the Knight led David into the tent, and there the youth
washed the blood from his face and put on the clean jerkin.

In the meantime a whisper had gone around from those that stood nearest
that this was none other than the great David of Doncaster, the best
wrestler in all the mid-country, who only last spring had cast stout
Adam o' Lincoln in the ring at Selby, in Yorkshire, and now held the
mid-country champion belt, Thus it happened that when young David came
forth from the tent along with Sir Richard, the blood all washed from
his face, and his soiled jerkin changed for a clean one, no sounds of
anger were heard, but all pressed forward to see the young man, feeling
proud that one of the great wrestlers of England should have entered the
ring at Denby fair. For thus fickle is a mass of men.

Then Sir Richard called aloud, "Friends, this is David of Doncaster; so
think it no shame that your Denby man was cast by such a wrestler. He
beareth you no ill will for what hath passed, but let it be a warning
to you how ye treat strangers henceforth. Had ye slain him it would have
been an ill day for you, for Robin Hood would have harried your town as
the kestrel harries the dovecote. I have bought the pipe of wine from
him, and now I give it freely to you to drink as ye list. But never
hereafterward fall upon a man for being a stout yeoman."

At this all shouted amain; but in truth they thought more of the wine
than of the Knight's words. Then Sir Richard, with David beside him and
his men-at-arms around, turned about and left the fair.

But in after days, when the men that saw that wrestling bout were bent
with age, they would shake their heads when they heard of any stalwart
game, and say, "Ay, ay; but thou shouldst have seen the great David of
Doncaster cast stout William of the Scar at Denby fair."

Robin Hood stood in the merry greenwood with Little John and most of his
stout yeomen around him, awaiting Sir Richard's coming. At last a glint
of steel was seen through the brown forest leaves, and forth from the
covert into the open rode Sir Richard at the head of his men. He came
straight forward to Robin Hood and leaping from off his horse, clasped
the yeoman in his arms.

"Why, how now," said Robin, after a time, holding Sir Richard off and
looking at him from top to toe, "methinks thou art a gayer bird than
when I saw thee last."

"Yes, thanks to thee, Robin," said the Knight, laying his hand upon the
yeoman's shoulder. "But for thee I would have been wandering in misery
in a far country by this time. But I have kept my word, Robin, and have
brought back the money that thou didst lend me, and which I have doubled
four times over again, and so become rich once more. Along with this
money I have brought a little gift to thee and thy brave men from my
dear lady and myself." Then, turning to his men, he called aloud, "Bring
forth the pack horses."

But Robin stopped him. "Nay, Sir Richard," said he, "think it not bold
of me to cross thy bidding, but we of Sherwood do no business till after
we have eaten and drunk." Whereupon, taking Sir Richard by the hand,
he led him to the seat beneath the greenwood tree, while others of the
chief men of the band came and seated themselves around. Then quoth
Robin, "How cometh it that I saw young David of Doncaster with thee and
thy men, Sir Knight?"

Then straightway the Knight told all about his stay at Denby and of the
happening at the fair, and how it was like to go hard with young David;
so he told his tale, and quoth he, "It was this, good Robin, that kept
me so late on the way, otherwise I would have been here an hour agone."

Then, when he had done speaking, Robin stretched out his hand and
grasped the Knight's palm. Quoth he in a trembling voice, "I owe thee
a debt I can never hope to repay, Sir Richard, for let me tell thee, I
would rather lose my right hand than have such ill befall young David of
Doncaster as seemed like to come upon him at Denby."

So they talked until after a while one came forward to say that the
feast was spread; whereupon all arose and went thereto. When at last
it was done, the Knight called upon his men to bring the pack horses
forward, which they did according to his bidding. Then one of the men
brought the Knight a strongbox, which he opened and took from it a bag
and counted out five hundred pounds, the sum he had gotten from Robin.

"Sir Richard," quoth Robin, "thou wilt pleasure us all if thou wilt keep
that money as a gift from us of Sherwood. Is it not so, my lads?"

Then all shouted "Ay" with a mighty voice.

"I thank you all deeply," said the Knight earnestly, "but think it not
ill of me if I cannot take it. Gladly have I borrowed it from you, but
it may not be that I can take it as a gift."

Then Robin Hood said no more but gave the money to Little John to put
away in the treasury, for he had shrewdness enough to know that nought
breeds ill will and heart bitterness like gifts forced upon one that
cannot choose but take them.

Then Sir Richard had the packs laid upon the ground and opened,
whereupon a great shout went up that made the forest ring again, for lo,
there were tenscore bows of finest Spanish yew, all burnished till they
shone again, and each bow inlaid with fanciful figures in silver, yet
not inlaid so as to mar their strength. Beside these were tenscore
quivers of leather embroidered with golden thread, and in each quiver
were a score of shafts with burnished heads that shone like silver; each
shaft was feathered with peacock's plumes, innocked with silver.

Sir Richard gave to each yeoman a bow and a quiver of arrows, but to
Robin he gave a stout bow inlaid with the cunningest workmanship in
gold, while each arrow in his quiver was innocked with gold.

Then all shouted again for joy of the fair gift, and all swore among
themselves that they would die if need be for Sir Richard and his lady.

At last the time came when Sir Richard must go, whereupon Robin Hood
called his band around him, and each man of the yeomen took a torch in
his hand to light the way through the woodlands. So they came to the
edge of Sherwood, and there the Knight kissed Robin upon the cheeks and
left him and was gone.

Thus Robin Hood helped a noble knight out of his dire misfortunes, that
else would have smothered the happiness from his life.




Little John Turns Barefoot Friar

COLD WINTER had passed and spring had come. No leafy thickness had yet
clad the woodlands, but the budding leaves hung like a tender mist about
the trees. In the open country the meadow lands lay a sheeny green, the
cornfields a dark velvety color, for they were thick and soft with
the growing blades. The plowboy shouted in the sun, and in the purple
new-turned furrows flocks of birds hunted for fat worms. All the broad
moist earth smiled in the warm light, and each little green hill clapped
its hand for joy.

On a deer's hide, stretched on the ground in the open in front of the
greenwood tree, sat Robin Hood basking in the sun like an old dog fox.
Leaning back with his hands clasped about his knees, he lazily watched
Little John rolling a stout bowstring from long strands of hempen
thread, wetting the palms of his hands ever and anon, and rolling the
cord upon his thigh. Near by sat Allan a Dale fitting a new string to
his harp.

Quoth Robin at last, "Methinks I would rather roam this forest in the
gentle springtime than be King of all merry England. What palace in the
broad world is as fair as this sweet woodland just now, and what king in
all the world hath such appetite for plover's eggs and lampreys as I for
juicy venison and sparkling ale? Gaffer Swanthold speaks truly when he
saith, 'Better a crust with content than honey with a sour heart.'"

"Yea," quoth Little John, as he rubbed his new-made bowstring with
yellow beeswax, "the life we lead is the life for me. Thou speakest of
the springtime, but methinks even the winter hath its own joys. Thou and
I, good master, have had more than one merry day, this winter past, at
the Blue Boar. Dost thou not remember that night thou and Will Stutely
and Friar Tuck and I passed at that same hostelry with the two beggars
and the strolling friar?"

"Yea," quoth merry Robin, laughing, "that was the night that Will
Stutely must needs snatch a kiss from the stout hostess, and got a
canakin of ale emptied over his head for his pains."

"Truly, it was the same," said Little John, laughing also. "Methinks
that was a goodly song that the strolling friar sang. Friar Tuck, thou
hast a quick ear for a tune, dost thou not remember it?"

"I did have the catch of it one time," said Tuck. "Let me see," and he
touched his forefinger to his forehead in thought, humming to himself,
and stopping ever and anon to fit what he had got to what he searched
for in his mind. At last he found it all and clearing his throat, sang
merrily:

     "_In the blossoming hedge the robin cock sings,
     For the sun it is merry and bright,
     And he joyfully hops and he flutters his wings,
     For his heart is all full of delight.
     For the May bloometh fair,
     And there's little of care,
     And plenty to eat in the Maytime rare.
     When the flowers all die,
     Then off he will fly,
     To keep himself warm
     In some jolly old barn
     Where the snow and the wind neither chill him nor harm.

     "And such is the life of the strolling friar,
     With aplenty to eat and to drink;
     For the goodwife will keep him a seat by the fire,
     And the pretty girls smile at his wink.
     Then he lustily trolls
     As he onward strolls,
     A rollicking song for the saving of souls.
     When the wind doth blow,
     With the coming of snow,
     There's a place by the fire
     For the fatherly friar,
     And a crab in the bowl for his heart's desire_."

Thus Friar Tuck sang in a rich and mellow voice, rolling his head from
side to side in time with the music, and when he had done, all clapped
their hands and shouted with laughter, for the song fitted him well.

"In very sooth," quoth Little John, "it is a goodly song, and, were I
not a yeoman of Sherwood Forest, I had rather be a strolling friar than
aught else in the world."

"Yea, it is a goodly song," said Robin Hood, "but methought those two
burly beggars told the merrier tales and led the merrier life. Dost thou
not remember what that great black-bearded fellow told of his begging at
the fair in York?"

"Yea," said Little John, "but what told the friar of the harvest home in
Kentshire? I hold that he led a merrier life than the other two."

"Truly, for the honor of the cloth," quoth Friar Tuck, "I hold with my
good gossip, Little John."

"Now," quoth Robin, "I hold to mine own mind. But what sayst thou,
Little John, to a merry adventure this fair day? Take thou a friar's
gown from our chest of strange garments, and don the same, and I will
stop the first beggar I meet and change clothes with him. Then let us
wander the country about, this sweet day, and see what befalls each of
us."

"That fitteth my mind," quoth Little John, "so let us forth, say I."

Thereupon Little John and Friar Tuck went to the storehouse of the band,
and there chose for the yeoman the robe of a Gray Friar. Then they came
forth again, and a mighty roar of laughter went up, for not only had the
band never seen Little John in such guise before, but the robe was too
short for him by a good palm's-breadth. But Little John's hands were
folded in his loose sleeves, and Little John's eyes were cast upon the
ground, and at his girdle hung a great, long string of beads.

And now Little John took up his stout staff, at the end of which hung
a chubby little leathern pottle, such as palmers carry at the tips of
their staves; but in it was something, I wot, more like good Malmsey
than cold spring water, such as godly pilgrims carry. Then up rose Robin
and took his stout staff in his hand, likewise, and slipped ten golden
angels into his pouch; for no beggar's garb was among the stores of the
band, so he was fain to run his chance of meeting a beggar and buying
his clothes of him.

So, all being made ready, the two yeomen set forth on their way,
striding lustily along all in the misty morning. Thus they walked down
the forest path until they came to the highway, and then along the
highway till it split in twain, leading on one hand to Blyth and on the
other to Gainsborough. Here the yeomen stopped.

Quoth jolly Robin, "Take thou the road to Gainsborough, and I will take
that to Blyth. So, fare thee well, holy father, and mayst thou not ha'
cause to count thy beads in earnest ere we meet again."

"Good den, good beggar that is to be," quoth Little John, "and mayst
thou have no cause to beg for mercy ere I see thee next."

So each stepped sturdily upon his way until a green hill rose between
them, and the one was hid from the sight of the other.

Little John walked along, whistling, for no one was nigh upon all the
road. In the budding hedges the little birds twittered merrily, and on
either hand the green hills swept up to the sky, the great white clouds
of springtime sailing slowly over their crowns in lazy flight. Up hill
and down dale walked Little John, the fresh wind blowing in his face and
his robes fluttering behind him, and so at last he came to a crossroad
that led to Tuxford. Here he met three pretty lasses, each bearing a
basket of eggs to market. Quoth he, "Whither away, fair maids?" And he
stood in their path, holding his staff in front of them, to stop them.

Then they huddled together and nudged one another, and one presently
spake up and said, "We are going to the Tuxford market, holy friar, to
sell our eggs."

"Now out upon it!" quoth Little John, looking upon them with his head on
one side. "Surely, it is a pity that such fair lasses should be forced
to carry eggs to market. Let me tell you, an I had the shaping of things
in this world, ye should all three have been clothed in the finest
silks, and ride upon milk-white horses, with pages at your side, and
feed upon nothing but whipped cream and strawberries; for such a life
would surely befit your looks."

At this speech all three of the pretty maids looked down, blushing and
simpering. One said, "La!" another, "Marry, a' maketh sport of us!" and
the third, "Listen, now, to the holy man!" But at the same time they
looked at Little John from out the corners of their eyes.

"Now, look you," said Little John, "I cannot see such dainty damsels
as ye are carrying baskets along a highroad. Let me take them mine own
self, and one of you, if ye will, may carry my staff for me."

"Nay," said one of the lasses, "but thou canst not carry three baskets
all at one time."

"Yea, but I can," said Little John, "and that I will show you presently.
I thank the good Saint Wilfred that he hath given me a pretty wit. Look
ye, now. Here I take this great basket, so; here I tie my rosary around
the handle, thus; and here I slip the rosary over my head and sling the
basket upon my back, in this wise." And Little John did according to his
words, the basket hanging down behind him like a peddler's pack; then,
giving his staff to one of the maids, and taking a basket upon either
arm, he turned his face toward Tuxford Town and stepped forth merrily, a
laughing maid on either side, and one walking ahead, carrying the staff.
In this wise they journeyed along, and everyone they met stopped and
looked after them, laughing, for never had anybody seen such a merry
sight as this tall, strapping Gray Friar, with robes all too short for
him, laden with eggs, and tramping the road with three pretty lasses.
For this Little John cared not a whit, but when such folks gave jesting
words to him he answered back as merrily, speech for speech.

So they stepped along toward Tuxford, chatting and laughing, until
they came nigh to the town. Here Little John stopped and set down
the baskets, for he did not care to go into the town lest he should,
perchance, meet some of the Sheriff's men. "Alas! sweet chucks," quoth
he, "here I must leave you. I had not thought to come this way, but I am
glad that I did so. Now, ere we part, we must drink sweet friendship."
So saying, he unslung the leathern pottle from the end of his staff,
and, drawing the stopper therefrom, he handed it to the lass who had
carried his staff, first wiping the mouth of the pottle upon his sleeve.
Then each lass took a fair drink of what was within, and when it had
passed all around, Little John finished what was left, so that not
another drop could be squeezed from it. Then, kissing each lass sweetly,
he wished them all good den, and left them. But the maids stood looking
after him as he walked away whistling. "What a pity," quoth one, "that
such a stout, lusty lad should be in holy orders."

"Marry," quoth Little John to himself, as he strode along, "yon was no
such ill happening; Saint Dunstan send me more of the like."

After he had trudged along for a time he began to wax thirsty again in
the warmth of the day. He shook his leathern pottle beside his ear, but
not a sound came therefrom. Then he placed it to his lips and tilted it
high aloft, but not a drop was there. "Little John! Little John!" said
he sadly to himself, shaking his head the while, "woman will be thy ruin
yet, if thou dost not take better care of thyself."

But at last he reached the crest of a certain hill, and saw below a
sweet little thatched inn lying snugly in the dale beneath him, toward
which the road dipped sharply. At the sight of this, a voice within him
cried aloud, "I give thee joy, good friend, for yonder is thy heart's
delight, to wit, a sweet rest and a cup of brown beer." So he quickened
his pace down the hill and so came to the little inn, from which hung a
sign with a stag's head painted upon it. In front of the door a clucking
hen was scratching in the dust with a brood of chickens about her heels,
the sparrows were chattering of household affairs under the eaves, and
all was so sweet and peaceful that Little John's heart laughed within
him. Beside the door stood two stout cobs with broad soft-padded
saddles, well fitted for easy traveling, and speaking of rich guests
in the parlor. In front of the door three merry fellows, a tinker, a
peddler, and a beggar, were seated on a bench in the sun quaffing stout
ale.

"I give you good den, sweet friends," quoth Little John, striding up to
where they sat.

"Give thee good den, holy father," quoth the merry Beggar with a grin.
"But look thee, thy gown is too short. Thou hadst best cut a piece off
the top and tack it to the bottom, so that it may be long enough. But
come, sit beside us here and take a taste of ale, if thy vows forbid
thee not."

"Nay," quoth Little John, also grinning, "the blessed Saint Dunstan hath
given me a free dispensation for all indulgence in that line." And he
thrust his hand into his pouch for money to pay his score.

"Truly," quoth the Tinker, "without thy looks belie thee, holy friar,
the good Saint Dunstan was wise, for without such dispensation his
votary is like to ha' many a penance to make. Nay, take thy hand from
out thy pouch, brother, for thou shalt not pay this shot. Ho, landlord,
a pot of ale!"

So the ale was brought and given to Little John. Then, blowing the froth
a little way to make room for his lips, he tilted the bottom of the pot
higher and higher, till it pointed to the sky, and he had to shut his
eyes to keep the dazzle of the sunshine out of them. Then he took the
pot away, for there was nothing in it, and heaved a full deep sigh,
looking at the others with moist eyes and shaking his head solemnly.

"Ho, landlord!" cried the Peddler, "bring this good fellow another pot
of ale, for truly it is a credit to us all to have one among us who can
empty a canakin so lustily."

So they talked among themselves merrily, until after a while quoth
Little John, "Who rideth those two nags yonder?"

"Two holy men like thee, brother," quoth the Beggar. "They are now
having a goodly feast within, for I smelled the steam of a boiled
pullet just now. The landlady sayeth they come from Fountain Abbey, in
Yorkshire, and go to Lincoln on matters of business."

"They are a merry couple," said the Tinker, "for one is as lean as an
old wife's spindle, and the other as fat as a suet pudding."

"Talking of fatness," said the Peddler, "thou thyself lookest none too
ill-fed, holy friar."

"Nay, truly," said Little John, "thou seest in me what the holy Saint
Dunstan can do for them that serve him upon a handful of parched peas
and a trickle of cold water."

At this a great shout of laughter went up. "Truly, it is a wondrous
thing," quoth the Beggar, "I would have made my vow, to see the masterly
manner in which thou didst tuck away yon pot of ale, that thou hadst not
tasted clear water for a brace of months. Has not this same holy Saint
Dunstan taught thee a goodly song or two?"

"Why, as for that," quoth Little John, grinning, "mayhap he hath lent me
aid to learn a ditty or so."

"Then, prythee, let us hear how he hath taught thee," quoth the Tinker.

At this Little John cleared his throat and, after a word or two about a
certain hoarseness that troubled him, sang thus:

     "_Ah, pretty, pretty maid, whither dost thou go?
     I prythee, prythee, wait for thy lover also,
     And we'll gather the rose
     As it sweetly blows,
     For the merry, merry winds are blo-o-o-wing_."

Now it seemed as though Little John's songs were never to get sung, for
he had got no farther than this when the door of the inn opened and out
came the two brothers of Fountain Abbey, the landlord following them,
and, as the saying is, washing his hands with humble soap. But when the
brothers of Fountain Abbey saw who it was that sang, and how he was
clad in the robes of a Gray Friar, they stopped suddenly, the fat little
Brother drawing his heavy eyebrows together in a mighty frown, and the
thin Brother twisting up his face as though he had sour beer in his
mouth. Then, as Little John gathered his breath for a new verse, "How,
now," roared forth the fat Brother, his voice coming from him like loud
thunder from a little cloud, "thou naughty fellow, is this a fit place
for one in thy garb to tipple and sing profane songs?"

"Nay," quoth Little John, "sin' I cannot tipple and sing, like Your
Worship's reverence, in such a goodly place as Fountain Abbey, I must
e'en tipple and sing where I can."

"Now, out upon thee," cried the tall lean Brother in a harsh voice,
"now, out upon thee, that thou shouldst so disgrace thy cloth by this
talk and bearing."

"Marry, come up!" quoth Little John. "Disgrace, sayest thou? Methinks it
is more disgrace for one of our garb to wring hard-earned farthings out
of the gripe of poor lean peasants. It is not so, brother?"

At this the Tinker and the Peddler and the Beggar nudged one another,
and all grinned, and the friars scowled blackly at Little John; but they
could think of nothing further to say, so they turned to their horses.
Then Little John arose of a sudden from the bench where he sat, and ran
to where the brothers of Fountain Abbey were mounting. Quoth he, "Let
me hold your horses' bridles for you. Truly, your words have smitten my
sinful heart, so that I will abide no longer in this den of evil, but
will go forward with you. No vile temptation, I wot, will fall upon me
in such holy company."

"Nay, fellow," said the lean Brother harshly, for he saw that Little
John made sport of them, "we want none of thy company, so get thee
gone."

"Alas," quoth Little John, "I am truly sorry that ye like me not nor
my company, but as for leaving you, it may not be, for my heart is so
moved, that, willy-nilly, I must go with you for the sake of your holy
company."

Now, at this talk all the good fellows on the bench grinned till their
teeth glistened, and even the landlord could not forbear to smile. As
for the friars, they looked at one another with a puzzled look, and knew
not what to do in the matter. They were so proud that it made them feel
sick with shame to think of riding along the highroad with a strolling
friar, in robes all too short for him, running beside them, but yet they
could not make Little John stay against his will, for they knew he could
crack the bones of both of them in a twinkling were he so minded. Then
up spake the fat Brother more mildly than he had done before. "Nay, good
brother," said he, "we will ride fast, and thou wilt tire to death at
the pace."

"Truly, I am grateful to thee for the thought of me," quoth Little John,
"but have no fear, brother; my limbs are stout, and I could run like a
hare from here to Gainsborough."

At these words a sound of laughing came from the bench, whereat the lean
Brother's wrath boiled over, like water into the fire, with great fuss
and noise. "Now, out upon thee, thou naughty fellow!" he cried. "Art
thou not ashamed to bring disgrace so upon our cloth? Bide thee here,
thou sot, with these porkers. Thou art no fit company for us."

"La, ye there now!" quoth Little John. "Thou hearest, landlord; thou art
not fit company for these holy men; go back to thine alehouse. Nay, if
these most holy brothers of mine do but give me the word, I'll beat thy
head with this stout staff till it is as soft as whipped eggs."

At these words a great shout of laughter went up from those on the
bench, and the landlord's face grew red as a cherry from smothering his
laugh in his stomach; but he kept his merriment down, for he wished
not to bring the ill-will of the brothers of Fountain Abbey upon him
by unseemly mirth. So the two brethren, as they could do nought else,
having mounted their nags, turned their noses toward Lincoln and rode
away.

"I cannot stay longer, sweet friends," quoth Little John, as he pushed
in betwixt the two cobs, "therefore I wish you good den. Off we go,
we three." So saying, he swung his stout staff over his shoulder and
trudged off, measuring his pace with that of the two nags.

The two brothers glowered at Little John when he so pushed himself
betwixt them, then they drew as far away from him as they could, so
that the yeoman walked in the middle of the road, while they rode on the
footpath on either side of the way. As they so went away, the Tinker,
the Peddler, and the Beggar ran skipping out into the middle of the
highway, each with a pot in his hand, and looked after them laughing.

While they were in sight of those at the inn, the brothers walked their
horses soberly, not caring to make ill matters worse by seeming to run
away from Little John, for they could not but think how it would sound
in folks' ears when they heard how the brethren of Fountain Abbey
scampered away from a strolling friar, like the Ugly One, when the
blessed Saint Dunstan loosed his nose from the red-hot tongs where he
had held it fast; but when they had crossed the crest of the hill and
the inn was lost to sight, quoth the fat Brother to the thin Brother,
"Brother Ambrose, had we not better mend our pace?"

"Why truly, gossip," spoke up Little John, "methinks it would be well to
boil our pot a little faster, for the day is passing on. So it will not
jolt thy fat too much, onward, say I."

At this the two friars said nothing, but they glared again on Little
John with baleful looks; then, without another word, they clucked to
their horses, and both broke into a canter. So they galloped for a mile
and more, and Little John ran betwixt them as lightly as a stag and
never turned a hair with the running. At last the fat Brother drew his
horse's rein with a groan, for he could stand the shaking no longer.
"Alas," said Little John, with not so much as a catch in his breath, "I
did sadly fear that the roughness of this pace would shake thy poor old
fat paunch."

To this the fat Friar said never a word, but he stared straight before
him, and he gnawed his nether lip. And now they traveled forward more
quietly, Little John in the middle of the road whistling merrily to
himself, and the two friars in the footpath on either side saying never
a word.

Then presently they met three merry minstrels, all clad in red, who
stared amain to see a Gray Friar with such short robes walking in the
middle of the road, and two brothers with heads bowed with shame,
riding upon richly caparisoned cobs on the footpaths. When they had
come near to the minstrels, Little John waved his staff like an usher
clearing the way. "Make way!" he cried in a loud voice. "Make way! make
way! For here we go, we three!" Then how the minstrels stared, and how
they laughed! But the fat Friar shook as with an ague, and the lean
Friar bowed his head over his horse's neck.

Then next they met two noble knights in rich array, with hawk on wrist,
and likewise two fair ladies clad in silks and velvets, all a-riding on
noble steeds. These all made room, staring, as Little John and the two
friars came along the road. To them Little John bowed humbly. "Give you
greetings, lords and ladies," said he. "But here we go, we three."

Then all laughed, and one of the fair ladies cried out, "What three
meanest thou, merry friend?"

Little John looked over his shoulder, for they had now passed each
other, and he called back, "Big Jack, lean Jack and fat Jack-pudding."

At this the fat Friar gave a groan and seemed as if he were like to fall
from his saddle for shame; the other brother said nothing, but he looked
before him with a grim and stony look.

Just ahead of them the road took a sudden turn around a high hedge, and
some twoscore paces beyond the bend another road crossed the one they
were riding upon. When they had come to the crossroad and were well away
from those they had left, the lean Friar drew rein suddenly. "Look ye,
fellow," quoth he in a voice quivering with rage, "we have had enough
of thy vile company, and care no longer to be made sport of. Go thy way,
and let us go ours in peace."

"La there, now!" quoth Little John. "Methought we were such a merry
company, and here thou dost blaze up like fat in the pan. But truly, I
ha' had enow of you today, though I can ill spare your company. I know
ye will miss me, but gin ye want me again, whisper to Goodman Wind, and
he will bring news thereof to me. But ye see I am a poor man and ye are
rich. I pray you give me a penny or two to buy me bread and cheese at
the next inn."

"We have no money, fellow," said the lean Friar harshly. "Come, Brother
Thomas, let us forward."

But Little John caught the horses by the bridle reins, one in either
hand. "Ha' ye in truth no money about you whatsoever?" said he. "Now, I
pray you, brothers, for charity's sake, give me somewhat to buy a crust
of bread, e'en though it be only a penny."

"I tell thee, fellow, we have no money," thundered the fat little Friar
with the great voice.

"Ha' ye, in holy truth, no money?" asked Little John.

"Not a farthing," said the lean Friar sourly.

"Not a groat," said the fat Friar loudly.

"Nay," quoth Little John, "this must not be. Far be it from me to see
such holy men as ye are depart from me with no money. Get both of you
down straightway from off your horses, and we will kneel here in the
middle of the crossroads and pray the blessed Saint Dunstan to send us
some money to carry us on our journey."

"What sayest thou, thou limb of evil!" cried the lean Friar, fairly
gnashing his teeth with rage. "Doss thou bid me, the high cellarer of
Fountain Abbey, to get down from my horse and kneel in the dirty road to
pray to some beggarly Saxon saint?"

"Now," quoth Little John, "I ha' a great part of a mind to crack thy
head for thee for speaking thus of the good Saint Dunstan! But get down
straightway, for my patience will not last much longer, and I may forget
that ye are both in holy orders." So saying, he twirled his stout staff
till it whistled again.

At this speech both friars grew as pale as dough. Down slipped the
fat Brother from off his horse on one side, and down slipped the lean
Brother on the other.

"Now, brothers, down on your knees and pray," said Little John;
thereupon, putting his heavy hands upon the shoulder of each, he forced
them to their knees, he kneeling also. Then Little John began to beseech
Saint Dunstan for money, which he did in a great loud voice. After he
had so besought the Saint for a time, he bade the friars feel in their
pouches and see if the Saint had sent them anything; so each put his
hand slowly in the pouch that hung beside him, but brought nothing
thence.

"Ha!" quoth Little John, "have your prayers so little virtue? Then let
us at it again." Then straightway he began calling on Saint Dunstan
again, somewhat in this wise: "O gracious Saint Dunstan! Send some money
straightway to these poor folk, lest the fat one waste away and grow as
lean as the lean one, and the lean one waste away to nothing at all, ere
they get to Lincoln Town; but send them only ten shillings apiece, lest
they grow puffed up with pride, Any more than that that thou sendest,
send to me.

"Now," quoth he, rising, "let us see what each man hath." Then he thrust
his hand into his pouch and drew thence four golden angels. "What have
ye, brothers?" said he.

Then once again each friar slowly thrust his hand into his pouch, and
once again brought it out with nothing in it.

"Have ye nothing?" quoth Little John. "Nay, I warrant there is somewhat
that hath crept into the seams of your pouches, and so ye ha' missed it.
Let me look."

So he went first to the lean Friar, and, thrusting his hand into the
pouch, he drew forth a leathern bag and counted therefrom one hundred
and ten pounds of golden money. "I thought," quoth Little John, "that
thou hadst missed, in some odd corner of thy pouch, the money that the
blessed Saint had sent thee. And now let me see whether thou hast not
some, also, brother." Thereupon he thrust his hand into the pouch of the
fat Friar and drew thence a bag like the other and counted out from it
threescore and ten pounds. "Look ye now," quoth he, "I knew the good
Saint had sent thee some pittance that thou, also, hadst missed."

Then, giving them one pound between them, he slipped the rest of the
money into his own pouch, saying, "Ye pledged me your holy word that ye
had no money. Being holy men, I trust that ye would not belie your word
so pledged, therefore I know the good Saint Dunstan hath sent this in
answer to my prayers. But as I only prayed for ten shillings to be sent
to each of you, all over and above that belongeth by rights to me, and
so I take it. I give you good den, brothers, and may ye have a pleasant
journey henceforth." So saying, he turned and left them, striding away.
The friars looked at one another with a woeful look, and slowly and
sadly they mounted their horses again and rode away with never a word.

But Little John turned his footsteps back again to Sherwood Forest, and
merrily he whistled as he strode along.

And now we will see what befell Robin Hood in his venture as beggar.




Robin Hood Turns Beggar

AFTER JOLLY ROBIN had left Little John at the forking of the roads, he
walked merrily onward in the mellow sunshine that shone about him.
Ever and anon he would skip and leap or sing a snatch of song, for pure
joyousness of the day; for, because of the sweetness of the springtide,
his heart was as lusty within him as that of a colt newly turned out
to grass. Sometimes he would walk a long distance, gazing aloft at the
great white swelling clouds that moved slowly across the deep blue sky;
anon he would stop and drink in the fullness of life of all things, for
the hedgerows were budding tenderly and the grass of the meadows was
waxing long and green; again he would stand still and listen to the
pretty song of the little birds in the thickets or hearken to the clear
crow of the cock daring the sky to rain, whereat he would laugh, for it
took but little to tickle Robin's heart into merriment. So he trudged
manfully along, ever willing to stop for this reason or for that, and
ever ready to chat with such merry lasses as he met now and then. So
the morning slipped along, but yet he met no beggar with whom he could
change clothes. Quoth he, "If I do not change my luck in haste, I am
like to have an empty day of it, for it is well nigh half gone already,
and, although I have had a merry walk through the countryside, I know
nought of a beggar's life."

Then, after a while, he began to grow hungry, whereupon his mind turned
from thoughts of springtime and flowers and birds and dwelled
upon boiled capons, Malmsey, white bread, and the like, with great
tenderness. Quoth he to himself, "I would I had Willie Wynkin's wishing
coat; I know right well what I should wish for, and this it should be."
Here he marked upon the fingers of his left hand with the forefinger of
his right hand those things which he wished for. "Firstly, I would have
a sweet brown pie of tender larks; mark ye, not dry cooked, but with
a good sop of gravy to moisten it withal. Next, I would have a pretty
pullet, fairly boiled, with tender pigeons' eggs, cunningly sliced,
garnishing the platter around. With these I would have a long, slim loaf
of wheaten bread that hath been baked upon the hearth; it should be warm
from the fire, with glossy brown crust, the color of the hair of mine
own Maid Marian, and this same crust should be as crisp and brittle as
the thin white ice that lies across the furrows in the early winter's
morning. These will do for the more solid things; but with these I must
have three potties, fat and round, one full of Malmsey, one of Canary,
and one brimming full of mine own dear lusty sack." Thus spoke Robin to
himself, his mouth growing moist at the corners with the thoughts of the
good things he had raised in his own mind.

So, talking to himself, he came to where the dusty road turned sharply
around the hedge, all tender with the green of the coming leaf, and
there he saw before him a stout fellow sitting upon a stile, swinging
his legs in idleness. All about this lusty rogue dangled divers pouches
and bags of different sizes and kinds, a dozen or more, with great,
wide, gaping mouths, like a brood of hungry daws. His coat was gathered
in at his waist, and was patched with as many colors as there are
stripes upon a Maypole in the springtide. On his head he wore a great
tall leathern cap, and across his knees rested a stout quarterstaff of
blackthorn, full as long and heavy as Robin's. As jolly a beggar was he
as ever trod the lanes and byways of Nottinghamshire, for his eyes were
as gray as slate, and snapped and twinkled and danced with merriment,
and his black hair curled close all over his head in little rings of
kinkiness.

"Halloa, good fellow," quoth Robin, when he had come nigh to the other,
"what art thou doing here this merry day, when the flowers are peeping
and the buds are swelling?"

Then the other winked one eye and straightway trolled forth in a merry
voice:

     "_I sit upon the stile,
     And I sing a little while
     As I wait for my own true dear, O,
     For the sun is shining bright,
     And the leaves are dancing light,
     And the little fowl sings she is near, O_.

"And so it is with me, bully boy, saving that my doxy cometh not."

"Now that is a right sweet song," quoth Robin, "and, were I in the right
mind to listen to thee, I could bear well to hear more; but I have two
things of seriousness to ask of thee; so listen, I prythee."

At this the jolly Beggar cocked his head on one side, like a rogue of
a magpie. Quoth he, "I am an ill jug to pour heavy things into, good
friend, and, if I mistake not, thou hast few serious words to spare at
any time."

"Nay," quoth jolly Robin, "what I would say first is the most serious
of all thoughts to me, to wit, 'Where shall I get somewhat to eat and
drink?'"

"Sayst thou so?" quoth the Beggar. "Marry, I make no such serious
thoughts upon the matter. I eat when I can get it, and munch my crust
when I can get no crumb; likewise, when there is no ale to be had I wash
the dust from out my throat with a trickle of cold water. I was sitting
here, as thou camest upon me, bethinking myself whether I should break
my fast or no. I do love to let my hunger grow mightily keen ere I eat,
for then a dry crust is as good to me as a venison pasty with suet and
raisins is to stout King Harry. I have a sharp hunger upon me now, but
methinks in a short while it will ripen to a right mellow appetite."

"Now, in good sooth," quoth merry Robin, laughing, "thou hast a quaint
tongue betwixt thy teeth. But hast thou truly nought but a dry crust
about thee? Methinks thy bags and pouches are fat and lusty for such
thin fare."

"Why, mayhap there is some other cold fare therein," said the Beggar
slyly.

"And hast thou nought to drink but cold water?" said Robin.

"Never so much as a drop," quoth the Beggar. "Over beyond yon clump of
trees is as sweet a little inn as ever thou hast lifted eyelid upon; but
I go not thither, for they have a nasty way with me. Once, when the good
Prior of Emmet was dining there, the landlady set a dear little tart of
stewed crabs and barley sugar upon the window sill to cool, and, seeing
it there, and fearing it might be lost, I took it with me till that I
could find the owner thereof. Ever since then they have acted very ill
toward me; yet truth bids me say that they have the best ale there that
ever rolled over my tongue."

At this Robin laughed aloud. "Marry," quoth he, "they did ill toward
thee for thy kindness. But tell me truly, what hast thou in thy
pouches?"

"Why," quoth the Beggar, peeping into the mouths of his bags, "I find
here a goodly piece of pigeon pie, wrapped in a cabbage leaf to hold the
gravy. Here I behold a dainty streaked piece of brawn, and here a fair
lump of white bread. Here I find four oaten cakes and a cold knuckle of
ham. Ha! In sooth, 'tis strange; but here I behold six eggs that must
have come by accident from some poultry yard hereabouts. They are raw,
but roasted upon the coals and spread with a piece of butter that I
see--"

"Peace, good friend!" cried Robin, holding up his hand. "Thou makest my
poor stomach quake with joy for what thou tellest me so sweetly. If thou
wilt give me to eat, I will straightway hie me to that little inn thou
didst tell of but now, and will bring a skin of ale for thy drinking and
mine."

"Friend, thou hast said enough," said the Beggar, getting down from
the stile. "I will feast thee with the best that I have and bless Saint
Cedric for thy company. But, sweet chuck, I prythee bring three quarts
of ale at least, one for thy drinking and two for mine, for my thirst is
such that methinks I can drink ale as the sands of the River Dee drink
salt water."

So Robin straightway left the Beggar, who, upon his part, went to a
budding lime bush back of the hedge, and there spread his feast upon
the grass and roasted his eggs upon a little fagot fire, with a deftness
gained by long labor in that line. After a while back came Robin bearing
a goodly skin of ale upon his shoulder, which he laid upon the grass.
Then, looking upon the feast spread upon the ground--and a fair sight it
was to look upon--he slowly rubbed his hand over his stomach, for to his
hungry eyes it seemed the fairest sight that he had beheld in all his
life.

"Friend," said the Beggar, "let me feel the weight of that skin.

"Yea, truly," quoth Robin, "help thyself, sweet chuck, and meantime let
me see whether thy pigeon pie is fresh or no."

So the one seized upon the ale and the other upon the pigeon pie, and
nothing was heard for a while but the munching of food and the gurgle of
ale as it left the skin.

At last, after a long time had passed thus, Robin pushed the food from
him and heaved a great sigh of deep content, for he felt as though he
had been made all over anew.

"And now, good friend," quoth he, leaning upon one elbow, "I would have
at thee about that other matter of seriousness of which I spoke not long
since."

"How!" said the Beggar reproachfully, "thou wouldst surely not talk of
things appertaining to serious affairs upon such ale as this!"

"Nay," quoth Robin, laughing. "I would not check thy thirst, sweet
friend; drink while I talk to thee. Thus it is: I would have thee know
that I have taken a liking to thy craft and would fain have a taste of a
beggar's life mine own self."

Said the Beggar, "I marvel not that thou hast taken a liking to my
manner of life, good fellow, but 'to like' and 'to do' are two
matters of different sorts. I tell thee, friend, one must serve a
long apprenticeship ere one can learn to be even so much as a
clapper-dudgeon, much less a crank or an Abraham-man.(3) I tell thee,
lad, thou art too old to enter upon that which it may take thee years to
catch the hang of."

     (3) Classes of traveling mendicants that infested England as
     late as the middle of the seventeenth century. VIDE Dakkar's
     ENGLISH VILLAINIES, etc.

"Mayhap that may be so," quoth Robin, "for I bring to mind that Gaffer
Swanthold sayeth Jack Shoemaker maketh ill bread; Tom Baker maketh ill
shoon. Nevertheless, I have a mind to taste a beggar's life, and need
but the clothing to be as good as any."

"I tell thee, fellow," said the Beggar, "if thou wert clad as sweetly
as good Saint Wynten, the patron of our craft, thou wouldst never make
a beggar. Marry, the first jolly traveler that thou wouldst meet
would beat thee to a pudding for thrusting thy nose into a craft that
belongeth not to thee."

"Nevertheless," quoth Robin, "I would have a try at it; and methinks I
shall change clothes with thee, for thy garb seemeth to be pretty, not
to say gay. So not only will I change clothes, but I will give thee two
golden angels to boot. I have brought my stout staff with me, thinking
that I might have to rap some one of the brethren of thy cloth over the
head by way of argument in this matter, but I love thee so much for the
feast thou hast given me that I would not lift even my little finger
against thee, so thou needst not have a crumb of fear."

To this the Beggar listened with his knuckles resting against his hips,
and when Robin had ended he cocked his head on one side and thrust his
tongue into his cheek.

"Marry, come up," quoth he at last. "Lift thy finger against me,
forsooth! Art thou out of thy wits, man? My name is Riccon Hazel, and I
come from Holywell, in Flintshire, over by the River Dee. I tell thee,
knave, I have cracked the head of many a better man than thou art, and
even now I would scald thy crown for thee but for the ale thou hast
given me. Now thou shalt not have so much as one tag-rag of my coat,
even could it save thee from hanging."

"Now, fellow," said Robin, "it would ill suit me to spoil thy pretty
head for thee, but I tell thee plainly, that but for this feast I would
do that to thee would stop thy traveling the country for many a day to
come. Keep thy lips shut, lad, or thy luck will tumble out of thy mouth
with thy speech!"

"Now out, and alas for thee, man, for thou hast bred thyself ill this
day!" cried the Beggar, rising and taking up his staff. "Take up thy
club and defend thyself, fellow, for I will not only beat thee but I
will take from thee thy money and leave thee not so much as a clipped
groat to buy thyself a lump of goose grease to rub thy cracked crown
withal. So defend thyself, I say."

Then up leaped merry Robin and snatched up his staff also. "Take my
money, if thou canst," quoth he. "I promise freely to give thee every
farthing if thou dost touch me." And he twirled his staff in his fingers
till it whistled again.

Then the Beggar swung his staff also, and struck a mighty blow at Robin,
which the yeoman turned. Three blows the Beggar struck, yet never one
touched so much as a hair of Robin's head. Then stout Robin saw his
chance, and, ere you could count three, Riccon's staff was over the
hedge, and Riccon himself lay upon the green grass with no more motion
than you could find in an empty pudding bag.

"How now!" quoth merry Robin, laughing. "Wilt thou have my hide or my
money, sweet chuck?" But to this the other answered never a word. Then
Robin, seeing his plight, and that he was stunned with the blow, ran,
still laughing, and brought the skin of ale and poured some of it on the
Beggar's head and some down his throat, so that presently he opened his
eyes and looked around as though wondering why he lay upon his back.

Then Robin, seeing that he had somewhat gathered the wits that had just
been rapped out of his head, said, "Now, good fellow, wilt thou change
clothes with me, or shall I have to tap thee again? Here are two golden
angels if thou wilt give me freely all thy rags and bags and thy cap
and things. If thou givest them not freely, I much fear me I shall have
to--" and he looked up and down his staff.

Then Riccon sat up and rubbed the bump on his crown. "Now, out upon it!"
quoth he. "I did think to drub thee sweetly, fellow. I know not how it
is, but I seem, as it were, to have bought more beer than I can drink.
If I must give up my clothes, I must, but first promise me, by thy word
as a true yeoman, that thou wilt take nought from me but my clothes."

"I promise on the word of a true yeoman," quoth Robin, thinking that the
fellow had a few pennies that he would save.

Thereupon the Beggar drew a little knife that hung at his side and,
ripping up the lining of his coat, drew thence ten bright golden pounds,
which he laid upon the ground beside him with a cunning wink at Robin.
"Now thou mayst have my clothes and welcome," said he, "and thou
mightest have had them in exchange for thine without the cost of a
single farthing, far less two golden angels."

"Marry," quoth Robin, laughing, "thou art a sly fellow, and I tell thee
truly, had I known thou hadst so much money by thee maybe thou mightst
not have carried it away, for I warrant thou didst not come honestly by
it."

Then each stripped off his clothes and put on those of the other, and as
lusty a beggar was Robin Hood as e'er you could find of a summer's day.
But stout Riccon of Holywell skipped and leaped and danced for joy of
the fair suit of Lincoln green that he had so gotten. Quoth he, "I am a
gay-feathered bird now. Truly, my dear Moll Peascod would never know me
in this dress. Thou mayst keep the cold pieces of the feast, friend, for
I mean to live well and lustily while my money lasts and my clothes are
gay."

So he turned and left Robin and, crossing the stile, was gone, but Robin
heard him singing from beyond the hedge as he strode away:

     "_For Polly is smiling and Molly is glad
     When the beggar comes in at the door,
     And Jack and Dick call him a fine lusty lad,
     And the hostess runs up a great score.

     "Then hey, Willy Waddykin,
     Stay, Billy Waddykin,
     And let the brown ale flow free, flow free,
     The beggar's the man for me_."

Robin listened till the song ended in the distance, then he also crossed
the stile into the road, but turned his toes away from where the Beggar
had gone. The road led up a gentle hill and up the hill Robin walked, a
half score or more of bags dangling about his legs. Onward he strolled
for a long time, but other adventure he found not. The road was bare
of all else but himself, as he went kicking up little clouds of dust at
each footstep; for it was noontide, the most peaceful time of all the
day, next to twilight. All the earth was silent in the restfulness of
eating time; the plowhorses stood in the furrow munching, with great
bags over their noses holding sweet food, the plowman sat under the
hedge and the plowboy also, and they, too, were munching, each one
holding a great piece of bread in one fist and a great piece of cheese
in the other.

So Robin, with all the empty road to himself, strode along whistling
merrily, his bags and pouches bobbing and dangling at his thighs. At
last he came to where a little grass-grown path left the road and,
passing through a stile and down a hill, led into a little dell and on
across a rill in the valley and up the hill on the other side, till it
reached a windmill that stood on the cap of the rise where the wind bent
the trees in swaying motion. Robin looked at the spot and liked it, and,
for no reason but that his fancy led him, he took the little path and
walked down the grassy sunny slope of the open meadow, and so came to
the little dingle and, ere he knew it, upon four lusty fellows that sat
with legs outstretched around a goodly feast spread upon the ground.

Four merry beggars were they, and each had slung about his neck a little
board that rested upon his breast. One board had written upon it, "I
am blind," another, "I am deaf," another, "I am dumb," and the fourth,
"Pity the lame one." But although all these troubles written upon the
boards seemed so grievous, the four stout fellows sat around feasting
as merrily as though Cain's wife had never opened the pottle that held
misfortunes and let them forth like a cloud of flies to pester us.

The deaf man was the first to hear Robin, for he said, "Hark, brothers,
I hear someone coming." And the blind man was the first to see him,
for he said, "He is an honest man, brothers, and one of like craft to
ourselves." Then the dumb man called to him in a great voice and said,
"Welcome, brother; come and sit while there is still some of the feast
left and a little Malmsey in the pottle." At this, the lame man, who
had taken off his wooden leg and unstrapped his own leg, and was sitting
with it stretched out upon the grass so as to rest it, made room for
Robin among them. "We are glad to see thee, brother," said he, holding
out the flask of Malmsey.

"Marry," quoth Robin, laughing, and weighing the flask in his hands ere
he drank, "methinks it is no more than seemly of you all to be glad
to see me, seeing that I bring sight to the blind, speech to the dumb,
hearing to the deaf, and such a lusty leg to a lame man. I drink to your
happiness, brothers, as I may not drink to your health, seeing ye are
already hale, wind and limb."

At this all grinned, and the Blind beggar, who was the chief man among
them, and was the broadest shouldered and most lusty rascal of all,
smote Robin upon the shoulder, swearing he was a right merry wag.

"Whence comest thou, lad?" asked the Dumb man.

"Why," quoth Robin, "I came this morning from sleeping overnight in
Sherwood."

"Is it even so?" said the Deaf man. "I would not for all the money we
four are carrying to Lincoln Town sleep one night in Sherwood. If Robin
Hood caught one of our trade in his woodlands he would, methinks, clip
his ears."

"Methinks he would, too," quoth Robin, laughing. "But what money is this
that ye speak of?"

Then up spake the Lame man. "Our king, Peter of York," said he, "hath
sent us to Lincoln with those moneys that--"

"Stay, brother Hodge," quoth the Blind man, breaking into the talk, "I
would not doubt our brother here, but bear in mind we know him not. What
art thou, brother? Upright-man, Jurkman, Clapper-dudgeon, Dommerer, or
Abraham-man?"

At these words Robin looked from one man to the other with mouth agape.
"Truly," quoth he, "I trust I am an upright man, at least, I strive to
be; but I know not what thou meanest by such jargon, brother. It were
much more seemly, methinks, if yon Dumb man, who hath a sweet voice,
would give us a song."

At these words a silence fell on all, and after a while the Blind man
spoke again. Quoth he, "Thou dost surely jest when thou sayest that thou
dost not understand such words. Answer me this: Hast thou ever fibbed a
chouse quarrons in the Rome pad for the loure in his bung?"(4)

     (4) I.E., in old beggar's cant, "beaten a man or gallant
     upon the highway for the money in his purse."  Dakkar's
     ENGLISH VILLAINIES.

"Now out upon it," quoth Robin Hood testily, "an ye make sport of me by
pattering such gibberish, it will be ill for you all, I tell you. I have
the best part of a mind to crack the heads of all four of you, and would
do so, too, but for the sweet Malmsey ye have given me. Brother, pass
the pottle lest it grow cold."

But all the four beggars leaped to their feet when Robin had done
speaking, and the Blind man snatched up a heavy knotted cudgel that lay
beside him on the grass, as did the others likewise. Then Robin, seeing
that things were like to go ill with him, albeit he knew not what all
the coil was about, leaped to his feet also and, catching up his trusty
staff, clapped his back against the tree and stood upon his guard
against them. "How, now!" cried he, twirling his staff betwixt his
fingers, "would you four stout fellows set upon one man? Stand back, ye
rascals, or I will score your pates till they have as many marks upon
them as a pothouse door! Are ye mad? I have done you no harm."

"Thou liest!" quoth the one who pretended to be blind and who, being the
lustiest villain, was the leader of the others, "thou liest! For thou
hast come among us as a vile spy. But thine ears have heard too much for
thy body's good, and thou goest not forth from this place unless thou
goest feet foremost, for this day thou shalt die! Come, brothers, all
together! Down with him!" Then, whirling up his cudgel, he rushed upon
Robin as an angry bull rushes upon a red rag. But Robin was ready for
any happening. "Crick! Crack!" he struck two blows as quick as a wink,
and down went the Blind man, rolling over and over upon the grass.

At this the others bore back and stood at a little distance scowling
upon Robin. "Come on, ye scum!" cried he merrily. "Here be cakes and ale
for all. Now, who will be next served?"

To this speech the beggars answered never a word, but they looked at
Robin as great Blunderbore looked upon stout Jack the slayer of giants,
as though they would fain eat him, body and bones; nevertheless, they
did not care to come nigher to him and his terrible staff. Then, seeing
them so hesitate, Robin of a sudden leaped upon them, striking even as
he leaped. Down went the Dumb man, and away flew his cudgel from his
hand as he fell. At this the others ducked to avoid another blow, then,
taking to their heels, scampered, the one one way and the other the
other, as though they had the west wind's boots upon their feet. Robin
looked after them, laughing, and thought that never had he seen so fleet
a runner as the Lame man; but neither of the beggars stopped nor turned
around, for each felt in his mind the wind of Robin's cudgel about his
ears.

Then Robin turned to the two stout knaves lying upon the ground. Quoth
he, "These fellows spake somewhat about certain moneys they were taking
to Lincoln; methinks I may find it upon this stout blind fellow,
who hath as keen sight as e'er a trained woodsman in Nottingham or
Yorkshire. It were a pity to let sound money stay in the pockets of
such thieving knaves." So saying, he stooped over the burly rascal and
searched among his rags and tatters, till presently his fingers felt a
leathern pouch slung around his body beneath his patched and tattered
coat. This he stripped away and, weighing it in his hands, bethought
himself that it was mighty heavy. "It were a sweet thing," said he to
himself, "if this were filled with gold instead of copper pence." Then,
sitting down upon the grass, he opened the pocket and looked into it.
There he found four round rolls wrapped up in dressed sheepskin; one of
these rolls he opened; then his mouth gaped and his eyes stared, I wot,
as though they would never close again, for what did he see but fifty
pounds of bright golden money? He opened the other pockets and found in
each one the same, fifty bright new-stamped golden pounds. Quoth Robin,
"I have oft heard that the Beggars' Guild was over-rich, but never did
I think that they sent such sums as this to their treasury. I shall take
it with me, for it will be better used for charity and the good of my
merry band than in the enriching of such knaves as these." So saying, he
rolled up the money in the sheepskin again, and putting it back in the
purse, he thrust the pouch into his own bosom. Then taking up the flask
of Malmsey, he held it toward the two fellows lying on the grass, and
quoth he, "Sweet friends, I drink your health and thank you dearly for
what ye have so kindly given me this day, and so I wish you good den."
Then, taking up his staff, he left the spot and went merrily on his way.

But when the two stout beggars that had been rapped upon the head roused
themselves and sat up, and when the others had gotten over their fright
and come back, they were as sad and woebegone as four frogs in dry
weather, for two of them had cracked crowns, their Malmsey was all gone,
and they had not so much as a farthing to cross their palms withal.

But after Robin left the little dell he strode along merrily, singing as
he went; and so blithe was he and such a stout beggar, and, withal, so
fresh and clean, that every merry lass he met had a sweet word for him
and felt no fear, while the very dogs, that most times hate the sight
of a beggar, snuffed at his legs in friendly wise and wagged their tails
pleasantly; for dogs know an honest man by his smell, and an honest man
Robin was--in his own way.

Thus he went along till at last he had come to the wayside cross nigh
Ollerton, and, being somewhat tired, he sat him down to rest upon the
grassy bank in front of it. "It groweth nigh time," quoth he to himself,
"that I were getting back again to Sherwood; yet it would please me well
to have one more merry adventure ere I go back again to my jolly band."

So he looked up the road and down the road to see who might come, until
at last he saw someone drawing near, riding upon a horse. When the
traveler came nigh enough for him to see him well, Robin laughed, for a
strange enough figure he cut. He was a thin, wizened man, and, to look
upon him, you could not tell whether he was thirty years old or sixty,
so dried up was he even to skin and bone. As for the nag, it was as thin
as the rider, and both looked as though they had been baked in Mother
Huddle's Oven, where folk are dried up so that they live forever.

But although Robin laughed at the droll sight, he knew the wayfarer
to be a certain rich corn engrosser of Worksop, who more than once had
bought all the grain in the countryside and held it till it reached even
famine prices, thus making much money from the needs of poor people, and
for this he was hated far and near by everyone that knew aught of him.

So, after a while, the Corn Engrosser came riding up to where Robin sat;
whereupon merry Robin stepped straightway forth, in all his rags and
tatters, his bags and pouches dangling about him, and laid his hand upon
the horse's bridle rein, calling upon the other to stop.

"Who art thou, fellow, that doth dare to stop me thus upon the King's
highway?" said the lean man, in a dry, sour voice.

"Pity a poor beggar," quoth Robin. "Give me but a farthing to buy me a
piece of bread."

"Now, out upon thee!" snarled the other. "Such sturdy rogues as thou art
are better safe in the prisons or dancing upon nothing, with a hempen
collar about the neck, than strolling the highways so freely."

"Tut," quoth Robin, "how thou talkest! Thou and I are brothers, man. Do
we not both take from the poor people that which they can ill spare? Do
we not make our livings by doing nought of any good? Do we not both live
without touching palm to honest work? Have we either of us ever rubbed
thumbs over honestly gained farthings? Go to! We are brothers, I say;
only thou art rich and I am poor; wherefore, I prythee once more, give
me a penny."

"Doss thou prate so to me, sirrah?" cried the Corn Engrosser in a rage.
"Now I will have thee soundly whipped if ever I catch thee in any town
where the law can lay hold of thee! As for giving thee a penny, I swear
to thee that I have not so much as a single groat in my purse. Were
Robin Hood himself to take me, he might search me from crown to heel
without finding the smallest piece of money upon me. I trust I am too
sly to travel so nigh to Sherwood with money in my pouch, and that thief
at large in the woods."

Then merry Robin looked up and down, as if to see that there was no one
nigh, and then, coming close to the Corn Engrosser, he stood on tiptoe
and spake in his ear, "Thinkest thou in sooth that I am a beggar, as I
seem to be? Look upon me. There is not a grain of dirt upon my hands or
my face or my body. Didst thou ever see a beggar so? I tell thee I am as
honest a man as thou art. Look, friend." Here he took the purse of money
from his breast and showed to the dazzled eyes of the Corn Engrosser the
bright golden pieces. "Friend, these rags serve but to hide an honest
rich man from the eyes of Robin Hood."

"Put up thy money, lad," cried the other quickly. "Art thou a fool,
to trust to beggar's rags to shield thee from Robin Hood? If he caught
thee, he would strip thee to the skin, for he hates a lusty beggar as he
doth a fat priest or those of my kind."

"Is it indeed so?" quoth Robin. "Had I known this, mayhap I had not come
hereabouts in this garb. But I must go forward now, as much depends upon
my journeying. Where goest thou, friend?"

"I go to Grantham," said the Corn Engrosser, "but I shall lodge tonight
at Newark, if I can get so far upon my way."

"Why, I myself am on the way to Newark," quoth merry Robin, "so that,
as two honest men are better than one in roads beset by such a fellow as
this Robin Hood, I will jog along with thee, if thou hast no dislike to
my company."

"Why, as thou art an honest fellow and a rich fellow," said the Corn
Engrosser, "I mind not thy company; but, in sooth, I have no great
fondness for beggars."

"Then forward," quoth Robin, "for the day wanes and it will be dark ere
we reach Newark." So off they went, the lean horse hobbling along as
before, and Robin running beside, albeit he was so quaking with laughter
within him that he could hardly stand; yet he dared not laugh aloud,
lest the Corn Engrosser should suspect something. So they traveled along
till they reached a hill just on the outskirts of Sherwood. Here the
lean man checked his lean horse into a walk, for the road was steep, and
he wished to save his nag's strength, having far to go ere he reached
Newark. Then he turned in his saddle and spake to Robin again, for the
first time since they had left the cross. "Here is thy greatest danger,
friend," said he, "for here we are nighest to that vile thief Robin
Hood, and the place where he dwells. Beyond this we come again to the
open honest country, and so are more safe in our journeying."

"Alas!" quoth Robin, "I would that I had as little money by me as thou
hast, for this day I fear that Robin Hood will get every groat of my
wealth."

Then the other looked at Robin and winked cunningly. Quoth he, "I tell
thee, friend, that I have nigh as much by me as thou hast, but it is
hidden so that never a knave in Sherwood could find it."

"Thou dost surely jest," quoth Robin. "How could one hide so much as two
hundred pounds upon his person?"

"Now, as thou art so honest a fellow, and, withal, so much younger than
I am, I will tell thee that which I have told to no man in all the world
before, and thus thou mayst learn never again to do such a foolish thing
as to trust to beggar's garb to guard thee against Robin Hood. Seest
thou these clogs upon my feet?"

"Yea," quoth Robin, laughing, "truly, they are large enough for any man
to see, even were his sight as foggy as that of Peter Patter, who never
could see when it was time to go to work."

"Peace, friend," said the Corn Engrosser, "for this is no matter for
jesting. The soles of these clogs are not what they seem to be, for each
one is a sweet little box; and by twisting the second nail from the toe,
the upper of the shoe and part of the sole lifts up like a lid, and in
the spaces within are fourscore and ten bright golden pounds in each
shoe, all wrapped in hair, to keep them from clinking and so telling
tales of themselves."

When the Corn Engrosser had told this, Robin broke into a roar of
laughter and, laying his hands upon the bridle rein, stopped the
sad-looking nag. "Stay, good friend," quoth he, between bursts of
merriment, "thou art the slyest old fox that e'er I saw in all
my life!--In the soles of his shoon, quotha!--If ever I trust a
poor-seeming man again, shave my head and paint it blue! A corn factor,
a horse jockey, an estate agent, and a jackdaw for cunningness, say I!"
And he laughed again till he shook in his shoes with mirth.

All this time the Corn Engrosser had been staring at Robin, his mouth
agape with wonder. "Art thou mad," quoth he, "to talk in this way, so
loud and in such a place? Let us forward, and save thy mirth till we are
safe and sound at Newark."

"Nay," quoth Robin, the tears of merriment wet on his cheeks, "on second
thoughts I go no farther than here, for I have good friends hereabouts.
Thou mayst go forward if thou dost list, thou sweet pretty fellow, but
thou must go forward barefoot, for I am afraid that thy shoon must be
left behind. Off with them, friend, for I tell thee I have taken a great
fancy to them."

At these words the corn factor grew pale as a linen napkin. "Who art
thou that talkest so?" said he.

Then merry Robin laughed again, and quoth he, "Men hereabouts call me
Robin Hood; so, sweet friend, thou hadst best do my bidding and give
me thy shoes, wherefore hasten, I prythee, or else thou wilt not get to
fair Newark Town till after dark."

At the sound of the name of Robin Hood, the corn factor quaked with
fear, so that he had to seize his horse by the mane to save himself
from falling off its back. Then straightway, and without more words,
he stripped off his clogs and let them fall upon the road. Robin, still
holding the bridle rein, stooped and picked them up. Then he said,
"Sweet friend, I am used to ask those that I have dealings with to
come and feast at Sherwood with me. I will not ask thee, because of our
pleasant journey together; for I tell thee there be those in Sherwood
that would not be so gentle with thee as I have been. The name of Corn
Engrosser leaves a nasty taste upon the tongue of all honest men. Take a
fool's advice of me and come no more so nigh to Sherwood, or mayhap some
day thou mayst of a sudden find a clothyard shaft betwixt thy ribs. So,
with this, I give thee good den." Hereupon he clapped his hand to the
horse's flank and off went nag and rider. But the man's face was all
bedewed with the sweat of fright, and never again, I wot, was he found
so close to Sherwood Forest as he had been this day.

Robin stood and looked after him, and, when he was fairly gone, turned,
laughing, and entered the forest carrying the shoes in his hand.

That night in sweet Sherwood the red fires glowed brightly in wavering
light on tree and bush, and all around sat or lay the stout fellows of
the band to hear Robin Hood and Little John tell their adventures. All
listened closely, and again and again the woods rang with shouts of
laughter.

When all was told, Friar Tuck spoke up. "Good master," said he, "thou
hast had a pretty time, but still I hold to my saying, that the life of
the barefoot friar is the merrier of the two."

"Nay," quoth Will Stutely, "I hold with our master, that he hath had
the pleasanter doings of the two, for he hath had two stout bouts at
quarterstaff this day."

So some of the band held with Robin Hood and some with Little John. As
for me, I think--But I leave it with you to say for yourselves which you
hold with.




Robin Hood Shoots Before Queen Eleanor

THE HIGHROAD stretched white and dusty in the hot summer afternoon sun,
and the trees stood motionless along the roadside. All across the meadow
lands the hot air danced and quivered, and in the limpid waters of
the lowland brook, spanned by a little stone bridge, the fish hung
motionless above the yellow gravel, and the dragonfly sat quite still,
perched upon the sharp tip of a spike of the rushes, with its wings
glistening in the sun.

Along the road a youth came riding upon a fair milk-white barb, and the
folk that he passed stopped and turned and looked after him, for never
had so lovely a lad or one so gaily clad been seen in Nottingham before.
He could not have been more than sixteen years of age, and was as fair
as any maiden. His long yellow hair flowed behind him as he rode along,
all clad in silk and velvet, with jewels flashing and dagger jingling
against the pommel of the saddle. Thus came the Queen's Page, young
Richard Partington, from famous London Town down into Nottinghamshire,
upon Her Majesty's bidding, to seek Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest.

The road was hot and dusty and his journey had been long, for that day
he had come all the way from Leicester Town, a good twenty miles and
more; wherefore young Partington was right glad when he saw before him a
sweet little inn, all shady and cool beneath the trees, in front of the
door of which a sign hung pendant, bearing the picture of a blue boar.
Here he drew rein and called loudly for a pottle of Rhenish wine to be
brought him, for stout country ale was too coarse a drink for this young
gentleman. Five lusty fellows sat upon the bench beneath the pleasant
shade of the wide-spreading oak in front of the inn door, drinking ale
and beer, and all stared amain at this fair and gallant lad. Two of the
stoutest of them were clothed in Lincoln green, and a great heavy oaken
staff leaned against the gnarled oak tree trunk beside each fellow.

The landlord came and brought a pottle of wine and a long narrow glass
upon a salver, which he held up to the Page as he sat upon his horse.
Young Partington poured forth the bright yellow wine and holding the
glass aloft, cried, "Here is to the health and long happiness of my
royal mistress, the noble Queen Eleanor; and may my journey and her
desirings soon have end, and I find a certain stout yeoman men call
Robin Hood."

At these words all stared, but presently the two stout yeomen in Lincoln
green began whispering together. Then one of the two, whom Partington
thought to be the tallest and stoutest fellow he had ever beheld, spoke
up and said, "What seekest thou of Robin Hood, Sir Page? And what does
our good Queen Eleanor wish of him? I ask this of thee, not foolishly,
but with reason, for I know somewhat of this stout yeoman."

"An thou knowest aught of him, good fellow," said young Partington,
"thou wilt do great service to him and great pleasure to our royal Queen
by aiding me to find him."

Then up spake the other yeoman, who was a handsome fellow with sunburned
face and nut-brown, curling hair, "Thou hast an honest look, Sir Page,
and our Queen is kind and true to all stout yeomen. Methinks I and my
friend here might safely guide thee to Robin Hood, for we know where
he may be found. Yet I tell thee plainly, we would not for all merry
England have aught of harm befall him."

"Set thy mind at ease; I bring nought of ill with me," quoth Richard
Partington. "I bring a kind message to him from our Queen, therefore an
ye know where he is to be found, I pray you to guide me thither."

Then the two yeomen looked at one another again, and the tall man said,
"Surely it were safe to do this thing, Will;" whereat the other nodded.
Thereupon both arose, and the tall yeoman said, "We think thou art true,
Sir Page, and meanest no harm, therefore we will guide thee to Robin
Hood as thou dost wish."

Then Partington paid his score, and the yeomen coming forward, they all
straightway departed upon their way.


Under the greenwood tree, in the cool shade that spread all around upon
the sward, with flickering lights here and there, Robin Hood and many
of his band lay upon the soft green grass, while Allan a Dale sang and
played upon his sweetly sounding harp. All listened in silence, for
young Allan's singing was one of the greatest joys in all the world
to them; but as they so listened there came of a sudden the sound of a
horse's feet, and presently Little John and Will Stutely came forth from
the forest path into the open glade, young Richard Partington riding
between them upon his milk-white horse. The three came toward where
Robin Hood sat, all the band staring with might and main, for never had
they seen so gay a sight as this young Page, nor one so richly clad
in silks and velvets and gold and jewels. Then Robin arose and stepped
forth to meet him, and Partington leaped from his horse and doffing
his cap of crimson velvet, met Robin as he came. "Now, welcome!" cried
Robin. "Now, welcome, fair youth, and tell me, I prythee, what bringeth
one of so fair a presence and clad in such noble garb to our poor forest
of Sherwood?"

Then young Partington said, "If I err not, thou art the famous Robin
Hood, and these thy stout band of outlawed yeomen. To thee I bring
greetings from our noble Queen Eleanor. Oft hath she heard thee spoken
of and thy merry doings hereabouts, and fain would she behold thy face;
therefore she bids me tell thee that if thou wilt presently come to
London Town, she will do all in her power to guard thee against harm,
and will send thee back safe to Sherwood Forest again. Four days hence,
in Finsbury Fields, our good King Henry, of great renown, holdeth a
grand shooting match, and all the most famous archers of merry England
will be thereat. Our Queen would fain see thee strive with these,
knowing that if thou wilt come thou wilt, with little doubt, carry
off the prize. Therefore she hath sent me with this greeting, and
furthermore sends thee, as a sign of great good will, this golden ring
from off her own fair thumb, which I give herewith into thy hands."

Then Robin Hood bowed his head and taking the ring, kissed it right
loyally, and then slipped it upon his little finger. Quoth he, "Sooner
would I lose my life than this ring; and ere it departs from me, my hand
shall be cold in death or stricken off at the wrist. Fair Sir Page, I
will do our Queen's bidding, and will presently hie with thee to London;
but, ere we go, I will feast thee here in the woodlands with the very
best we have."

"It may not be," said the Page; "we have no time to tarry, therefore
get thyself ready straightway; and if there be any of thy band that thou
wouldst take with thee, our Queen bids me say that she will make them
right welcome likewise."

"Truly, thou art right," quoth Robin, "and we have but short time to
stay; therefore I will get me ready presently. I will choose three of my
men, only, to go with me, and these three shall be Little John, mine
own true right-hand man, Will Scarlet, my cousin, and Allan a Dale, my
minstrel. Go, lads, and get ye ready straightway, and we will presently
off with all speed that we may. Thou, Will Stutely, shall be the chief
of the band while I am gone."

Then Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale ran leaping, full of
joy, to make themselves ready, while Robin also prepared himself for the
journey. After a while they all four came forth, and a right fair sight
they made, for Robin was clad in blue from head to foot, and Little John
and Will Scarlet in good Lincoln green, and as for Allan a Dale, he was
dressed in scarlet from the crown of his head to the toes of his pointed
shoes. Each man wore beneath his cap a little head covering of burnished
steel set with rivets of gold, and underneath his jerkin a coat of
linked mail, as fine as carded wool, yet so tough that no arrow could
pierce it. Then, seeing all were ready, young Partington mounted his
horse again, and the yeomen having shaken hands all around, the five
departed upon their way.

That night they took up their inn in Melton Mowbray, in Leicestershire,
and the next night they lodged at Kettering, in Northamptonshire; and
the next at Bedford Town; and the next at St. Albans, in Hertfordshire.
This place they left not long after the middle of the night, and
traveling fast through the tender dawning of the summer day, when the
dews lay shining on the meadows and faint mists hung in the dales,
when the birds sang their sweetest and the cobwebs beneath the hedges
glimmered like fairy cloth of silver, they came at last to the towers
and walls of famous London Town, while the morn was still young and all
golden toward the east.

Queen Eleanor sat in her royal bower, through the open casements of
which poured the sweet yellow sunshine in great floods of golden light.
All about her stood her ladies-in-waiting chatting in low voices, while
she herself sat dreamily where the mild air came softly drifting into
the room laden with the fresh perfumes of the sweet red roses that
bloomed in the great garden beneath the wall. To her came one who said
that her page, Richard Partington, and four stout yeomen waited her
pleasure in the court below. Then Queen Eleanor arose joyously and bade
them be straightway shown into her presence.

Thus Robin Hood and Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale came
before the Queen into her own royal bower. Then Robin kneeled before the
Queen with his hands folded upon his breast, saying in simple phrase,
"Here am I, Robin Hood. Thou didst bid me come, and lo, I do thy
bidding. I give myself to thee as thy true servant, and will do thy
commanding, even if it be to the shedding of the last drop of my life's
blood."

But good Queen Eleanor smiled pleasantly upon him, bidding him to arise.
Then she made them all be seated to rest themselves after their long
journey. Rich food was brought them and noble wines, and she had her
own pages to wait upon the wants of the yeomen. At last, after they
had eaten all they could, she began questioning them of their merry
adventures. Then they told her all of the lusty doings herein spoken of,
and among others that concerning the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Richard
of the Lea, and how the Bishop had abided three days in Sherwood Forest.
At this, the Queen and the ladies about her laughed again and again, for
they pictured to themselves the stout Bishop abiding in the forest and
ranging the woods in lusty sport with Robin and his band. Then, when
they had told all that they could bring to mind, the Queen asked Allan
to sing to her, for his fame as a minstrel had reached even to the court
at London Town. So straightway Allan took up his harp in his hand, and,
without more asking, touched the strings lightly till they all rang
sweetly, then he sang thus:

     "_Gentle river, gentle river,
     Bright thy crystal waters flow,
     Sliding where the aspens shiver,
     Gliding where the lilies blow,

     "Singing over pebbled shallows,
     Kissing blossoms bending low,
     Breaking 'neath the dipping swallows,
     Purpling where the breezes blow.

     "Floating on thy breast forever
     Down thy current I could glide;
     Grief and pain should reach me never
     On thy bright and gentle tide.

     "So my aching heart seeks thine, love,
     There to find its rest and peace,
     For, through loving, bliss is mine, love,
     And my many troubles cease_."

Thus Allan sang, and as he sang all eyes dwelled upon him and not a
sound broke the stillness, and even after he had done the silence hung
for a short space. So the time passed till the hour drew nigh for the
holding of the great archery match in Finsbury Fields.

A gay sight were famous Finsbury Fields on that bright and sunny morning
of lusty summertime. Along the end of the meadow stood the booths for
the different bands of archers, for the King's yeomen were divided into
companies of fourscore men, and each company had a captain over it; so
on the bright greensward stood ten booths of striped canvas, a booth for
each band of the royal archers, and at the peak of each fluttered a
flag in the mellow air, and the flag was the color that belonged to
the captain of each band. From the center booth hung the yellow flag of
Tepus, the famous bow bearer of the King; next to it, on one hand,
was the blue flag of Gilbert of the White Hand, and on the other the
blood-red pennant of stout young Clifton of Buckinghamshire. The seven
other archer captains were also men of great renown; among them were
Egbert of Kent and William of Southampton; but those first named were
most famous of all. The noise of many voices in talk and laughter came
from within the booths, and in and out ran the attendants like
ants about an ant-hill. Some bore ale and beer, and some bundles of
bowstrings or sheaves of arrows. On each side of the archery range were
rows upon rows of seats reaching high aloft, and in the center of the
north side was a raised dais for the King and Queen, shaded by canvas
of gay colors, and hung about with streaming silken pennants of red and
blue and green and white. As yet the King and Queen had not come, but
all the other benches were full of people, rising head above head high
aloft till it made the eye dizzy to look upon them. Eightscore yards
distant from the mark from which the archers were to shoot stood ten
fair targets, each target marked by a flag of the color belonging to the
band that was to shoot thereat. So all was ready for the coming of the
King and Queen.

At last a great blast of bugles sounded, and into the meadow came riding
six trumpeters with silver trumpets, from which hung velvet banners
heavy with rich workings of silver and gold thread. Behind these came
stout King Henry upon a dapple-gray stallion, with his Queen beside him
upon a milk-white palfrey. On either side of them walked the yeomen of
the guard, the bright sunlight flashing from the polished blades of
the steel halberds they carried. Behind these came the Court in a great
crowd, so that presently all the lawn was alive with bright colors, with
silk and velvet, with waving plumes and gleaming gold, with flashing
jewels and sword hilts; a gallant sight on that bright summer day.

Then all the people arose and shouted, so that their voices sounded like
the storm upon the Cornish coast, when the dark waves run upon the shore
and leap and break, surging amid the rocks; so, amid the roaring and the
surging of the people, and the waving of scarfs and kerchiefs, the King
and Queen came to their place, and, getting down from their horses,
mounted the broad stairs that led to the raised platform, and there
took their seats on two thrones bedecked with purple silks and cloths of
silver and of gold.

When all was quiet a bugle sounded, and straightway the archers came
marching in order from their tents. Fortyscore they were in all, as
stalwart a band of yeomen as could be found in all the wide world. So
they came in orderly fashion and stood in front of the dais where King
Henry and his Queen sat. King Henry looked up and down their ranks right
proudly, for his heart warmed within him at the sight of such a gallant
band of yeomen. Then he bade his herald Sir Hugh de Mowbray stand forth
and proclaim the rules governing the game. So Sir Hugh stepped to the
edge of the platform and spoke in a loud clear voice, and thus he said:

That each man should shoot seven arrows at the target that belonged to
his band, and, of the fourscore yeomen of each band, the three that shot
the best should be chosen. These three should shoot three arrows apiece,
and the one that shot the best should again be chosen. Then each of
these should again shoot three arrows apiece, and the one that shot the
best should have the first prize, the one that shot the next best should
have the second, and the one that shot the next best should have the
third prize. Each of the others should have fourscore silver pennies for
his shooting. The first prize was to be twoscore and ten golden pounds,
a silver bugle horn inlaid with gold, and a quiver with ten white arrows
tipped with gold and feathered with the white swan's-wing therein. The
second prize was to be fivescore of the fattest bucks that run on Dallen
Lea, to be shot when the yeoman that won them chose. The third prize was
to be two tuns of good Rhenish wine.

So Sir Hugh spoke, and when he had done all the archers waved their bows
aloft and shouted. Then each band turned and marched in order back to
its place.

And now the shooting began, the captains first taking stand and speeding
their shafts and then making room for the men who shot, each in turn,
after them. Two hundred and eighty score shafts were shot in all, and so
deftly were they sped that when the shooting was done each target looked
like the back of a hedgehog when the farm dog snuffs at it. A long
time was taken in this shooting, and when it was over the judges came
forward, looked carefully at the targets, and proclaimed in a loud voice
which three had shot the best from the separate bands. Then a great
hubbub of voices arose, each man among the crowd that looked on calling
for his favorite archer. Then ten fresh targets were brought forward,
and every sound was hushed as the archers took their places once more.

This time the shooting was more speedily done, for only nine shafts
were shot by each band. Not an arrow missed the targets, but in that of
Gilbert of the White Hand five arrows were in the small white spot that
marked the center; of these five three were sped by Gilbert. Then the
judges came forward again, and looking at the targets, called aloud the
names of the archer chosen as the best bowman of each band. Of these
Gilbert of the White Hand led, for six of the ten arrows he had shot had
lodged in the center; but stout Tepus and young Clifton trod close upon
his heels; yet the others stood a fair chance for the second or third
place.

And now, amid the roaring of the crowd, those ten stout fellows that
were left went back to their tents to rest for a while and change their
bowstrings, for nought must fail at this next round, and no hand must
tremble or eye grow dim because of weariness.

Then while the deep buzz and hum of talking sounded all around like the
noise of the wind in the leafy forest, Queen Eleanor turned to the King,
and quoth she, "Thinkest thou that these yeomen so chosen are the very
best archers in all merry England?"

"Yea, truly," said the King, smiling, for he was well pleased with the
sport that he had seen; "and I tell thee, that not only are they the
best archers in all merry England, but in all the wide world beside."

"But what wouldst thou say," quoth Queen Eleanor, "if I were to find
three archers to match the best three yeomen of all thy guard?"

"I would say thou hast done what I could not do," said the King,
laughing, "for I tell thee there lives not in all the world three
archers to match Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton of Buckinghamshire."

"Now," said the Queen, "I know of three yeomen, and in truth I have seen
them not long since, that I would not fear to match against any three
that thou canst choose from among all thy fortyscore archers; and,
moreover, I will match them here this very day. But I will only match
them with thy archers providing that thou wilt grant a free pardon to
all that may come in my behalf."

At this, the King laughed loud and long. "Truly," said he, "thou art
taking up with strange matters for a queen. If thou wilt bring those
three fellows that thou speakest of, I will promise faithfully to give
them free pardon for forty days, to come or to go wheresoever they
please, nor will I harm a hair of their heads in all that time.
Moreover, if these that thou bringest shoot better than my yeomen, man
for man, they shall have the prizes for themselves according to their
shooting. But as thou hast so taken up of a sudden with sports of this
kind, hast thou a mind for a wager?"

"Why, in sooth," said Queen Eleanor, laughing, "I know nought of such
matters, but if thou hast a mind to do somewhat in that way, I will
strive to pleasure thee. What wilt thou wager upon thy men?"

Then the merry King laughed again, for he dearly loved goodly jest; so
he said, amidst his laughter, "I will wager thee ten tuns of Rhenish
wine, ten tuns of the stoutest ale, and tenscore bows of tempered
Spanish yew, with quivers and arrows to match."

All that stood around smiled at this, for it seemed a merry wager for
a king to give to a queen; but Queen Eleanor bowed her head quietly. "I
will take thy wager," said she, "for I know right well where to place
those things that thou hast spoken of. Now, who will be on my side in
this matter?" And she looked around upon them that stood about; but no
one spake or cared to wager upon the Queen's side against such archers
as Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton. Then the Queen spoke again, "Now, who
will back me in this wager? Wilt thou, my Lord Bishop of Hereford?"

"Nay," quoth the Bishop hastily, "it ill befits one of my cloth to deal
in such matters. Moreover, there are no such archers as His Majesty's in
all the world; therefore I would but lose my money.

"Methinks the thought of thy gold weigheth more heavily with thee than
the wrong to thy cloth," said the Queen, smiling, and at this a ripple
of laughter went around, for everyone knew how fond the Bishop was of
his money. Then the Queen turned to a knight who stood near, whose name
was Sir Robert Lee. "Wilt thou back me in this manner?" said she. "Thou
art surely rich enough to risk so much for the sake of a lady."

"To pleasure my Queen I will do it," said Sir Robert Lee, "but for the
sake of no other in all the world would I wager a groat, for no man can
stand against Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton."

Then turning to the King, Queen Eleanor said, "I want no such aid as Sir
Robert giveth me; but against thy wine and beer and stout bows of yew I
wager this girdle all set with jewels from around my waist; and surely
that is worth more than thine."

"Now, I take thy wager," quoth the King. "Send for thy archers
straightway. But here come forth the others; let them shoot, and then I
will match those that win against all the world."

"So be it," said the Queen. Thereupon, beckoning to young Richard
Partington, she whispered something in his ear, and straightway the Page
bowed and left the place, crossing the meadow to the other side of the
range, where he was presently lost in the crowd. At this, all that stood
around whispered to one another, wondering what it all meant, and what
three men the Queen was about to set against those famous archers of the
King's guard.

And now the ten archers of the King's guard took their stand again, and
all the great crowd was hushed to the stillness of death. Slowly and
carefully each man shot his shafts, and so deep was the silence that
you could hear every arrow rap against the target as it struck it. Then,
when the last shaft had sped, a great roar went up; and the shooting, I
wot, was well worthy of the sound. Once again Gilbert had lodged three
arrows in the white; Tepus came second with two in the white and one in
the black ring next to it; but stout Clifton had gone down and Hubert of
Suffolk had taken the third place, for, while both those two good yeomen
had lodged two in the white, Clifton had lost one shot upon the fourth
ring, and Hubert came in with one in the third.

All the archers around Gilbert's booth shouted for joy till their
throats were hoarse, tossing their caps aloft, and shaking hands with
one another.

In the midst of all the noise and hubbub five men came walking across
the lawn toward the King's pavilion. The first was Richard Partington,
and was known to most folk there, but the others were strange to
everybody. Beside young Partington walked a yeoman clad in blue, and
behind came three others, two in Lincoln green and one in scarlet. This
last yeoman carried three stout bows of yew tree, two fancifully inlaid
with silver and one with gold. While these five men came walking across
the meadow, a messenger came running from the King's booth and summoned
Gilbert and Tepus and Hubert to go with him. And now the shouting
quickly ceased, for all saw that something unwonted was toward, so the
folk stood up in their places and leaned forward to see what was the
ado.

When Partington and the others came before the spot where the King and
Queen sat, the four yeomen bent their knees and doffed their caps unto
her. King Henry leaned far forward and stared at them closely, but the
Bishop of Hereford, when he saw their faces, started as though stung by
a wasp. He opened his mouth as though about to speak, but, looking up,
he saw the Queen gazing at him with a smile upon her lips, so he said
nothing, but bit his nether lip, while his face was as red as a cherry.

Then the Queen leaned forward and spake in a clear voice. "Locksley,"
said she, "I have made a wager with the King that thou and two of thy
men can outshoot any three that he can send against you. Wilt thou do
thy best for my sake?"

"Yea," quoth Robin Hood, to whom she spake, "I will do my best for thy
sake, and, if I fail, I make my vow never to finger bowstring more."

Now, although Little John had been somewhat abashed in the Queen's
bower, he felt himself the sturdy fellow he was when the soles of his
feet pressed green grass again; so he said boldly, "Now, blessings on
thy sweet face, say I. An there lived a man that would not do his best
for thee--I will say nought, only I would like to have the cracking of
his knave's pate!

"Peace, Little John!" said Robin Hood hastily, in a low voice; but good
Queen Eleanor laughed aloud, and a ripple of merriment sounded all over
the booth.

The Bishop of Hereford did not laugh, neither did the King, but he
turned to the Queen, and quoth he, "Who are these men that thou hast
brought before us?"

Then up spoke the Bishop hastily, for he could hold his peace no longer:
"Your Majesty," quoth he, "yon fellow in blue is a certain outlawed
thief of the mid-country, named Robin Hood; yon tall, strapping villain
goeth by the name of Little John; the other fellow in green is a certain
backsliding gentleman, known as Will Scarlet; the man in red is a rogue
of a northern minstrel, named Allan a Dale."

At this speech the King's brows drew together blackly, and he turned to
the Queen. "Is this true?" said he sternly.

"Yea," said the Queen, smiling, "the Bishop hath told the truth; and
truly he should know them well, for he and two of his friars spent three
days in merry sport with Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest. I did little
think that the good Bishop would so betray his friends. But bear in mind
that thou hast pledged thy promise for the safety of these good yeomen
for forty days."

"I will keep my promise," said the King, in a deep voice that showed the
anger in his heart, "but when these forty days are gone let this outlaw
look to himself, for mayhap things will not go so smoothly with him
as he would like." Then he turned to his archers, who stood near the
Sherwood yeomen, listening and wondering at all that passed. Quoth he,
"Gilbert, and thou, Tepus, and thou, Hubert, I have pledged myself that
ye shall shoot against these three fellows. If ye outshoot the knaves I
will fill your caps with silver pennies; if ye fail ye shall lose
your prizes that ye have won so fairly, and they go to them that shoot
against you, man to man. Do your best, lads, and if ye win this bout ye
shall be glad of it to the last days of your life. Go, now, and get you
gone to the butts."

Then the three archers of the King turned and went back to their booths,
and Robin and his men went to their places at the mark from which they
were to shoot. Then they strung their bows and made themselves ready,
looking over their quivers of arrows, and picking out the roundest and
the best feathered.

But when the King's archers went to their tents, they told their friends
all that had passed, and how that these four men were the famous Robin
Hood and three of his band, to wit, Little John, Will Scarlet, and Allan
a Dale. The news of this buzzed around among the archers in the
booths, for there was not a man there that had not heard of these great
mid-country yeomen. From the archers the news was taken up by the crowd
that looked on at the shooting, so that at last everybody stood up,
craning their necks to catch sight of the famous outlaws.

Six fresh targets were now set up, one for each man that was to shoot;
whereupon Gilbert and Tepus and Hubert came straightway forth from the
booths. Then Robin Hood and Gilbert of the White Hand tossed a farthing
aloft to see who should lead in the shooting, and the lot fell to
Gilbert's side; thereupon he called upon Hubert of Suffolk to lead.

Hubert took his place, planted his foot firmly, and fitted a fair,
smooth arrow; then, breathing upon his fingertips, he drew the string
slowly and carefully. The arrow sped true, and lodged in the white;
again he shot, and again he hit the clout; a third shaft he sped, but
this time failed of the center, and but struck the black, yet not more
than a finger's-breadth from the white. At this a shout went up, for it
was the best shooting that Hubert had yet done that day.

Merry Robin laughed, and quoth he, "Thou wilt have an ill time bettering
that round, Will, for it is thy turn next. Brace thy thews, lad, and
bring not shame upon Sherwood."

Then Will Scarlet took his place; but, because of overcaution, he
spoiled his target with the very first arrow that he sped, for he hit
the next ring to the black, the second from the center. At this Robin
bit his lips. "Lad, lad," quoth he, "hold not the string so long! Have
I not often told thee what Gaffer Swanthold sayeth, that 'overcaution
spilleth the milk'?" To this Will Scarlet took heed, so the next arrow
he shot lodged fairly in the center ring; again he shot, and again he
smote the center; but, for all that, stout Hubert had outshot him, and
showed the better target. Then all those that looked on clapped their
hands for joy because that Hubert had overcome the stranger.

Quoth the King grimly, to the Queen, "If thy archers shoot no better
than that, thou art like to lose thy wager, lady." But Queen Eleanor
smiled, for she looked for better things from Robin Hood and Little
John.

And now Tepus took his place to shoot. He, also, took overheed to what
he was about, and so he fell into Will Scarlet's error. The first arrow
he struck into the center ring, but the second missed its mark, and
smote the black; the last arrow was tipped with luck, for it smote the
very center of the clout, upon the black spot that marked it. Quoth
Robin Hood, "That is the sweetest shot that hath been sped this day;
but, nevertheless, friend Tepus, thy cake is burned, methinks. Little
John, it is thy turn next."

So Little John took his place as bidden, and shot his three arrows
quickly. He never lowered his bow arm in all the shooting, but fitted
each shaft with his longbow raised; yet all three of his arrows smote
the center within easy distance of the black. At this no sound of
shouting was heard, for, although it was the best shooting that had been
done that day, the folk of London Town did not like to see the stout
Tepus overcome by a fellow from the countryside, even were he as famous
as Little John.

And now stout Gilbert of the White Hand took his place and shot with the
greatest care; and again, for the third time in one day, he struck all
three shafts into the clout.

"Well done, Gilbert!" quoth Robin Hood, smiting him upon the shoulder.
"I make my vow, thou art one of the best archers that ever mine eyes
beheld. Thou shouldst be a free and merry ranger like us, lad, for thou
art better fitted for the greenwood than for the cobblestones and gray
walls of London Town." So saying, he took his place, and drew a fair,
round arrow from his quiver, which he turned over and over ere he fitted
it to his bowstring.

Then the King muttered in his beard, "Now, blessed Saint Hubert, if thou
wilt but jog that rogue's elbow so as to make him smite even the second
ring, I will give eightscore waxen candles three fingers'-breadth in
thickness to thy chapel nigh Matching." But it may be Saint Hubert's
ears were stuffed with tow, for he seemed not to hear the King's prayer
this day.

Having gotten three shafts to his liking, merry Robin looked carefully
to his bowstring ere he shot. "Yea," quoth he to Gilbert, who stood
nigh him to watch his shooting, "thou shouldst pay us a visit at merry
Sherwood." Here he drew the bowstring to his ear. "In London"--here
he loosed his shaft--"thou canst find nought to shoot at but rooks and
daws; there one can tickle the ribs of the noblest stags in England." So
he shot even while he talked, yet the shaft lodged not more than half an
inch from the very center.

"By my soul!" cried Gilbert. "Art thou the devil in blue, to shoot in
that wise?"

"Nay," quoth Robin, laughing, "not quite so ill as that, I trust." And
he took up another shaft and fitted it to the string. Again he shot, and
again he smote his arrow close beside the center; a third time he loosed
his bowstring and dropped his arrow just betwixt the other two and
into the very center, so that the feathers of all three were ruffled
together, seeming from a distance to be one thick shaft.

And now a low murmur ran all among that great crowd, for never before
had London seen such shooting as this; and never again would it see it
after Robin Hood's day had gone. All saw that the King's archers were
fairly beaten, and stout Gilbert clapped his palm to Robin's, owning
that he could never hope to draw such a bowstring as Robin Hood or
Little John. But the King, full of wrath, would not have it so, though
he knew in his mind that his men could not stand against those fellows.
"Nay!" cried he, clenching his hands upon the arms of his seat, "Gilbert
is not yet beaten! Did he not strike the clout thrice? Although I have
lost my wager, he hath not yet lost the first prize. They shall shoot
again, and still again, till either he or that knave Robin Hood cometh
off the best. Go thou, Sir Hugh, and bid them shoot another round, and
another, until one or the other is overcome." Then Sir Hugh, seeing how
wroth the King was, said never a word, but went straightway to do his
bidding; so he came to where Robin Hood and the other stood, and told
them what the King had said.

"With all my heart," quoth merry Robin, "I will shoot from this time
till tomorrow day if it can pleasure my most gracious lord and King.
Take thy place, Gilbert lad, and shoot."

So Gilbert took his place once more, but this time he failed, for, a
sudden little wind arising, his shaft missed the center ring, but by not
more than the breadth of a barley straw.

"Thy eggs are cracked, Gilbert," quoth Robin, laughing; and straightway
he loosed a shaft, and once more smote the white circle of the center.

Then the King arose from his place, and not a word said he, but he
looked around with a baleful look, and it would have been an ill day for
anyone that he saw with a joyous or a merry look upon his face. Then he
and his Queen and all the court left the place, but the King's heart was
brimming full of wrath.

After the King had gone, all the yeomen of the archer guard came
crowding around Robin, and Little John, and Will, and Allan, to snatch
a look at these famous fellows from the mid-country; and with them came
many that had been onlookers at the sport, for the same purpose. Thus it
happened presently that the yeomen, to whom Gilbert stood talking, were
all surrounded by a crowd of people that formed a ring about them.

After a while the three judges that had the giving away of the prizes
came forward, and the chief of them all spake to Robin and said,
"According to agreement, the first prize belongeth rightly to thee; so
here I give thee the silver bugle, here the quiver of ten golden arrows,
and here a purse of twoscore and ten golden pounds." And as he spake he
handed those things to Robin, and then turned to Little John. "To thee,"
he said, "belongeth the second prize, to wit, fivescore of the finest
harts that run on Dallen Lea. Thou mayest shoot them whensoever thou
dost list." Last of all he turned to stout Hubert. "Thou," said he,
"hast held thine own against the yeomen with whom thou didst shoot, and
so thou hast kept the prize duly thine, to wit, two tuns of good Rhenish
wine. These shall be delivered to thee whensoever thou dost list." Then
he called upon the other seven of the King's archers who had last shot,
and gave each fourscore silver pennies.

Then up spake Robin, and quoth he, "This silver bugle I keep in honor of
this shooting match; but thou, Gilbert, art the best archer of all the
King's guard, and to thee I freely give this purse of gold. Take it,
man, and would it were ten times as much, for thou art a right yeoman,
good and true. Furthermore, to each of the ten that last shot I give one
of these golden shafts apiece. Keep them always by you, so that ye may
tell your grandchildren, an ye are ever blessed with them, that ye are
the very stoutest yeomen in all the wide world."

At this all shouted aloud, for it pleased them to hear Robin speak so of
them.

Then up spake Little John. "Good friend Tepus," said he, "I want not
those harts of Dallen Lea that yon stout judge spoke of but now, for in
truth we have enow and more than enow in our own country. Twoscore and
ten I give to thee for thine own shooting, and five I give to each band
for their pleasure."

At this another great shout went up, and many tossed their caps aloft,
and swore among themselves that no better fellows ever walked the sod
than Robin Hood and his stout yeomen.

While they so shouted with loud voices, a tall burly yeoman of the
King's guard came forward and plucked Robin by the sleeve. "Good
master," quoth he, "I have somewhat to tell thee in thine ear; a silly
thing, God wot, for one stout yeoman to tell another; but a young
peacock of a page, one Richard Partington, was seeking thee without
avail in the crowd, and, not being able to find thee, told me that he
bore a message to thee from a certain lady that thou wottest of. This
message he bade me tell thee privily, word for word, and thus it was.
Let me see--I trust I have forgot it not--yea, thus it was: 'The lion
growls. Beware thy head.'"

"Is it so?" quoth Robin, starting; for he knew right well that it was
the Queen sent the message, and that she spake of the King's wrath.
"Now, I thank thee, good fellow, for thou hast done me greater service
than thou knowest of this day." Then he called his three yeomen together
and told them privately that they had best be jogging, as it was like to
be ill for them so nigh merry London Town. So, without tarrying longer,
they made their way through the crowd until they had come out from the
press. Then, without stopping, they left London Town and started away
northward.




The Chase of Robin Hood

SO ROBIN HOOD and the others left the archery range at Finsbury Fields,
and, tarrying not, set forth straightway upon their homeward journey.
It was well for them that they did so, for they had not gone more than
three or four miles upon their way when six of the yeomen of the King's
guard came bustling among the crowd that still lingered, seeking for
Robin and his men, to seize upon them and make them prisoners. Truly, it
was an ill-done thing in the King to break his promise, but it all came
about through the Bishop of Hereford's doing, for thus it happened:

After the King left the archery ground, he went straightway to his
cabinet, and with him went the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Robert Lee;
but the King said never a word to these two, but sat gnawing his nether
lip, for his heart was galled within him by what had happened. At last
the Bishop of Hereford spoke, in a low, sorrowful voice: "It is a sad
thing, Your Majesty, that this knavish outlaw should be let to escape in
this wise; for, let him but get back to Sherwood Forest safe and sound,
and he may snap his fingers at king and king's men."

At these words the King raised his eyes and looked grimly upon the
Bishop. "Sayst thou so?" quoth he. "Now, I will show thee, in good time,
how much thou dost err, for, when the forty days are past and gone,
I will seize upon this thieving outlaw, if I have to tear down all of
Sherwood to find him. Thinkest thou that the laws of the King of England
are to be so evaded by one poor knave without friends or money?"

Then the Bishop spoke again, in his soft, smooth voice:

"Forgive my boldness, Your Majesty, and believe that I have nought but
the good of England and Your Majesty's desirings at heart; but what
would it boot though my gracious lord did root up every tree of
Sherwood? Are there not other places for Robin Hood's hiding? Cannock
Chase is not far from Sherwood, and the great Forest of Arden is not far
from Cannock Chase. Beside these are many other woodlands in Nottingham
and Derby, Lincoln and York, amid any of which Your Majesty might as
well think to seize upon Robin Hood as to lay finger upon a rat among
the dust and broken things of a garret. Nay, my gracious lord, if he
doth once plant foot in the woodland, he is lost to the law forever."

At these words the King tapped his fingertips upon the table beside him
with vexation. "What wouldst thou have me do, Bishop?" quoth he. "Didst
thou not hear me pledge my word to the Queen? Thy talk is as barren as
the wind from the bellows upon dead coals."

"Far be it from me," said the cunning Bishop, "to point the way to one
so clear-sighted as Your Majesty; but, were I the King of England, I
should look upon the matter in this wise: I have promised my Queen, let
us say, that for forty days the cunningest rogue in all England shall
have freedom to come and go; but, lo! I find this outlaw in my grasp;
shall I, then, foolishly cling to a promise so hastily given? Suppose
that I had promised to do Her Majesty's bidding, whereupon she bade me
to slay myself; should I, then, shut mine eyes and run blindly upon
my sword? Thus would I argue within myself. Moreover, I would say unto
myself, a woman knoweth nought of the great things appertaining to state
government; and, likewise, I know a woman is ever prone to take up a
fancy, even as she would pluck a daisy from the roadside, and then throw
it away when the savor is gone; therefore, though she hath taken a fancy
to this outlaw, it will soon wane away and be forgotten. As for me, I
have the greatest villain in all England in my grasp; shall I, then,
open my hand and let him slip betwixt my fingers? Thus, Your Majesty,
would I say to myself, were I the King of England." So the Bishop
talked, and the King lent his ear to his evil counsel, until, after a
while, he turned to Sir Robert Lee and bade him send six of the yeomen
of the guard to take Robin Hood and his three men prisoners.

Now Sir Robert Lee was a gentle and noble knight, and he felt grieved
to the heart to see the King so break his promise; nevertheless, he said
nothing, for he saw how bitterly the King was set against Robin Hood;
but he did not send the yeomen of the guard at once, but went first to
the Queen, and told her all that had passed, and bade her send word to
Robin of his danger. This he did not for the well-being of Robin Hood,
but because he would save his lord's honor if he could. Thus it came
about that when, after a while, the yeomen of the guard went to the
archery field, they found not Robin and the others, and so got no cakes
at that fair.

The afternoon was already well-nigh gone when Robin Hood, Little John,
Will, and Allan set forth upon their homeward way, trudging along
merrily through the yellow slanting light, which speedily changed to
rosy red as the sun sank low in the heavens. The shadows grew long,
and finally merged into the grayness of the mellow twilight. The dusty
highway lay all white betwixt the dark hedgerows, and along it walked
four fellows like four shadows, the pat of their feet sounding loud, and
their voices, as they talked, ringing clear upon the silence of the air.
The great round moon was floating breathlessly up in the eastern sky
when they saw before them the twinkling lights of Barnet Town, some ten
or twelve miles from London. Down they walked through the stony streets
and past the cosy houses with overhanging gables, before the doors of
which sat the burghers and craftsmen in the mellow moonlight, with
their families about them, and so came at last, on the other side of
the hamlet, to a little inn, all shaded with roses and woodbines. Before
this inn Robin Hood stopped, for the spot pleased him well. Quoth he,
"Here will we take up our inn and rest for the night, for we are well
away from London Town and our King's wrath. Moreover, if I mistake not,
we will find sweet faring within. What say ye, lads?"

"In sooth, good master," quoth Little John, "thy bidding and my doing
ever fit together like cakes and ale. Let us in, I say also."

Then up spake Will Scarlet: "I am ever ready to do what thou sayest,
uncle, yet I could wish that we were farther upon our way ere we rest
for the night. Nevertheless, if thou thinkest best, let us in for the
night, say I also."

So in they went and called for the best that the place afforded. Then a
right good feast was set before them, with two stout bottles of old sack
to wash it down withal. These things were served by as plump and buxom a
lass as you could find in all the land, so that Little John, who always
had an eye for a fair lass, even when meat and drink were by, stuck his
arms akimbo and fixed his eyes upon her, winking sweetly whenever he saw
her looking toward him. Then you should have seen how the lass twittered
with laughter, and how she looked at Little John out of the corners of
her eyes, a dimple coming in either cheek; for the fellow had always a
taking way with the womenfolk.

So the feast passed merrily, and never had that inn seen such lusty
feeders as these four stout fellows; but at last they were done their
eating, though it seemed as though they never would have ended, and
sat loitering over the sack. As they so sat, the landlord came in of
a sudden, and said that there was one at the door, a certain young
esquire, Richard Partington, of the Queen's household, who wished to
see the lad in blue, and speak with him, without loss of time. So Robin
arose quickly, and, bidding the landlord not to follow him, left the
others gazing at one another, and wondering what was about to happen.

When Robin came out of the inn, he found young Richard Partington
sitting upon his horse in the white moonlight, awaiting his coming.

"What news bearest thou, Sir Page?" said Robin. "I trust that it is not
of an ill nature."

"Why," said young Partington, "for the matter of that, it is ill enow.
The King hath been bitterly stirred up against thee by that vile Bishop
of Hereford. He sent to arrest thee at the archery butts at Finsbury
Fields, but not finding thee there, he hath gathered together his armed
men, fifty-score and more, and is sending them in haste along this very
road to Sherwood, either to take thee on the way or to prevent thy
getting back to the woodlands again. He hath given the Bishop of
Hereford command over all these men, and thou knowest what thou hast
to expect of the Bishop of Hereford--short shrift and a long rope. Two
bands of horsemen are already upon the road, not far behind me, so
thou hadst best get thee gone from this place straightway, for, if thou
tarriest longer, thou art like to sleep this night in a cold dungeon.
This word the Queen hath bidden me bring to thee."

"Now, Richard Partington," quoth Robin, "this is the second time that
thou hast saved my life, and if the proper time ever cometh I will show
thee that Robin Hood never forgets these things. As for that Bishop of
Hereford, if I ever catch him nigh to Sherwood again, things will be
like to go ill with him. Thou mayst tell the good Queen that I will
leave this place without delay, and will let the landlord think that we
are going to Saint Albans; but when we are upon the highroad again, I
will go one way through the country and will send my men the other, so
that if one falleth into the King's hands the others may haply escape.
We will go by devious ways, and so, I hope, will reach Sherwood in
safety. And now, Sir Page, I wish thee farewell."

"Farewell, thou bold yeoman," said young Partington, "and mayst thou
reach thy hiding in safety." So each shook the other's hand, and the
lad, turning his horse's head, rode back toward London, while Robin
entered the inn once more.

There he found his yeomen sitting in silence, waiting his coming;
likewise the landlord was there, for he was curious to know what Master
Partington had to do with the fellow in blue. "Up, my merry men!" quoth
Robin, "this is no place for us, for those are after us with whom we
will stand but an ill chance an we fall into their hands. So we will
go forward once more, nor will we stop this night till we reach Saint
Albans." Hereupon, taking out his purse, he paid the landlord his score,
and so they left the inn.

When they had come to the highroad without the town, Robin stopped and
told them all that had passed between young Partington and himself, and
how that the King's men were after them with hot heels. Then he told
them that here they should part company; they three going to the
eastward and he to the westward, and so, skirting the main highroads,
would come by devious paths to Sherwood. "So, be ye wily," said Robin
Hood, "and keep well away from the northward roads till ye have gotten
well to the eastward. And thou, Will Scarlet, take the lead of the
others, for thou hast a cunning turn to thy wits." Then Robin kissed the
three upon the cheeks, and they kissed him, and so they parted company.

Not long after this, a score or more of the King's men came clattering
up to the door of the inn at Barnet Town. Here they leaped from their
horses and quickly surrounded the place, the leader of the band and four
others entering the room where the yeomen had been. But they found that
their birds had flown again, and that the King had been balked a second
time.

"Methought that they were naughty fellows," said the host, when he heard
whom the men-at-arms sought. "But I heard that blue-clad knave say that
they would go straight forward to Saint Albans; so, an ye hurry forward,
ye may, perchance, catch them on the highroad betwixt here and there."
For this news the leader of the band thanked mine host right heartily,
and, calling his men together, mounted and set forth again, galloping
forward to Saint Albans upon a wild goose chase.

After Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale had left the highway
near garnet, they traveled toward the eastward, without stopping, as
long as their legs could carry them, until they came to Chelmsford,
in Essex. Thence they turned northward, and came through Cambridge and
Lincolnshire, to the good town of Gainsborough. Then, striking to the
westward and the south, they came at last to the northern borders of
Sherwood Forest, without in all that time having met so much as a single
band of the King's men. Eight days they journeyed thus ere they reached
the woodlands in safety, but when they got to the greenwood glade, they
found that Robin had not yet returned.

For Robin was not as lucky in getting back as his men had been, as you
shall presently hear.

After having left the great northern road, he turned his face to the
westward, and so came past Aylesbury, to fair Woodstock, in Oxfordshire.
Thence he turned his footsteps northward, traveling for a great distance
by way of Warwick Town, till he came to Dudley, in Staffordshire. Seven
days it took him to journey thus far, and then he thought he had gotten
far enough to the north, so, turning toward the eastward, shunning the
main roads, and choosing byways and grassy lanes, he went, by way of
Litchfield and Ashby de la Zouch, toward Sherwood, until he came to a
place called Stanton. And now Robin's heart began to laugh aloud, for
he thought that his danger had gone by, and that his nostrils would soon
snuff the spicy air of the woodlands once again. But there is many a
slip betwixt the cup and the lip, and this Robin was to find. For thus
it was:

When the King's men found themselves foiled at Saint Albans, and that
Robin and his men were not to be found high nor low, they knew not what
to do. Presently another band of horsemen came, and another, until all
the moonlit streets were full of armed men. Betwixt midnight and
dawn another band came to the town, and with them came the Bishop of
Hereford. When he heard that Robin Hood had once more slipped out of
the trap, he stayed not a minute, but, gathering his bands together, he
pushed forward to the northward with speed, leaving orders for all the
troops that came to Saint Albans to follow after him without tarrying.
On the evening of the fourth day he reached Nottingham Town, and there
straightway divided his men into bands of six or seven, and sent them
all through the countryside, blocking every highway and byway to the
eastward and the southward and the westward of Sherwood. The Sheriff
of Nottingham called forth all his men likewise, and joined with the
Bishop, for he saw that this was the best chance that had ever befallen
of paying back his score in full to Robin Hood. Will Scarlet and Little
John and Allan a Dale had just missed the King's men to the eastward,
for the very next day after they had passed the line and entered
Sherwood the roads through which they had traveled were blocked, so
that, had they tarried in their journeying, they would surely have
fallen into the Bishop's hands.

But of all this Robin knew not a whit; so he whistled merrily as he
trudged along the road beyond Stanton, with his heart as free from care
as the yolk of an egg is from cobwebs. At last he came to where a little
stream spread across the road in a shallow sheet, tinkling and sparkling
as it fretted over its bed of golden gravel. Here Robin stopped, being
athirst, and, kneeling down, he made a cup of the palms of his hands,
and began to drink. On either side of the road, for a long distance,
stood tangled thickets of bushes and young trees, and it pleased Robin's
heart to hear the little birds singing therein, for it made him think
of Sherwood, and it seemed as though it had been a lifetime since he had
breathed the air of the woodlands. But of a sudden, as he thus stooped,
drinking, something hissed past his ear, and struck with a splash into
the gravel and water beside him. Quick as a wink Robin sprang to his
feet, and, at one bound, crossed the stream and the roadside, and
plunged headlong into the thicket, without looking around, for he knew
right well that that which had hissed so venomously beside his ear was
a gray goose shaft, and that to tarry so much as a moment meant death.
Even as he leaped into the thicket six more arrows rattled among the
branches after him, one of which pierced his doublet, and would have
struck deeply into his side but for the tough coat of steel that he
wore. Then up the road came riding some of the King's men at headlong
speed. They leaped from their horses and plunged straightway into the
thicket after Robin. But Robin knew the ground better than they did,
so crawling here, stooping there, and, anon, running across some little
open, he soon left them far behind, coming out, at last, upon another
road about eight hundred paces distant from the one he had left. Here he
stood for a moment, listening to the distant shouts of the seven men
as they beat up and down in the thickets like hounds that had lost the
scent of the quarry. Then, buckling his belt more tightly around his
waist, he ran fleetly down the road toward the eastward and Sherwood.

But Robin had not gone more than three furlongs in that direction when
he came suddenly to the brow of a hill, and saw beneath him another band
of the King's men seated in the shade along the roadside in the valley
beneath. Then he paused not a moment, but, seeing that they had not
caught sight of him, he turned and ran back whence he had come, knowing
that it was better to run the chance of escaping those fellows that were
yet in the thickets than to rush into the arms of those in the valley.
So back he ran with all speed, and had gotten safely past the thickets,
when the seven men came forth into the open road. They raised a great
shout when they saw him, such as the hunter gives when the deer breaks
cover, but Robin was then a quarter of a mile and more away from them,
coursing over the ground like a greyhound. He never slackened his pace,
but ran along, mile after mile, till he had come nigh to Mackworth, over
beyond the Derwent River, nigh to Derby Town. Here, seeing that he was
out of present danger, he slackened in his running, and at last sat him
down beneath a hedge where the grass was the longest and the shade the
coolest, there to rest and catch his wind. "By my soul, Robin," quoth he
to himself, "that was the narrowest miss that e'er thou hadst in all
thy life. I do say most solemnly that the feather of that wicked shaft
tickled mine ear as it whizzed past. This same running hath given me a
most craving appetite for victuals and drink. Now I pray Saint Dunstan
that he send me speedily some meat and beer."

It seemed as though Saint Dunstan was like to answer his prayer, for
along the road came plodding a certain cobbler, one Quince, of Derby,
who had been to take a pair of shoes to a farmer nigh Kirk Langly, and
was now coming back home again, with a fair boiled capon in his pouch
and a stout pottle of beer by his side, which same the farmer had given
him for joy of such a stout pair of shoon. Good Quince was an honest
fellow, but his wits were somewhat of the heavy sort, like unbaked
dough, so that the only thing that was in his mind was, "Three shillings
sixpence ha'penny for thy shoon, good Quince--three shillings sixpence
ha'penny for thy shoon," and this traveled round and round inside of his
head, without another thought getting into his noddle, as a pea rolls
round and round inside an empty quart pot.

"Halloa, good friend," quoth Robin, from beneath the hedge, when the
other had gotten nigh enough, "whither away so merrily this bright day?"

Hearing himself so called upon, the Cobbler stopped, and, seeing a
well-clad stranger in blue, he spoke to him in seemly wise. "Give ye
good den, fair sir, and I would say that I come from Kirk Langly, where
I ha' sold my shoon and got three shillings sixpence ha'penny for them
in as sweet money as ever thou sawest, and honestly earned too, I would
ha' thee know. But an I may be so bold, thou pretty fellow, what dost
thou there beneath the hedge?"

"Marry," quoth merry Robin, "I sit beneath the hedge here to drop salt
on the tails of golden birds; but in sooth thou art the first chick of
any worth I ha' seen this blessed day."

At these words the Cobbler's eyes opened big and wide, and his mouth
grew round with wonder, like a knothole in a board fence, "slack-a-day,"
quoth he, "look ye, now! I ha' never seen those same golden birds. And
dost thou in sooth find them in these hedges, good fellow? Prythee, tell
me, are there many of them? I would fain find them mine own self."

"Ay, truly," quoth Robin, "they are as thick here as fresh herring in
Cannock Chase."

"Look ye, now!" said the Cobbler, all drowned in wonder. "And dost thou
in sooth catch them by dropping salt on their pretty tails?"

"Yea," quoth Robin, "but this salt is of an odd kind, let me tell thee,
for it can only be gotten by boiling down a quart of moonbeams in a
wooden platter, and then one hath but a pinch. But tell me, now, thou
witty man, what hast thou gotten there in that pouch by thy side and in
that pottle?"

At these words the Cobbler looked down at those things of which merry
Robin spoke, for the thoughts of the golden bird had driven them from
his mind, and it took him some time to scrape the memory of them back
again. "Why," said he at last, "in the one is good March beer, and in
the other is a fat capon. Truly, Quince the Cobbler will ha' a fine
feast this day an I mistake not."

"But tell me, good Quince," said Robin, "hast thou a mind to sell those
things to me? For the hearing of them sounds sweet in mine ears. I will
give thee these gay clothes of blue that I have upon my body and ten
shillings to boot for thy clothes and thy leather apron and thy beer and
thy capon. What sayst thou, bully boy?"

"Nay, thou dost jest with me," said the Cobbler, "for my clothes are
coarse and patched, and thine are of fine stuff and very pretty."

"Never a jest do I speak," quoth Robin. "Come, strip thy jacket off and
I will show thee, for I tell thee I like thy clothes well. Moreover, I
will be kind to thee, for I will feast straightway upon the good things
thou hast with thee, and thou shalt be bidden to the eating." At these
words he began slipping off his doublet, and the Cobbler, seeing him so
in earnest, began pulling off his clothes also, for Robin Hood's garb
tickled his eye. So each put on the other fellow's clothes, and Robin
gave the honest Cobbler ten bright new shillings. Quoth merry Robin,
"I ha' been a many things in my life before, but never have I been an
honest cobbler. Come, friend, let us fall to and eat, for something
within me cackles aloud for that good fat capon." So both sat down and
began to feast right lustily, so that when they were done the bones of
the capon were picked as bare as charity.

Then Robin stretched his legs out with a sweet feeling of comfort within
him. Quoth he, "By the turn of thy voice, good Quince, I know that
thou hast a fair song or two running loose in thy head like colts in a
meadow. I prythee, turn one of them out for me."

"A song or two I ha'," quoth the Cobbler, "poor things, poor things, but
such as they are thou art welcome to one of them." So, moistening his
throat with a swallow of beer, he sang:

     "_Of all the joys, the best I love,
     Sing hey my frisking Nan, O,
     And that which most my soul doth move,
     It is the clinking can, O.

     "All other bliss I'd throw away,
     Sing hey my frisking Nan, O,
     But this_--"

The stout Cobbler got no further in his song, for of a sudden six
horsemen burst upon them where they sat, and seized roughly upon the
honest craftsman, hauling him to his feet, and nearly plucking the
clothes from him as they did so. "Ha!" roared the leader of the band
in a great big voice of joy, "have we then caught thee at last, thou
blue-clad knave? Now, blessed be the name of Saint Hubert, for we are
fourscore pounds richer this minute than we were before, for the good
Bishop of Hereford hath promised that much to the band that shall bring
thee to him. Oho! thou cunning rascal! thou wouldst look so innocent,
forsooth! We know thee, thou old fox. But off thou goest with us to have
thy brush clipped forthwith." At these words the poor Cobbler gazed all
around him with his great blue eyes as round as those of a dead fish,
while his mouth gaped as though he had swallowed all his words and so
lost his speech.

Robin also gaped and stared in a wondering way, just as the Cobbler
would have done in his place. "Alack-a-daisy, me," quoth he. "I know
not whether I be sitting here or in No-man's-land! What meaneth all this
stir i' th' pot, dear good gentlemen? Surely this is a sweet, honest
fellow."

"'Honest fellow,' sayst thou, clown?" quoth one of the men "Why, I tell
thee that this is that same rogue that men call Robin Hood."

At this speech the Cobbler stared and gaped more than ever, for there
was such a threshing of thoughts going on within his poor head that his
wits were all befogged with the dust and chaff thereof. Moreover, as
he looked at Robin Hood, and saw the yeoman look so like what he knew
himself to be, he began to doubt and to think that mayhap he was the
great outlaw in real sooth. Said he in a slow, wondering voice, "Am I
in very truth that fellow?--Now I had thought--but nay, Quince, thou art
mistook--yet--am I?--Nay, I must indeed be Robin Hood! Yet, truly, I had
never thought to pass from an honest craftsman to such a great yeoman."

"Alas!" quoth Robin Hood, "look ye there, now! See how your
ill-treatment hath curdled the wits of this poor lad and turned them all
sour! I, myself, am Quince, the Cobbler of Derby Town."

"Is it so?" said Quince. "Then, indeed, I am somebody else, and can be
none other than Robin Hood. Take me, fellows; but let me tell you that
ye ha' laid hand upon the stoutest yeoman that ever trod the woodlands."

"Thou wilt play madman, wilt thou?" said the leader of the band. "Here,
Giles, fetch a cord and bind this knave's hands behind him. I warrant
we will bring his wits back to him again when we get him safe before our
good Bishop at Tutbury Town." Thereupon they tied the Cobbler's hands
behind him, and led him off with a rope, as the farmer leads off the
calf he hath brought from the fair. Robin stood looking after them, and
when they were gone he laughed till the tears rolled down his cheeks;
for he knew that no harm would befall the honest fellow, and he pictured
to himself the Bishop's face when good Quince was brought before him
as Robin Hood. Then, turning his steps once more to the eastward, he
stepped out right foot foremost toward Nottinghamshire and Sherwood
Forest.

But Robin Hood had gone through more than he wotted of. His journey
from London had been hard and long, and in a se'ennight he had traveled
sevenscore and more of miles. He thought now to travel on without
stopping until he had come to Sherwood, but ere he had gone a half a
score of miles he felt his strength giving way beneath him like a river
bank which the waters have undermined. He sat him down and rested, but
he knew within himself that he could go no farther that day, for his
feet felt like lumps of lead, so heavy were they with weariness. Once
more he arose and went forward, but after traveling a couple of miles
he was fain to give the matter up, so, coming to an inn just then, he
entered and calling the landlord, bade him show him to a room, although
the sun was only then just sinking in the western sky. There were but
three bedrooms in the place, and to the meanest of these the landlord
showed Robin Hood, but little Robin cared for the looks of the place,
for he could have slept that night upon a bed of broken stones. So,
stripping off his clothes without more ado, he rolled into the bed and
was asleep almost ere his head touched the pillow.

Not long after Robin had so gone to his rest a great cloud peeped
blackly over the hills to the westward. Higher and higher it arose
until it piled up into the night like a mountain of darkness. All around
beneath it came ever and anon a dull red flash, and presently a short
grim mutter of the coming thunder was heard. Then up rode four stout
burghers of Nottingham Town, for this was the only inn within
five miles' distance, and they did not care to be caught in such a
thunderstorm as this that was coming upon them. Leaving their nags to
the stableman, they entered the best room of the inn, where fresh green
rushes lay all spread upon the floor, and there called for the goodliest
fare that the place afforded. After having eaten heartily they bade the
landlord show them to their rooms, for they were aweary, having ridden
all the way from Dronfield that day. So off they went, grumbling at
having to sleep two in a bed, but their troubles on this score, as well
as all others, were soon lost in the quietness of sleep.

And now came the first gust of wind, rushing past the place, clapping
and banging the doors and shutters, smelling of the coming rain, and all
wrapped in a cloud of dust and leaves. As though the wind had brought a
guest along with it, the door opened of a sudden and in came a friar of
Emmet Priory, and one in high degree, as was shown by the softness and
sleekness of his robes and the richness of his rosary. He called to the
landlord, and bade him first have his mule well fed and bedded in the
stable, and then to bring him the very best there was in the house.
So presently a savory stew of tripe and onions, with sweet little fat
dumplings, was set before him, likewise a good stout pottle of
Malmsey, and straightway the holy friar fell to with great courage and
heartiness, so that in a short time nought was left but a little pool of
gravy in the center of the platter, not large enow to keep the life in a
starving mouse.

In the meantime the storm broke. Another gust of wind went rushing
by, and with it fell a few heavy drops of rain, which presently came
rattling down in showers, beating against the casements like a hundred
little hands. Bright flashes of lightning lit up every raindrop, and
with them came cracks of thunder that went away rumbling and bumping as
though Saint Swithin were busy rolling great casks of water across rough
ground overhead. The womenfolks screamed, and the merry wags in
the taproom put their arms around their waists to soothe them into
quietness.

At last the holy friar bade the landlord show him to his room; but when
he heard that he was to bed with a cobbler, he was as ill contented a
fellow as you could find in all England, nevertheless there was nothing
for it, and he must sleep there or nowhere; so, taking up his candle,
he went off, grumbling like the now distant thunder. When he came to the
room where he was to sleep he held the light over Robin and looked at
him from top to toe; then he felt better pleased, for, instead, of a
rough, dirty-bearded fellow, he beheld as fresh and clean a lad as one
could find in a week of Sundays; so, slipping off his clothes, he also
huddled into the bed, where Robin, grunting and grumbling in his sleep,
made room for him. Robin was more sound asleep, I wot, than he had been
for many a day, else he would never have rested so quietly with one of
the friar's sort so close beside him. As for the friar, had he known who
Robin Hood was, you may well believe he would almost as soon have slept
with an adder as with the man he had for a bedfellow.

So the night passed comfortably enough, but at the first dawn of day
Robin opened his eyes and turned his head upon the pillow. Then how he
gaped and how he stared, for there beside him lay one all shaven and
shorn, so that he knew that it must be a fellow in holy orders. He
pinched himself sharply, but, finding he was awake, sat up in bed, while
the other slumbered as peacefully as though he were safe and sound at
home in Emmet Priory. "Now," quoth Robin to himself, "I wonder how this
thing hath dropped into my bed during the night." So saying, he arose
softly, so as not to waken the other, and looking about the room he
espied the friar's clothes lying upon a bench near the wall. First he
looked at the clothes, with his head on one side, and then he looked
at the friar and slowly winked one eye. Quoth he, "Good Brother
What-e'er-thy-name-may-be, as thou hast borrowed my bed so freely I'll
e'en borrow thy clothes in return." So saying, he straightway donned the
holy man's garb, but kindly left the cobbler's clothes in the place
of it. Then he went forth into the freshness of the morning, and the
stableman that was up and about the stables opened his eyes as though he
saw a green mouse before him, for such men as the friars of Emmet were
not wont to be early risers; but the man bottled his thoughts, and only
asked Robin whether he wanted his mule brought from the stable.

"Yea, my son," quoth Robin--albeit he knew nought of the mule--"and
bring it forth quickly, I prythee, for I am late and must be jogging."
So presently the stableman brought forth the mule, and Robin mounted it
and went on his way rejoicing.

As for the holy friar, when he arose he was in as pretty a stew as any
man in all the world, for his rich, soft robes were gone, likewise his
purse with ten golden pounds in it, and nought was left but patched
clothes and a leathern apron. He raged and swore like any layman, but as
his swearing mended nothing and the landlord could not aid him, and as,
moreover, he was forced to be at Emmet Priory that very morning upon
matters of business, he was fain either to don the cobbler's clothes
or travel the road in nakedness. So he put on the clothes, and, still
raging and swearing vengeance against all the cobblers in Derbyshire,
he set forth upon his way afoot; but his ills had not yet done with him,
for he had not gone far ere he fell into the hands of the King's men,
who marched him off, willy-nilly, to Tutbury Town and the Bishop of
Hereford. In vain he swore he was a holy man, and showed his shaven
crown; off he must go, for nothing would do but that he was Robin Hood.

Meanwhile merry Robin rode along contentedly, passing safely by two
bands of the King's men, until his heart began to dance within him
because of the nearness of Sherwood; so he traveled ever on to the
eastward, till, of a sudden, he met a noble knight in a shady lane. Then
Robin checked his mule quickly and leaped from off its back. "Now, well
met, Sir Richard of the Lea," cried he, "for rather than any other man
in England would I see thy good face this day!" Then he told Sir Richard
all the happenings that had befallen him, and that now at last he felt
himself safe, being so nigh to Sherwood again. But when Robin had done,
Sir Richard shook his head sadly. "Thou art in greater danger now,
Robin, than thou hast yet been," said he, "for before thee lie bands of
the Sheriff's men blocking every road and letting none pass through the
lines without examining them closely. I myself know this, having passed
them but now. Before thee lie the Sheriffs men and behind thee the
King's men, and thou canst not hope to pass either way, for by this
time they will know of thy disguise and will be in waiting to seize upon
thee. My castle and everything within it are thine, but nought could be
gained there, for I could not hope to hold it against such a force as is
now in Nottingham of the King's and the Sheriffs men." Having so spoken,
Sir Richard bent his head in thought, and Robin felt his heart sink
within him like that of the fox that hears the hounds at his heels and
finds his den blocked with earth so that there is no hiding for him.
But presently Sir Richard spoke again, saying, "One thing thou canst do,
Robin, and one only. Go back to London and throw thyself upon the mercy
of our good Queen Eleanor. Come with me straightway to my castle. Doff
these clothes and put on such as my retainers wear. Then I will hie me
to London Town with a troop of men behind me, and thou shalt mingle with
them, and thus will I bring thee to where thou mayst see and speak with
the Queen. Thy only hope is to get to Sherwood, for there none can reach
thee, and thou wilt never get to Sherwood but in this way."

So Robin went with Sir Richard of the Lea, and did as he said, for he
saw the wisdom of that which the knight advised, and that this was his
only chance of safety.


Queen Eleanor walked in her royal garden, amid the roses that bloomed
sweetly, and with her walked six of her ladies-in-waiting, chattering
blithely together. Of a sudden a man leaped up to the top of the wall
from the other side, and then, hanging for a moment, dropped lightly
upon the grass within. All the ladies-in-waiting shrieked at the
suddenness of his coming, but the man ran to the Queen and kneeled at
her feet, and she saw that it was Robin Hood.

"Why, how now, Robin!" cried she, "dost thou dare to come into the very
jaws of the raging lion? Alas, poor fellow! Thou art lost indeed if the
King finds thee here. Dost thou not know that he is seeking thee through
all the land?"

"Yea," quoth Robin, "I do know right well that the King seeks me, and
therefore I have come; for, surely, no ill can befall me when he hath
pledged his royal word to Your Majesty for my safety. Moreover, I know
Your Majesty's kindness and gentleness of heart, and so I lay my life
freely in your gracious hands."

"I take thy meaning, Robin Hood," said the Queen, "and that thou dost
convey reproach to me, as well thou mayst, for I know that I have not
done by thee as I ought to have done. I know right well that thou must
have been hard pressed by peril to leap so boldly into one danger to
escape another. Once more I promise thee mine aid, and will do all I can
to send thee back in safety to Sherwood Forest. Bide thou here till I
return." So saying, she left Robin in the garden of roses, and was gone
a long time.

When she came back Sir Robert Lee was with her, and the Queen's cheeks
were hot and the Queen's eyes were bright, as though she had been
talking with high words. Then Sir Robert came straight forward to where
Robin Hood stood, and he spoke to the yeoman in a cold, stern voice.
Quoth he, "Our gracious Sovereign the King hath mitigated his wrath
toward thee, fellow, and hath once more promised that thou shalt depart
in peace and safety. Not only hath he promised this, but in three days
he will send one of his pages to go with thee and see that none arrest
thy journey back again. Thou mayst thank thy patron saint that thou hast
such a good friend in our noble Queen, for, but for her persuasion and
arguments, thou hadst been a dead man, I can tell thee. Let this peril
that thou hast passed through teach thee two lessons. First, be more
honest. Second, be not so bold in thy comings and goings. A man that
walketh in the darkness as thou dost may escape for a time, but in the
end he will surely fall into the pit. Thou hast put thy head in the
angry lion's mouth, and yet thou hast escaped by a miracle. Try it not
again." So saying, he turned and left Robin and was gone.

For three days Robin abided in London in the Queen's household, and at
the end of that time the King's head Page, Edward Cunningham, came, and
taking Robin with him, departed northward upon his way to Sherwood.
Now and then they passed bands of the King's men coming back again to
London, but none of those bands stopped them, and so, at last, they
reached the sweet, leafy woodlands.




Robin Hood and Guy of Gisbourne

A LONG TIME passed after the great shooting match, and during that time
Robin followed one part of the advice of Sir Robert Lee, to wit, that of
being less bold in his comings and his goings; for though mayhap he may
not have been more honest (as most folks regard honesty), he took good
care not to travel so far from Sherwood that he could not reach it both
easily and quickly.

Great changes had fallen in this time; for King Henry had died and King
Richard had come to the crown that fitted him so well through many hard
trials, and through adventures as stirring as any that ever befell Robin
Hood. But though great changes came, they did not reach to Sherwood's
shades, for there Robin Hood and his men dwelled as merrily as they had
ever done, with hunting and feasting and singing and blithe woodland
sports; for it was little the outside striving of the world troubled
them.

The dawning of a summer's day was fresh and bright, and the birds sang
sweetly in a great tumult of sound. So loud was their singing that
it awakened Robin Hood where he lay sleeping, so that he stirred, and
turned, and arose. Up rose Little John also, and all the merry men;
then, after they had broken their fast, they set forth hither and
thither upon the doings of the day.

Robin Hood and Little John walked down a forest path where all around
the leaves danced and twinkled as the breeze trembled through them and
the sunlight came flickering down. Quoth Robin Hood, "I make my vow,
Little John, my blood tickles my veins as it flows through them this gay
morn. What sayst thou to our seeking adventures, each one upon his own
account?"

"With all my heart," said Little John. "We have had more than one
pleasant doing in that way, good master. Here are two paths; take thou
the one to the right hand, and I will take the one to the left, and then
let us each walk straight ahead till he tumble into some merry doing or
other."

"I like thy plan," quoth Robin, "therefore we will part here. But look
thee, Little John, keep thyself out of mischief, for I would not have
ill befall thee for all the world."

"Marry, come up," quoth Little John, "how thou talkest! Methinks thou
art wont to get thyself into tighter coils than I am like to do."

At this Robin Hood laughed. "Why, in sooth, Little John," said he, "thou
hast a blundering hard-headed way that seemeth to bring thee right side
uppermost in all thy troubles; but let us see who cometh out best this
day." So saying, he clapped his palm to Little John's and each departed
upon his way, the trees quickly shutting the one from the other's sight.

Robin Hood strolled onward till he came to where a broad woodland road
stretched before him. Overhead the branches of the trees laced together
in flickering foliage, all golden where it grew thin to the sunlight;
beneath his feet the ground was soft and moist from the sheltering
shade. Here in this pleasant spot the sharpest adventure that ever
befell Robin Hood came upon him; for, as he walked down the woodland
path thinking of nought but the songs of the birds, he came of a sudden
to where a man was seated upon the mossy roots beneath the shade of
a broad-spreading oak tree. Robin Hood saw that the stranger had not
caught sight of him, so he stopped and stood quite still, looking at the
other a long time before he came forward. And the stranger, I wot,
was well worth looking at, for never had Robin seen a figure like that
sitting beneath the tree. From his head to his feet he was clad in a
horse's hide, dressed with the hair upon it. Upon his head was a cowl
that hid his face from sight, and which was made of the horse's skin,
the ears whereof stuck up like those of a rabbit. His body was clad in
a jacket made of the hide, and his legs were covered with the hairy skin
likewise. By his side was a heavy broadsword and a sharp, double-edged
dagger. A quiver of smooth round arrows hung across his shoulders, and
his stout bow of yew leaned against the tree beside him.

"Halloa, friend," cried Robin, coming forward at last, "who art thou
that sittest there? And what is that that thou hast upon thy body? I
make my vow I ha' never seen such a sight in all my life before. Had I
done an evil thing, or did my conscience trouble me, I would be afraid
of thee, thinking that thou wast someone from down below bringing a
message bidding me come straightway to King Nicholas."

To this speech the other answered not a word, but he pushed the cowl
back from his head and showed a knit brow, a hooked nose, and a pair of
fierce, restless black eyes, which altogether made Robin think of a hawk
as he looked on his face. But beside this there was something about the
lines on the stranger's face, and his thin cruel mouth, and the hard
glare of his eyes, that made one's flesh creep to look upon.

"Who art thou, rascal?" said he at last, in a loud, harsh voice.

"Tut, tut," quoth merry Robin, "speak not so sourly, brother. Hast
thou fed upon vinegar and nettles this morning that thy speech is so
stinging?"

"An thou likest not my words," said the other fiercely, "thou hadst best
be jogging, for I tell thee plainly, my deeds match them."

"Nay, but I do like thy words, thou sweet, pretty thing," quoth Robin,
squatting down upon the grass in front of the other. "Moreover, I tell
thee thy speech is witty and gamesome as any I ever heard in all my
life."

The other said not a word, but he glared upon Robin with a wicked and
baleful look, such as a fierce dog bestows upon a man ere it springs at
his throat. Robin returned the gaze with one of wide-eyed innocence, not
a shadow of a smile twinkling in his eyes or twitching at the corners of
his mouth. So they sat staring at one another for a long time, until the
stranger broke the silence suddenly. "What is thy name, fellow?" said
he.

"Now," quoth Robin, "I am right glad to hear thee speak, for I began to
fear the sight of me had stricken thee dumb. As for my name, it may be
this or it may be that; but methinks it is more meet for thee to tell
me thine, seeing that thou art the greater stranger in these parts.
Prythee, tell me, sweet chuck, why wearest thou that dainty garb upon
thy pretty body?" At these words the other broke into a short, harsh
roar of laughter. "By the bones of the Daemon Odin," said he, "thou art
the boldest-spoken man that ever I have seen in all my life. I know not
why I do not smite thee down where thou sittest, for only two days ago I
skewered a man over back of Nottingham Town for saying not half so much
to me as thou hast done. I wear this garb, thou fool, to keep my body
warm; likewise it is near as good as a coat of steel against a common
sword-thrust. As for my name, I care not who knoweth it. It is Guy
of Gisbourne, and thou mayst have heard it before. I come from the
woodlands over in Herefordshire, upon the lands of the Bishop of that
ilk. I am an outlaw, and get my living by hook and by crook in a manner
it boots not now to tell of. Not long since the Bishop sent for me, and
said that if I would do a certain thing that the Sheriff of Nottingham
would ask of me, he would get me a free pardon, and give me tenscore
pounds to boot. So straightway I came to Nottingham Town and found my
sweet Sheriff; and what thinkest thou he wanted of me? Why, forsooth, to
come here to Sherwood to hunt up one Robin Hood, also an outlaw, and to
take him alive or dead. It seemeth that they have no one here to face
that bold fellow, and so sent all the way to Herefordshire, and to me,
for thou knowest the old saying, 'Set a thief to catch a thief.' As for
the slaying of this fellow, it galleth me not a whit, for I would shed
the blood of my own brother for the half of two hundred pounds."

To all this Robin listened, and as he listened his gorge rose. Well he
knew of this Guy of Gisbourne, and of all the bloody and murderous deeds
that he had done in Herefordshire, for his doings were famous throughout
all the land. Yet, although he loathed the very presence of the man, he
held his peace, for he had an end to serve. "Truly," quoth he, "I have
heard of thy gentle doings. Methinks there is no one in all the world
that Robin Hood would rather meet than thee."

At this Guy of Gisbourne gave another harsh laugh. "Why," quoth he, "it
is a merry thing to think of one stout outlaw like Robin Hood meeting
another stout outlaw like Guy of Gisbourne. Only in this case it will be
an ill happening for Robin Hood, for the day he meets Guy of Gisbourne
he shall die."

"But thou gentle, merry spirit," quoth Robin, "dost thou not think that
mayhap this same Robin Hood may be the better man of the two? I know
him right well, and many think that he is one of the stoutest men
hereabouts."

"He may be the stoutest of men hereabouts," quoth Guy of Gisbourne,
"yet, I tell thee, fellow, this sty of yours is not the wide world.
I lay my life upon it I am the better man of the two. He an outlaw,
forsooth! Why, I hear that he hath never let blood in all his life,
saving when he first came to the forest. Some call him a great archer;
marry, I would not be afraid to stand against him all the days of the
year with a bow in my hand."

"Why, truly, some folk do call him a great archer," said Robin Hood,
"but we of Nottinghamshire are famous hands with the longbow. Even I,
though but a simple hand at the craft, would not fear to try a bout with
thee."

At these words Guy of Gisbourne looked upon Robin with wondering eyes,
and then gave another roar of laughter till the woods rang. "Now," quoth
he, "thou art a bold fellow to talk to me in this way. I like thy spirit
in so speaking up to me, for few men have dared to do so. Put up a
garland, lad, and I will try a bout with thee."

"Tut, tut," quoth Robin, "only babes shoot at garlands hereabouts. I
will put up a good Nottingham mark for thee." So saying, he arose, and
going to a hazel thicket not far off, he cut a wand about twice
the thickness of a man's thumb. From this he peeled the bark, and,
sharpening the point, stuck it up in the ground in front of a great oak
tree. Thence he measured off fourscore paces, which brought him beside
the tree where the other sat. "There," quoth he, "is the kind of mark
that Nottingham yeomen shoot at. Now let me see thee split that wand if
thou art an archer."

Then Guy of Gisbourne arose. "Now out upon it!" cried he. "The Devil
himself could not hit such a mark as that."

"Mayhap he could and mayhap he could not," quoth merry Robin, "but that
we shall never know till thou hast shot thereat."

At these words Guy of Gisbourne looked upon Robin with knit brows, but,
as the yeoman still looked innocent of any ill meaning, he bottled his
words and strung his bow in silence. Twice he shot, but neither time did
he hit the wand, missing it the first time by a span and the second time
by a good palm's-breadth. Robin laughed and laughed. "I see now," quoth
he, "that the Devil himself could not hit that mark. Good fellow, if
thou art no better with the broadsword than thou art with the bow and
arrow, thou wilt never overcome Robin Hood."

At these words Guy of Gisbourne glared savagely upon Robin. Quoth he,
"Thou hast a merry tongue, thou villain; but take care that thou makest
not too free with it, or I may cut it out from thy throat for thee."

Robin Hood strung his bow and took his place with never a word, albeit
his heartstrings quivered with anger and loathing. Twice he shot, the
first time hitting within an inch of the wand, the second time splitting
it fairly in the middle. Then, without giving the other a chance for
speech, he flung his bow upon the ground. "There, thou bloody villain!"
cried he fiercely, "let that show thee how little thou knowest of manly
sports. And now look thy last upon the daylight, for the good earth hath
been befouled long enough by thee, thou vile beast! This day, Our Lady
willing, thou diest--I am Robin Hood." So saying, he flashed forth his
bright sword in the sunlight.

For a time Guy of Gisbourne stared upon Robin as though bereft of wits;
but his wonder quickly passed to a wild rage. "Art thou indeed Robin
Hood?" cried he. "Now I am glad to meet thee, thou poor wretch! Shrive
thyself, for thou wilt have no time for shriving when I am done with
thee." So saying, he also drew his sword.

And now came the fiercest fight that ever Sherwood saw; for each man
knew that either he or the other must die, and that no mercy was to be
had in this battle. Up and down they fought, till all the sweet green
grass was crushed and ground beneath the trampling of their heels. More
than once the point of Robin Hood's sword felt the softness of flesh,
and presently the ground began to be sprinkled with bright red drops,
albeit not one of them came from Robin's veins. At last Guy of Gisbourne
made a fierce and deadly thrust at Robin Hood, from which he leaped back
lightly, but in so leaping he caught his heel in a root and fell heavily
upon his back. "Now, Holy Mary aid me!" muttered he, as the other leaped
at him, with a grin of rage upon his face. Fiercely Guy of Gisbourne
stabbed at the other with his great sword, but Robin caught the blade in
his naked hand, and, though it cut his palm, he turned the point away so
that it plunged deep into the ground close beside him; then, ere a blow
could be struck again, he leaped to his feet, with his good sword in
his hand. And now despair fell upon Guy of Gisbourne's heart in a black
cloud, and he looked around him wildly, like a wounded hawk. Seeing that
his strength was going from him, Robin leaped forward, and, quick as a
flash, struck a back-handed blow beneath the sword arm. Down fell
the sword from Guy of Gisbourne's grasp, and back he staggered at the
stroke, and, ere he could regain himself, Robin's sword passed through
and through his body. Round he spun upon his heel, and, flinging his
hands aloft with a shrill, wild cry, fell prone upon his face upon the
green sod.

Then Robin Hood wiped his sword and thrust it back into the scabbard,
and, coming to where Guy of Gisbourne lay, he stood over him with folded
arms, talking to himself the while. "This is the first man I have slain
since I shot the Kings forester in the hot days of my youth. I ofttimes
think bitterly, even yet, of that first life I took, but of this I am as
glad as though I had slain a wild boar that laid waste a fair country.
Since the Sheriff of Nottingham hath sent such a one as this against me,
I will put on the fellow's garb and go forth to see whether I may not
find his worship, and perchance pay him back some of the debt I owe him
upon this score."

So saying, Robin Hood stripped the hairy garments from off the dead man,
and put them on himself, all bloody as they were. Then, strapping the
other's sword and dagger around his body and carrying his own in his
hand, together with the two bows of yew, he drew the cowl of horse's
hide over his face, so that none could tell who he was, and set forth
from the forest, turning his steps toward the eastward and Nottingham
Town. As he strode along the country roads, men, women, and children
hid away from him, for the terror of Guy of Gisbourne's name and of his
doings had spread far and near.

And now let us see what befell Little John while these things were
happening.

Little John walked on his way through the forest paths until he had
come to the outskirts of the woodlands, where, here and there, fields of
barley, corn, or green meadow lands lay smiling in the sun. So he came
to the highroad and to where a little thatched cottage stood back of
a cluster of twisted crab trees, with flowers in front of it. Here he
stopped of a sudden, for he thought that he heard the sound of someone
in sorrow. He listened, and found that it came from the cottage; so,
turning his footsteps thither, he pushed open the wicket and entered
the place. There he saw a gray-haired dame sitting beside a cold
hearthstone, rocking herself to and fro and weeping bitterly.

Now Little John had a tender heart for the sorrows of other folk, so,
coming to the old woman and patting her kindly upon the shoulder, he
spoke comforting words to her, bidding her cheer up and tell him her
troubles, for that mayhap he might do something to ease them. At all
this the good dame shook her head; but all the same his kind words did
soothe her somewhat, so after a while she told him all that bore upon
her mind. That that morning she had three as fair, tall sons beside her
as one could find in all Nottinghamshire, but that they were now taken
from her, and were like to be hanged straightway; that, want having
come upon them, her eldest boy had gone out, the night before, into the
forest, and had slain a hind in the moonlight; that the King's rangers
had followed the blood upon the grass until they had come to her
cottage, and had there found the deer's meat in the cupboard; that, as
neither of the younger sons would betray their brother, the foresters
had taken all three away, in spite of the oldest saying that he alone
had slain the deer; that, as they went, she had heard the rangers
talking among themselves, saying that the Sheriff had sworn that he
would put a check upon the great slaughter of deer that had been going
on of late by hanging the very first rogue caught thereat upon the
nearest tree, and that they would take the three youths to the King's
Head Inn, near Nottingham Town, where the Sheriff was abiding that day,
there to await the return of a certain fellow he had sent into Sherwood
to seek for Robin Hood.

To all this Little John listened, shaking his head sadly now and then.
"Alas," quoth he, when the good dame had finished her speech, "this is
indeed an ill case. But who is this that goeth into Sherwood after Robin
Hood, and why doth he go to seek him? But no matter for that now; only
that I would that Robin Hood were here to advise us. Nevertheless, no
time may be lost in sending for him at this hour, if we would save the
lives of thy three sons. Tell me, hast thou any clothes hereabouts that
I may put on in place of these of Lincoln green? Marry, if our stout
Sheriff catcheth me without disguise, I am like to be run up more
quickly than thy sons, let me tell thee, dame."

Then the old woman told him that she had in the house some of the
clothes of her good husband, who had died only two years before. These
she brought to Little John, who, doffing his garb of Lincoln green, put
them on in its stead. Then, making a wig and false beard of uncarded
wool, he covered his own brown hair and beard, and, putting on a great,
tall hat that had belonged to the old peasant, he took his staff in one
hand and his bow in the other, and set forth with all speed to where the
Sheriff had taken up his inn.

A mile or more from Nottingham Town, and not far from the southern
borders of Sherwood Forest, stood the cosy inn bearing the sign of the
King's Head. Here was a great bustle and stir on this bright morning,
for the Sheriff and a score of his men had come to stop there and
await Guy of Gisbourne's return from the forest. Great hiss and fuss of
cooking was going on in the kitchen, and great rapping and tapping of
wine kegs and beer barrels was going on in the cellar. The Sheriff
sat within, feasting merrily of the best the place afforded, and the
Sheriff's men sat upon the bench before the door, quaffing ale, or lay
beneath the shade of the broad-spreading oak trees, talking and jesting
and laughing. All around stood the horses of the band, with a great
noise of stamping feet and a great switching of tails. To this inn came
the King's rangers, driving the widow's three sons before them. The
hands of the three youths were tied tightly behind their backs, and a
cord from neck to neck fastened them all together. So they were marched
to the room where the Sheriff sat at meat, and stood trembling before
him as he scowled sternly upon them.

"So," quoth he, in a great, loud, angry voice, "ye have been poaching
upon the King's deer, have you? Now I will make short work of you this
day, for I will hang up all three of you as a farmer would hang up three
crows to scare others of the kind from the field. Our fair county of
Nottingham hath been too long a breeding place for such naughty knaves
as ye are. I have put up with these things for many years, but now I
will stamp them out once for all, and with you I will begin."

Then one of the poor fellows opened his mouth to speak, but the Sheriff
roared at him in a loud voice to be silent, and bade the rangers to take
them away till he had done his eating and could attend to the matters
concerning them. So the three poor youths were marched outside, where
they stood with bowed heads and despairing hearts, till after a while
the Sheriff came forth. Then he called his men about him, and quoth he,
"These three villains shall be hanged straightway, but not here, lest
they breed ill luck to this goodly inn. We will take them over yonder to
that belt of woodlands, for I would fain hang them upon the very trees
of Sherwood itself, to show those vile outlaws therein what they may
expect of me if I ever have the good luck to lay hands upon them." So
saying, he mounted his horse, as did his men-at-arms likewise, and all
together they set forth for the belt of woodlands he had spoken of, the
poor youths walking in their midst guarded by the rangers. So they came
at last to the spot, and here nooses were fastened around the necks of
the three, and the ends of the cords flung over the branch of a great
oak tree that stood there. Then the three youths fell upon their knees
and loudly besought mercy of the Sheriff; but the Sheriff of Nottingham
laughed scornfully. "Now," quoth he, "I would that I had a priest here
to shrive you; but, as none is nigh, you must e'en travel your road with
all your sins packed upon your backs, and trust to Saint Peter to let
you in through the gates of Paradise like three peddlers into the town."

In the meantime, while all this had been going forward, an old man had
drawn near and stood leaning on his staff, looking on. His hair and
beard were all curly and white, and across his back was a bow of yew
that looked much too strong for him to draw. As the Sheriff looked
around ere he ordered his men to string the three youths up to the oak
tree, his eyes fell upon this strange old man. Then his worship beckoned
to him, saying, "Come hither, father, I have a few words to say to
thee." So Little John, for it was none other than he, came forward, and
the Sheriff looked upon him, thinking that there was something strangely
familiar in the face before him. "How, now," said he, "methinks I have
seen thee before. What may thy name be, father?"

"Please Your Worship," said Little John, in a cracked voice like that of
an old man, "my name is Giles Hobble, at Your Worship's service."

"Giles Hobble, Giles Hobble," muttered the Sheriff to himself, turning
over the names that he had in his mind to try to find one to fit to
this. "I remember not thy name," said he at last, "but it matters not.
Hast thou a mind to earn sixpence this bright morn?"

"Ay, marry," quoth Little John, "for money is not so plenty with me that
I should cast sixpence away an I could earn it by an honest turn. What
is it Your Worship would have me do?"

"Why, this," said the Sheriff. "Here are three men that need hanging
as badly as any e'er I saw. If thou wilt string them up I will pay thee
twopence apiece for them. I like not that my men-at-arms should turn
hangmen. Wilt thou try thy hand?"

"In sooth," said Little John, still in the old man's voice, "I ha' never
done such a thing before; but an a sixpence is to be earned so easily
I might as well ha' it as anybody. But, Your Worship, are these naughty
fellows shrived?"

"Nay," said the Sheriff, laughing, "never a whit; but thou mayst turn
thy hand to that also if thou art so minded. But hasten, I prythee, for
I would get back to mine inn betimes."

So Little John came to where the three youths stood trembling, and,
putting his face to the first fellow's cheek as though he were listening
to him, he whispered softly into his ear, "Stand still, brother, when
thou feelest thy bonds cut, but when thou seest me throw my woolen wig
and beard from my head and face, cast the noose from thy neck and run
for the woodlands." Then he slyly cut the cord that bound the youth's
hands; who, upon his part, stood still as though he were yet bound. Then
he went to the second fellow, and spoke to him in the same way, and also
cut his bonds. This he did to the third likewise, but all so slyly that
the Sheriff, who sat upon his horse laughing, wotted not what was being
done, nor his men either.

Then Little John turned to the Sheriff. "Please Your Worship," said he,
"will you give me leave to string my bow? For I would fain help these
fellows along the way, when they are swinging, with an arrow beneath the
ribs."

"With all my heart," said the Sheriff, "only, as I said before, make
thou haste in thy doings."

Little John put the tip of his bow to his instep, and strung the weapon
so deftly that all wondered to see an old man so strong. Next he drew
a good smooth arrow from his quiver and fitted it to the string; then,
looking all around to see that the way was clear behind him, he suddenly
cast away the wool from his head and face, shouting in a mighty voice,
"Run!" Quick as a flash the three youths flung the nooses from their
necks and sped across the open to the woodlands as the arrow speeds from
the bow. Little John also flew toward the covert like a greyhound, while
the Sheriff and his men gazed after him all bewildered with the sudden
doing. But ere the yeoman had gone far the Sheriff roused himself.
"After him!" he roared in a mighty voice; for he knew now who it was
with whom he had been talking, and wondered that he had not known him
before.

Little John heard the Sheriff's words, and seeing that he could not hope
to reach the woodlands before they would be upon him, he stopped and
turned suddenly, holding his bow as though he were about to shoot.
"Stand back!" cried he fiercely. "The first man that cometh a foot
forward, or toucheth finger to bowstring, dieth!"

At these words the Sheriff's men stood as still as stocks, for they knew
right well that Little John would be as good as his word, and that to
disobey him meant death. In vain the Sheriff roared at them, calling
them cowards, and urging them forward in a body; they would not budge an
inch, but stood and watched Little John as he moved slowly away toward
the forest, keeping his gaze fixed upon them. But when the Sheriff saw
his enemy thus slipping betwixt his fingers he grew mad with his rage,
so that his head swam and he knew not what he did. Then of a sudden he
turned his horse's head, and plunging his spurs into its sides he gave
a great shout, and, rising in his stirrups, came down upon Little John
like the wind. Then Little John raised his deadly bow and drew the gray
goose feather to his cheek. But alas for him! For, ere he could loose
the shaft, the good bow that had served him so long, split in his hands,
and the arrow fell harmless at his feet. Seeing what had happened, the
Sheriff's men raised a shout, and, following their master, came rushing
down upon Little John. But the Sheriff was ahead of the others, and
so caught up with the yeoman before he reached the shelter of the
woodlands, then leaning forward he struck a mighty blow. Little John
ducked and the Sheriff's sword turned in his hand, but the flat of the
blade struck the other upon the head and smote him down, stunned and
senseless.

"Now, I am right glad," said the Sheriff, when the men came up and found
that Little John was not dead, "that I have not slain this man in my
haste! I would rather lose five hundred pounds than have him die thus
instead of hanging, as such a vile thief should do. Go, get some water
from yonder fountain, William, and pour it over his head."

The man did as he was bidden, and presently Little John opened his eyes
and looked around him, all dazed and bewildered with the stun of the
blow. Then they tied his hands behind him, and lifting him up set him
upon the back of one of the horses, with his face to its tail and his
feet strapped beneath its belly. So they took him back to the King's
Head Inn, laughing and rejoicing as they went along. But in the meantime
the widow's three sons had gotten safely away, and were hidden in the
woodlands.

Once more the Sheriff of Nottingham sat within the King's Head Inn. His
heart rejoiced within him, for he had at last done that which he had
sought to do for years, taken Little John prisoner. Quoth he to himself,
"This time tomorrow the rogue shall hang upon the gallows tree in front
of the great gate of Nottingham Town, and thus shall I make my long
score with him even." So saying, he took a deep draught of Canary. But
it seemed as if the Sheriff had swallowed a thought with his wine, for
he shook his head and put the cup down hastily. "Now," he muttered
to himself, "I would not for a thousand pounds have this fellow slip
through my fingers; yet, should his master escape that foul Guy of
Gisbourne, there is no knowing what he may do, for he is the cunningest
knave in all the world--this same Robin Hood. Belike I had better not
wait until tomorrow to hang the fellow." So saying, he pushed his chair
back hastily, and going forth from the inn called his men together.
Quoth he, "I will wait no longer for the hanging of this rogue, but it
shall be done forthwith, and that from the very tree whence he saved
those three young villains by stepping betwixt them and the law. So get
ye ready straightway."

Then once more they sat Little John upon the horse, with his face to the
tail, and so, one leading the horse whereon he sat and the others riding
around him, they went forward to that tree from the branches of which
they had thought to hang the poachers. On they went, rattling and
jingling along the road till they came to the tree. Here one of the men
spake to the Sheriff of a sudden. "Your Worship," cried he, "is not yon
fellow coming along toward us that same Guy of Gisbourne whom thou didst
send into the forest to seek Robin Hood?" At these words the Sheriff
shaded his eyes and looked eagerly. "Why, certes," quoth he, "yon fellow
is the same. Now, Heaven send that he hath slain the master thief, as we
will presently slay the man!"

When Little John heard this speech he looked up, and straightway his
heart crumbled away within him, for not only were the man's garments all
covered with blood, but he wore Robin Hood's bugle horn and carried his
bow and broadsword.

"How now!" cried the Sheriff, when Robin Hood, in Guy of Gisbourne's
clothes, had come nigh to them. "What luck hath befallen thee in the
forest? Why, man, thy clothes are all over blood!"

"An thou likest not my clothes," said Robin in a harsh voice like that
of Guy of Gisbourne, "thou mayst shut thine eyes. Marry, the blood upon
me is that of the vilest outlaw that ever trod the woodlands, and one
whom I have slain this day, albeit not without wound to myself."

Then out spake Little John, for the first time since he had fallen into
the Sheriff's hands. "O thou vile, bloody wretch! I know thee, Guy of
Gisbourne, for who is there that hath not heard of thee and cursed thee
for thy vile deeds of blood and rapine? Is it by such a hand as thine
that the gentlest heart that ever beat is stilled in death? Truly,
thou art a fit tool for this coward Sheriff of Nottingham. Now I die
joyfully, nor do I care how I die, for life is nought to me!" So spake
Little John, the salt tears rolling down his brown cheeks.

But the Sheriff of Nottingham clapped his hands for joy. "Now, Guy of
Gisbourne," cried he, "if what thou tellest me is true, it will be the
best day's doings for thee that ever thou hast done in all thy life."

"What I have told thee is sooth, and I lie not," said Robin, still in
Guy of Gisbourne's voice. "Look, is not this Robin Hood's sword, and is
not this his good bow of yew, and is not this his bugle horn? Thinkest
thou he would have given them to Guy of Gisbourne of his own free will?"

Then the Sheriff laughed aloud for joy. "This is a good day!" cried he.
"The great outlaw dead and his right-hand man in my hands! Ask what thou
wilt of me, Guy of Gisbourne, and it is thine!"

"Then this I ask of thee," said Robin. "As I have slain the master
I would now kill the man. Give this fellow's life into my hands, Sir
Sheriff."

"Now thou art a fool!" cried the Sheriff. "Thou mightst have had money
enough for a knight's ransom if thou hadst asked for it. I like ill to
let this fellow pass from my hands, but as I have promised, thou shalt
have him."

"I thank thee right heartily for thy gift," cried Robin. "Take the rogue
down from the horse, men, and lean him against yonder tree, while I show
you how we stick a porker whence I come!"

At these words some of the Sheriff's men shook their heads; for, though
they cared not a whit whether Little John were hanged or not, they hated
to see him butchered in cold blood. But the Sheriff called to them in
a loud voice, ordering them to take the yeoman down from the horse and
lean him against the tree, as the other bade.

While they were doing this Robin Hood strung both his bow and that of
Guy of Gisbourne, albeit none of them took notice of his doing so. Then,
when Little John stood against the tree, he drew Guy of Gisbourne's
sharp, double-edged dagger. "Fall back! fall back!" cried he. "Would
ye crowd so on my pleasure, ye unmannerly knaves? Back, I say! Farther
yet!" So they crowded back, as he ordered, many of them turning their
faces away, that they might not see what was about to happen.

"Come!" cried Little John. "Here is my breast. It is meet that the same
hand that slew my dear master should butcher me also! I know thee, Guy
of Gisbourne!"

"Peace, Little John!" said Robin in a low voice. "Twice thou hast said
thou knowest me, and yet thou knowest me not at all. Couldst thou not
tell me beneath this wild beast's hide? Yonder, just in front of thee,
lie my bow and arrows, likewise my broadsword. Take them when I cut thy
bonds. Now! Get them quickly!" So saying, he cut the bonds, and Little
John, quick as a wink, leaped forward and caught up the bow and arrows
and the broadsword. At the same time Robin Hood threw back the cowl of
horse's hide from his face and bent Guy of Gisbourne's bow, with a keen,
barbed arrow fitted to the string. "Stand back!" cried he sternly. "The
first man that toucheth finger to bowstring dieth! I have slain thy
man, Sheriff; take heed that it is not thy turn next." Then, seeing that
Little John had armed himself, he clapped his bugle horn to his lips and
blew three blasts both loud and shrill.

Now when the Sheriff of Nottingham saw whose face it was beneath Guy of
Gisbourne's hood, and when he heard those bugle notes ring in his ear,
he felt as if his hour had come. "Robin Hood!" roared he, and without
another word he wheeled his horse in the road and went off in a cloud of
dust. The Sheriff's men, seeing their master thus fleeing for his life,
thought that it was not their business to tarry longer, so, clapping
spurs to their horses, they also dashed away after him. But though
the Sheriff of Nottingham went fast, he could not outstrip a clothyard
arrow. Little John twanged his bowstring with a shout, and when the
Sheriff dashed in through the gates of Nottingham Town at full speed, a
gray goose shaft stuck out behind him like a moulting sparrow with one
feather in its tail. For a month afterward the poor Sheriff could sit
upon nought but the softest cushions that could be gotten for him.

Thus the Sheriff and a score of men ran away from Robin Hood and Little
John; so that when Will Stutely and a dozen or more of stout yeomen
burst from out the covert, they saw nought of their master's enemies,
for the Sheriff and his men were scurrying away in the distance, hidden
within a cloud of dust like a little thunderstorm.

Then they all went back into the forest once more, where they found the
widow's three sons, who ran to Little John and kissed his hands. But
it would not do for them to roam the forest at large any more; so
they promised that, after they had gone and told their mother of
their escape, they would come that night to the greenwood tree, and
thenceforth become men of the band.




King Richard Comes to Sherwood Forest

NOT MORE than two months had passed and gone since these stirring
adventures befell Robin Hood and Little John, when all Nottinghamshire
was a mighty stir and tumult, for King Richard of the Lion's Heart was
making a royal progress through merry England, and everyone expected
him to come to Nottingham Town in his journeying. Messengers went riding
back and forth between the Sheriff and the King, until at last the time
was fixed upon when His Majesty was to stop in Nottingham, as the guest
of his worship.

And now came more bustle than ever; a great running hither and thither,
a rapping of hammers and a babble of voices sounded everywhere through
the place, for the folk were building great arches across the streets,
beneath which the King was to pass, and were draping these arches with
silken banners and streamers of many colors. Great hubbub was going on
in the Guild Hall of the town, also, for here a grand banquet was to
be given to the King and the nobles of his train, and the best master
carpenters were busy building a throne where the King and the Sheriff
were to sit at the head of the table, side by side.

It seemed to many of the good folk of the place as if the day that
should bring the King into the town would never come; but all the same
it did come in its own season, and bright shone the sun down into the
stony streets, which were all alive with a restless sea of people.
On either side of the way great crowds of town and country folk stood
packed as close together as dried herring in a box, so that the Sheriffs
men, halberds in hands, could hardly press them back to leave space for
the King's riding.

"Take care whom thou pushest against!" cried a great, burly friar to one
of these men. "Wouldst thou dig thine elbows into me, sirrah? By'r Lady
of the Fountain, an thou dost not treat me with more deference I will
crack thy knave's pate for thee, even though thou be one of the mighty
Sheriff's men."

At this a great shout of laughter arose from a number of tall yeomen in
Lincoln green that were scattered through the crowd thereabouts; but one
that seemed of more authority than the others nudged the holy man with
his elbow. "Peace, Tuck," said he, "didst thou not promise me, ere thou
camest here, that thou wouldst put a check upon thy tongue?"

"Ay, marry," grumbled the other, "but 'a did not think to have a
hard-footed knave trample all over my poor toes as though they were no
more than so many acorns in the forest."

But of a sudden all this bickering ceased, for a clear sound of many
bugle horns came winding down the street. Then all the people craned
their necks and gazed in the direction whence the sound came, and the
crowding and the pushing and the swaying grew greater than ever. And now
a gallant array of men came gleaming into sight, and the cheering of the
people ran down the crowd as the fire runs in dry grass.

Eight and twenty heralds in velvet and cloth of gold came riding
forward. Over their heads fluttered a cloud of snow-white feathers,
and each herald bore in his hand a long silver trumpet, which he blew
musically. From each trumpet hung a heavy banner of velvet and cloth
of gold, with the royal arms of England emblazoned thereon. After these
came riding fivescore noble knights, two by two, all fully armed, saving
that their heads were uncovered. In their hands they bore tall lances,
from the tops of which fluttered pennons of many colors and devices. By
the side of each knight walked a page clad in rich clothes of silk and
velvet, and each page bore in his hands his master's helmet, from which
waved long, floating plumes of feathers. Never had Nottingham seen a
fairer sight than those fivescore noble knights, from whose armor the
sun blazed in dazzling light as they came riding on their great war
horses, with clashing of arms and jingling of chains. Behind the knights
came the barons and the nobles of the mid-country, in robes of silk and
cloth of gold, with golden chains about their necks and jewels at their
girdles. Behind these again came a great array of men-at-arms, with
spears and halberds in their hands, and, in the midst of these, two
riders side by side. One of the horsemen was the Sheriff of Nottingham
in his robes of office. The other, who was a head taller than the
Sheriff, was clad in a rich but simple garb, with a broad, heavy chain
about his neck. His hair and beard were like threads of gold, and his
eyes were as blue as the summer sky. As he rode along he bowed to the
right hand and the left, and a mighty roar of voices followed him as he
passed; for this was King Richard.

Then, above all the tumult and the shouting a great voice was heard
roaring, "Heaven, its saints bless thee, our gracious King Richard!
and likewise Our Lady of the Fountain, bless thee!" Then King Richard,
looking toward the spot whence the sound came, saw a tall, burly,
strapping priest standing in front of all the crowd with his legs wide
apart as he backed against those behind.

"By my soul, Sheriff," said the King, laughing, "ye have the tallest
priests in Nottinghamshire that e'er I saw in all my life. If
Heaven never answered prayers because of deafness, methinks I would
nevertheless have blessings bestowed upon me, for that man yonder would
make the great stone image of Saint Peter rub its ears and hearken unto
him. I would that I had an army of such as he."

To this the Sheriff answered never a word, but all the blood left his
cheeks, and he caught at the pommel of his saddle to keep himself from
falling; for he also saw the fellow that so shouted, and knew him to be
Friar Tuck; and, moreover, behind Friar Tuck he saw the faces of Robin
Hood and Little John and Will Scarlet and Will Stutely and Allan a Dale
and others of the band.

"How now," said the King hastily, "art thou ill, Sheriff, that thou
growest so white?"

"Nay, Your Majesty," said the Sheriff, "it was nought but a sudden pain
that will soon pass by." Thus he spake, for he was ashamed that the King
should know that Robin Hood feared him so little that he thus dared to
come within the very gates of Nottingham Town.

Thus rode the King into Nottingham Town on that bright afternoon in the
early fall season; and none rejoiced more than Robin Hood and his merry
men to see him come so royally unto his own.


Eventide had come; the great feast in the Guild Hall at Nottingham Town
was done, and the wine passed freely. A thousand waxen lights gleamed
along the board, at which sat lord and noble and knight and squire in
goodly array. At the head of the table, upon a throne all hung with
cloth of gold, sat King Richard with the Sheriff of Nottingham beside
him.

Quoth the King to the Sheriff, laughing as he spoke, "I have heard much
spoken concerning the doings of certain fellows hereabouts, one Robin
Hood and his band, who are outlaws and abide in Sherwood Forest. Canst
thou not tell me somewhat of them, Sir Sheriff? For I hear that thou
hast had dealings with them more than once."

At these words the Sheriff of Nottingham looked down gloomily, and the
Bishop of Hereford, who was present, gnawed his nether lip. Quoth the
Sheriff, "I can tell Your Majesty but little concerning the doings of
those naughty fellows, saving that they are the boldest lawbreakers in
all the land."

Then up spake young Sir Henry of the Lea, a great favorite with the
King, under whom he had fought in Palestine. "May it please Your
Majesty," said he, "when I was away in Palestine I heard ofttimes from
my father, and in most cases I heard of this very fellow, Robin Hood.
If Your Majesty would like I will tell you a certain adventure of this
outlaw."

Then the King laughingly bade him tell his tale, whereupon he told
how Robin Hood had aided Sir Richard of the Lea with money that he had
borrowed from the Bishop of Hereford. Again and again the King and those
present roared with laughter, while the poor Bishop waxed cherry red in
the face with vexation, for the matter was a sore thing with him. When
Sir Henry of the Lea was done, others of those present, seeing how the
King enjoyed this merry tale, told other tales concerning Robin and his
merry men.

"By the hilt of my sword," said stout King Richard, "this is as bold and
merry a knave as ever I heard tell of. Marry, I must take this matter in
hand and do what thou couldst not do, Sheriff, to wit, clear the forest
of him and his band."

That night the King sat in the place that was set apart for his lodging
while in Nottingham Town. With him were young Sir Henry of the Lea and
two other knights and three barons of Nottinghamshire; but the King's
mind still dwelled upon Robin Hood. "Now," quoth he, "I would freely
give a hundred pounds to meet this roguish fellow, Robin Hood, and to
see somewhat of his doings in Sherwood Forest."

Then up spake Sir Hubert of gingham, laughing: "If Your Majesty hath
such a desire upon you it is not so hard to satisfy. If Your Majesty is
willing to lose one hundred pounds, I will engage to cause you not only
to meet this fellow, but to feast with him in Sherwood."

"Marry, Sir Hubert," quoth the King, "this pleaseth me well. But how
wilt thou cause me to meet Robin Hood?"

"Why, thus," said Sir Hubert, "let Your Majesty and us here present put
on the robes of seven of the Order of Black Friars, and let Your Majesty
hang a purse of one hundred pounds beneath your gown; then let us
undertake to ride from here to Mansfield Town tomorrow, and, without I
am much mistaken, we will both meet with Robin Hood and dine with him
before the day be passed."

"I like thy plan, Sir Hubert," quoth the King merrily, "and tomorrow we
will try it and see whether there be virtue in it."

So it happened that when early the next morning the Sheriff came to
where his liege lord was abiding, to pay his duty to him, the King told
him what they had talked of the night before, and what merry adventure
they were set upon undertaking that morning. But when the Sheriff heard
this he smote his forehead with his fist. "Alas!" said he, "what evil
counsel is this that hath been given thee! O my gracious lord and King,
you know not what you do! This villain that you thus go to seek hath no
reverence either for king or king's laws."

"But did I not hear aright when I was told that this Robin Hood hath
shed no blood since he was outlawed, saving only that of that vile Guy
of Gisbourne, for whose death all honest men should thank him?"

"Yea, Your Majesty," said the Sheriff, "you have heard aright.
Nevertheless--"

"Then," quoth the King, breaking in on the Sheriffs speech, "what have
I to fear in meeting him, having done him no harm? Truly, there is no
danger in this. But mayhap thou wilt go with us, Sir Sheriff."

"Nay," quoth the Sheriff hastily, "Heaven forbid!"

But now seven habits such as Black Friars wear were brought, and the
King and those about him having clad themselves therein, and His Majesty
having hung a purse with a hundred golden pounds in it beneath his
robes, they all went forth and mounted the mules that had been brought
to the door for them. Then the King bade the Sheriff be silent as
to their doings, and so they set forth upon their way. Onward they
traveled, laughing and jesting, until they passed through the open
country; between bare harvest fields whence the harvest had been
gathered home; through scattered glades that began to thicken as they
went farther along, till they came within the heavy shade of the forest
itself. They traveled in the forest for several miles without meeting
anyone such as they sought, until they had come to that part of the road
that lay nearest to Newstead Abbey.

"By the holy Saint Martin," quoth the King, "I would that I had a better
head for remembering things of great need. Here have we come away and
brought never so much as a drop of anything to drink with us. Now
I would give half a hundred pounds for somewhat to quench my thirst
withal."

No sooner had the King so spoken, than out from the covert at the
roadside stepped a tall fellow with yellow beard and hair and a pair of
merry blue eyes. "Truly, holy brother," said he, laying his hand upon
the King's bridle rein, "it were an unchristian thing to not give
fitting answer to so fair a bargain. We keep an inn hereabouts, and for
fifty pounds we will not only give thee a good draught of wine, but will
give thee as noble a feast as ever thou didst tickle thy gullet withal."
So saying, he put his fingers to his lips and blew a shrill whistle.
Then straightway the bushes and branches on either side of the road
swayed and crackled, and threescore broad-shouldered yeomen in Lincoln
green burst out of the covert.

"How now, fellow," quoth the King, "who art thou, thou naughty rogue?
Hast thou no regard for such holy men as we are?"

"Not a whit," quoth merry Robin Hood, for the fellow was he, "for in
sooth all the holiness belonging to rich friars, such as ye are, one
could drop into a thimble and the goodwife would never feel it with the
tip of her finger. As for my name, it is Robin Hood, and thou mayst have
heard it before."

"Now out upon thee!" quoth King Richard. "Thou art a bold and naughty
fellow and a lawless one withal, as I have often heard tell. Now,
prythee, let me, and these brethren of mine, travel forward in peace and
quietness."

"It may not be," said Robin, "for it would look but ill of us to let
such holy men travel onward with empty stomachs. But I doubt not that
thou hast a fat purse to pay thy score at our inn since thou offerest
freely so much for a poor draught of wine. Show me thy purse, reverend
brother, or I may perchance have to strip thy robes from thee to search
for it myself."

"Nay, use no force," said the King sternly. "Here is my purse, but lay
not thy lawless hands upon our person."

"Hut, tut," quoth merry Robin, "what proud words are these? Art thou the
King of England, to talk so to me? Here, Will, take this purse and see
what there is within."

Will Scarlet took the purse and counted out the money. Then Robin bade
him keep fifty pounds for themselves, and put fifty back into the purse.
This he handed to the King. "Here, brother," quoth he, "take this half
of thy money, and thank Saint Martin, on whom thou didst call before,
that thou hast fallen into the hands of such gentle rogues that they
will not strip thee bare, as they might do. But wilt thou not put back
thy cowl? For I would fain see thy face."

"Nay," said the King, drawing back, "I may not put back my cowl, for
we seven have vowed that we will not show our faces for four and twenty
hours."

"Then keep them covered in peace," said Robin, "and far be it from me to
make you break your vows."

So he called seven of his yeomen and bade them each one take a mule
by the bridle; then, turning their faces toward the depths of the
woodlands, they journeyed onward until they came to the open glade and
the greenwood tree.

Little John, with threescore yeomen at his heels, had also gone forth
that morning to wait along the roads and bring a rich guest to Sherwood
glade, if such might be his luck, for many with fat purses must
travel the roads at this time, when such great doings were going on in
Nottinghamshire, but though Little John and so many others were gone,
Friar Tuck and twoscore or more stout yeomen were seated or lying around
beneath the great tree, and when Robin and the others came they leaped
to their feet to meet him.

"By my soul," quoth merry King Richard, when he had gotten down from his
mule and stood looking about him, "thou hast in very truth a fine lot of
young men about thee, Robin. Methinks King Richard himself would be glad
of such a bodyguard."

"These are not all of my fellows," said Robin proudly, "for threescore
more of them are away on business with my good right-hand man, Little
John. But, as for King Richard, I tell thee, brother, there is not a man
of us all but would pour out our blood like water for him. Ye churchmen
cannot rightly understand our King; but we yeomen love him right loyally
for the sake of his brave doings which are so like our own."

But now Friar Tuck came bustling up. "Gi' ye good den, brothers," said
he. "I am right glad to welcome some of my cloth in this naughty place.
Truly, methinks these rogues of outlaws would stand but an ill chance
were it not for the prayers of Holy Tuck, who laboreth so hard for their
well-being." Here he winked one eye slyly and stuck his tongue into his
cheek.

"Who art thou, mad priest?" said the King in a serious voice, albeit he
smiled beneath his cowl.

At this Friar Tuck looked all around with a slow gaze. "Look you now,"
quoth he, "never let me hear you say again that I am no patient man.
Here is a knave of a friar calleth me a mad priest, and yet I smite him
not. My name is Friar Tuck, fellow--the holy Friar Tuck."

"There, Tuck," said Robin, "thou hast said enow. Prythee, cease thy talk
and bring some wine. These reverend men are athirst, and sin' they have
paid so richly for their score they must e'en have the best."

Friar Tuck bridled at being so checked in his speech, nevertheless he
went straightway to do Robin's bidding; so presently a great crock was
brought, and wine was poured out for all the guests and for Robin Hood.
Then Robin held his cup aloft. "Stay!" cried he. "Tarry in your drinking
till I give you a pledge. Here is to good King Richard of great renown,
and may all enemies to him be confounded."

Then all drank the King's health, even the King himself. "Methinks, good
fellow," said he, "thou hast drunk to thine own confusion."

"Never a whit," quoth merry Robin, "for I tell thee that we of Sherwood
are more loyal to our lord the King than those of thine order. We would
give up our lives for his benefiting, while ye are content to lie snug
in your abbeys and priories let reign who will."

At this the King laughed. Quoth he, "Perhaps King Richard's welfare is
more to me than thou wottest of, fellow. But enough of that matter.
We have paid well for our fare, so canst thou not show us some merry
entertainment? I have oft heard that ye are wondrous archers; wilt thou
not show us somewhat of your skill?"

"With all my heart," said Robin, "we are always pleased to show our
guests all the sport that is to be seen. As Gaffer Swanthold sayeth,
''Tis a hard heart that will not give a caged starling of the best'; and
caged starlings ye are with us. Ho, lads! Set up a garland at the end of
the glade."

Then, as the yeomen ran to do their master's bidding, Tuck turned to
one of the mock friars. "Hearest thou our master?" quoth he, with a sly
wink. "Whenever he cometh across some poor piece of wit he straightway
layeth it on the shoulders of this Gaffer Swanthold--whoever he may
be--so that the poor goodman goeth traveling about with all the odds and
ends and tags and rags of our master's brain packed on his back." Thus
spake Friar Tuck, but in a low voice so that Robin could not hear him,
for he felt somewhat nettled at Robin's cutting his talk so short.

In the meantime the mark at which they were to shoot was set up at
sixscore paces distance. It was a garland of leaves and flowers two
spans in width, which same was hung upon a stake in front of a broad
tree trunk. "There," quoth Robin, "yon is a fair mark, lads. Each of you
shoot three arrows thereat; and if any fellow misseth by so much as one
arrow, he shall have a buffet of Will Scarlet's fist."

"Hearken to him!" quoth Friar Tuck. "Why, master, thou dost bestow
buffets from thy strapping nephew as though they were love taps from
some bouncing lass. I warrant thou art safe to hit the garland thyself,
or thou wouldst not be so free of his cuffing."

First David of Doncaster shot, and lodged all three of his arrows within
the garland. "Well done, David!" cried Robin, "thou hast saved thine
ears from a warming this day." Next Midge, the Miller, shot, and he,
also, lodged his arrows in the garland. Then followed Wat, the Tinker,
but alas for him! For one of his shafts missed the mark by the breadth
of two fingers.

"Come hither, fellow," said Will Scarlet, in his soft, gentle voice,
"I owe thee somewhat that I would pay forthwith." Then Wat, the Tinker,
came forward and stood in front of Will Scarlet, screwing up his face
and shutting his eyes tightly, as though he already felt his ears
ringing with the buffet. Will Scarlet rolled up his sleeve, and,
standing on tiptoe to give the greater swing to his arm, he struck with
might and main. "WHOOF!" came his palm against the Tinker's head, and
down went stout Wat to the grass, heels over head, as the wooden image
at the fair goes down when the skillful player throws a cudgel at it.
Then, as the Tinker sat up upon the grass, rubbing his ear and winking
and blinking at the bright stars that danced before his eyes, the yeomen
roared with mirth till the forest rang. As for King Richard, he laughed
till the tears ran down his cheeks. Thus the band shot, each in turn,
some getting off scot free, and some winning a buffet that always sent
them to the grass. And now, last of all, Robin took his place, and all
was hushed as he shot. The first shaft he shot split a piece from the
stake on which the garland was hung; the second lodged within an inch of
the other. "By my halidom," said King Richard to himself, "I would give
a thousand pounds for this fellow to be one of my guard!" And now,
for the third time Robin shot; but, alas for him! The arrow was
ill-feathered, and, wavering to one side, it smote an inch outside the
garland.

At this a great roar went up, those of the yeomen who sat upon the grass
rolling over and over and shouting with laughter, for never before had
they seen their master so miss his mark; but Robin flung his bow upon
the ground with vexation. "Now, out upon it!" cried he. "That shaft had
an ill feather to it, for I felt it as it left my fingers. Give me a
clean arrow, and I will engage to split the wand with it."

At these words the yeomen laughed louder than ever. "Nay, good uncle,"
said Will Scarlet in his soft, sweet voice, "thou hast had thy fair
chance and hast missed thine aim out and out. I swear the arrow was
as good as any that hath been loosed this day. Come hither; I owe thee
somewhat, and would fain pay it."

"Go, good master," roared Friar Tuck, "and may my blessing go with thee.
Thou hast bestowed these love taps of Will Scarlet's with great freedom.
It were pity an thou gottest not thine own share."

"It may not be," said merry Robin. "I am king here, and no subject may
raise hand against the king. But even our great King Richard may yield
to the holy Pope without shame, and even take a tap from him by way of
penance; therefore I will yield myself to this holy friar, who seemeth
to be one in authority, and will take my punishment from him." Thus
saying, he turned to the King, "I prythee, brother, wilt thou take my
punishing into thy holy hands?"

"With all my heart," quoth merry King Richard, rising from where he was
sitting. "I owe thee somewhat for having lifted a heavy weight of fifty
pounds from my purse. So make room for him on the green, lads."

"An thou makest me tumble," quoth Robin, "I will freely give thee back
thy fifty pounds; but I tell thee, brother, if thou makest me not feel
grass all along my back, I will take every farthing thou hast for thy
boastful speech."

"So be it," said the King, "I am willing to venture it." Thereupon he
rolled up his sleeve and showed an arm that made the yeomen stare.
But Robin, with his feet wide apart, stood firmly planted, waiting the
other, smiling. Then the King swung back his arm, and, balancing himself
a moment, he delivered a buffet at Robin that fell like a thunderbolt.
Down went Robin headlong upon the grass, for the stroke would have
felled a stone wall. Then how the yeomen shouted with laughter till
their sides ached, for never had they seen such a buffet given in all
their lives. As for Robin, he presently sat up and looked all around
him, as though he had dropped from a cloud and had lit in a place he had
never seen before. After a while, still gazing about him at his laughing
yeomen, he put his fingertips softly to his ear and felt all around
it tenderly. "Will Scarlet," said he, "count this fellow out his fifty
pounds; I want nothing more either of his money or of him. A murrain
seize him and his buffeting! I would that I had taken my dues from thee,
for I verily believe he hath deafened mine ear from ever hearing again."

Then, while gusts of laughter still broke from the band, Will Scarlet
counted out the fifty pounds, and the King dropped it back into his
purse again. "I give thee thanks, fellow," said he, "and if ever thou
shouldst wish for another box of the ear to match the one thou hast,
come to me and I will fit thee with it for nought."

So spake the merry King; but, even as he ended, there came suddenly
the sound of many voices, and out from the covert burst Little John and
threescore men, with Sir Richard of the Lea in the midst. Across the
glade they came running, and, as they came, Sir Richard shouted to
Robin: "Make haste, dear friend, gather thy band together and come with
me! King Richard left Nottingham Town this very morning, and cometh to
seek thee in the woodlands. I know not how he cometh, for it was but
a rumor of this that reached me; nevertheless, I know that it is the
truth. Therefore hasten with all thy men, and come to Castle Lea, for
there thou mayst lie hidden till thy present danger passeth. Who are
these strangers that thou hast with thee?"

"Why," quoth merry Robin, rising from the grass, "these are certain
gentle guests that came with us from the highroad over by Newstead
Abbey. I know not their names, but I have become right well acquaint
with this lusty rogue's palm this morning. Marry, the pleasure of this
acquaintance hath dost me a deaf ear and fifty pounds to boot!"

Sir Richard looked keenly at the tall friar, who, drawing himself up to
his full height, looked fixedly back at the knight. Then of a sudden Sir
Richard's cheeks grew pale, for he knew who it was that he looked upon.
Quickly he leaped from off his horse's back and flung himself upon his
knees before the other. At this, the King, seeing that Sir Richard knew
him, threw back his cowl, and all the yeomen saw his face and knew him
also, for there was not one of them but had been in the crowd in the
good town of Nottingham, and had seen him riding side by side with the
Sheriff. Down they fell upon their knees, nor could they say a word.
Then the King looked all around right grimly, and, last of all, his
glance came back and rested again upon Sir Richard of the Lea.

"How is this, Sir Richard?" said he sternly. "How darest thou step
between me and these fellows? And how darest thou offer thy knightly
Castle of the Lea for a refuge to them? Wilt thou make it a hiding place
for the most renowned outlaws in England?"

Then Sir Richard of the Lea raised his eyes to the King's face. "Far be
it from me," said he, "to do aught that could bring Your Majesty's anger
upon me. Yet, sooner would I face Your Majesty's wrath than suffer aught
of harm that I could stay to fall upon Robin Hood and his band; for to
them I owe life, honor, everything. Should I, then, desert him in his
hour of need?"

Ere the knight had done speaking, one of the mock friars that stood near
the King came forward and knelt beside Sir Richard, and throwing back
his cowl showed the face of young Sir Henry of the Lea. Then Sir Henry
grasped his father's hand and said, "Here kneels one who hath served
thee well, King Richard, and, as thou knowest, hath stepped between thee
and death in Palestine; yet do I abide by my dear father, and here I say
also, that I would freely give shelter to this noble outlaw, Robin Hood,
even though it brought thy wrath upon me, for my father's honor and my
father's welfare are as dear to me as mine own."

King Richard looked from one to the other of the kneeling knights,
and at last the frown faded from his brow and a smile twitched at the
corners of his lips. "Marry, Sir Richard," quoth the King, "thou art
a bold-spoken knight, and thy freedom of speech weigheth not heavily
against thee with me. This young son of thine taketh after his sire both
in boldness of speech and of deed, for, as he sayeth, he stepped one
time betwixt me and death; wherefore I would pardon thee for his sake
even if thou hadst done more than thou hast. Rise all of you, for ye
shall suffer no harm through me this day, for it were pity that a merry
time should end in a manner as to mar its joyousness."

Then all arose and the King beckoned Robin Hood to come to him. "How
now," quoth he, "is thine ear still too deaf to hear me speak?"

"Mine ears would be deafened in death ere they would cease to hear Your
Majesty's voice," said Robin. "As for the blow that Your Majesty struck
me, I would say that though my sins are haply many, methinks they have
been paid up in full thereby."

"Thinkest thou so?" said the King with somewhat of sternness in
his voice. "Now I tell thee that but for three things, to wit, my
mercifulness, my love for a stout woodsman, and the loyalty thou hast
avowed for me, thine ears, mayhap, might have been more tightly closed
than ever a buffet from me could have shut them. Talk not lightly of thy
sins, good Robin. But come, look up. Thy danger is past, for hereby I
give thee and all thy band free pardon. But, in sooth, I cannot let you
roam the forest as ye have done in the past; therefore I will take thee
at thy word, when thou didst say thou wouldst give thy service to me,
and thou shalt go back to London with me. We will take that bold
knave Little John also, and likewise thy cousin, Will Scarlet, and thy
minstrel, Allan a Dale. As for the rest of thy band, we will take their
names and have them duly recorded as royal rangers; for methinks it
were wiser to have them changed to law-abiding caretakers of our deer in
Sherwood than to leave them to run at large as outlawed slayers thereof.
But now get a feast ready; I would see how ye live in the woodlands."

So Robin bade his men make ready a grand feast. Straightway great
fires were kindled and burned brightly, at which savory things roasted
sweetly. While this was going forward, the King bade Robin call Allan
a Dale, for he would hear him sing. So word was passed for Allan, and
presently he came, bringing his harp.

"Marry," said King Richard, "if thy singing match thy looks it is
fair enough. Prythee, strike up a ditty and let us have a taste of thy
skill."

Then Allan touched his harp lightly, and all words were hushed while he
sang thus:

     "'_Oh, where has thou been, my daughter?
     Oh, where hast thou been this day
     Daughter, my daughter?'
     'Oh, I have been to the river's side,
     Where the waters lie all gray and wide,
     And the gray sky broods o'er the leaden tide,
     And the shrill wind sighs a straining.'

     "'What sawest thou there, my daughter?
     What sawest thou there this day,
     Daughter, my daughter?'
     'Oh, I saw a boat come drifting nigh,
     Where the quivering rushes hiss and sigh,
     And the water soughs as it gurgles by,
     And the shrill wind sighs a straining.'

     "'What sailed in the boat, my daughter?
     What sailed in the boat this day,
     Daughter, my daughter?'
     'Oh, there was one all clad in white,
     And about his face hung a pallid light,
     And his eyes gleamed sharp like the stars at night,
     And the shrill wind sighed a straining.'

     "'And what said he, my daughter?
     What said he to thee this day,
     Daughter, my daughter?'
     'Oh, said he nought, but did he this:
     Thrice on my lips did he press a kiss,
     And my heartstrings shrunk with an awful bliss,
     And the shrill wind sighed a straining.'

     "'Why growest thou so cold, my daughter?
     Why growest thou so cold and white,
     Daughter, my daughter?'
     Oh, never a word the daughter said,
     But she sat all straight with a drooping head,
     For her heart was stilled and her face was dead:
     And the shrill wind sighed a straining_."

All listened in silence; and when Allan a Dale had done King Richard
heaved a sigh. "By the breath of my body, Allan," quoth he, "thou hast
such a wondrous sweet voice that it strangely moves my heart. But what
doleful ditty is this for the lips of a stout yeoman? I would rather
hear thee sing a song of love and battle than a sad thing like that.
Moreover, I understand it not; what meanest thou by the words?"

"I know not, Your Majesty," said Allan, shaking his head, "for ofttimes
I sing that which I do not clearly understand mine own self."

"Well, well," quoth the King, "let it pass; only I tell thee this,
Allan, thou shouldst turn thy songs to such matters as I spoke of, to
wit, love or war; for in sooth thou hast a sweeter voice than Blondell,
and methought he was the best minstrel that ever I heard."

But now one came forward and said that the feast was ready; so Robin
Hood brought King Richard and those with him to where it lay all spread
out on fair white linen cloths which lay upon the soft green grass. Then
King Richard sat him down and feasted and drank, and when he was done
he swore roundly that he had never sat at such a lusty repast in all his
life before.

That night he lay in Sherwood Forest upon a bed of sweet green
leaves, and early the next morning he set forth from the woodlands for
Nottingham Town, Robin Hood and all of his band going with him. You
may guess what a stir there was in the good town when all these famous
outlaws came marching into the streets. As for the Sheriff, he knew not
what to say nor where to look when he saw Robin Hood in such high favor
with the King, while all his heart was filled with gall because of the
vexation that lay upon him.

The next day the King took leave of Nottingham Town; so Robin Hood and
Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale shook hands with all the
rest of the band, kissing the cheeks of each man, and swearing that they
would often come to Sherwood and see them. Then each mounted his horse
and rode away in the train of the King.




Epilogue

THUS END the Merry Adventures of Robin Hood; for, in spite of his
promise, it was many a year ere he saw Sherwood again.

After a year or two at court Little John came back to Nottinghamshire,
where he lived in an orderly way, though within sight of Sherwood, and
where he achieved great fame as the champion of all England with the
quarterstaff. Will Scarlet after a time came back to his own home,
whence he had been driven by his unlucky killing of his father's
steward. The rest of the band did their duty as royal rangers right
well. But Robin Hood and Allan a Dale did not come again to Sherwood so
quickly, for thus it was:

Robin, through his great fame as an archer, became a favorite with
the King, so that he speedily rose in rank to be the chief of all the
yeomen. At last the King, seeing how faithful and how loyal he was,
created him Earl of Huntingdon; so Robin followed the King to the
wars, and found his time so full that he had no chance to come back to
Sherwood for even so much as a day. As for Allan a Dale and his wife,
the fair Ellen, they followed Robin Hood and shared in all his ups and
downs of life.

And now, dear friend, you who have journeyed with me in all these merry
doings, I will not bid you follow me further, but will drop your hand
here with a "good den," if you wish it; for that which cometh hereafter
speaks of the breaking up of things, and shows how joys and pleasures
that are dead and gone can never be set upon their feet to walk again.
I will not dwell upon the matter overlong, but will tell as speedily as
may be of how that stout fellow, Robin Hood, died as he had lived, not
at court as Earl of Huntingdon, but with bow in hand, his heart in the
greenwood, and he himself a right yeoman.

King Richard died upon the battlefield, in such a way as properly became
a lion-hearted king, as you yourself, no doubt, know; so, after a
time, the Earl of Huntingdon--or Robin Hood, as we still call him as of
old--finding nothing for his doing abroad, came back to merry England
again. With him came Allan a Dale and his wife, the fair Ellen, for
these two had been chief of Robin's household ever since he had left
Sherwood Forest.

It was in the springtime when they landed once more on the shores of
England. The leaves were green and the small birds sang blithely, just
as they used to do in fair Sherwood when Robin Hood roamed the woodland
shades with a free heart and a light heel. All the sweetness of the time
and the joyousness of everything brought back to Robin's mind his forest
life, so that a great longing came upon him to behold the woodlands once
more. So he went straightway to King John and besought leave of him to
visit Nottingham for a short season. The King gave him leave to come
and to go, but bade him not stay longer than three days at Sherwood. So
Robin Hood and Allan a Dale set forth without delay to Nottinghamshire
and Sherwood Forest.

The first night they took up their inn at Nottingham Town, yet they did
not go to pay their duty to the Sheriff, for his worship bore many a
bitter grudge against Robin Hood, which grudges had not been lessened
by Robin's rise in the world. The next day at an early hour they mounted
their horses and set forth for the woodlands. As they passed along the
road it seemed to Robin that he knew every stick and stone that his eyes
looked upon. Yonder was a path that he had ofttimes trod of a mellow
evening, with Little John beside him; here was one, now nigh choked with
brambles, along which he and a little band had walked when they went
forth to seek a certain curtal friar.

Thus they rode slowly onward, talking about these old, familiar things;
old and yet new, for they found more in them than they had ever thought
of before. Thus at last they came to the open glade, and the broad,
wide-spreading greenwood tree which was their home for so many years.
Neither of the two spoke when they stood beneath that tree. Robin looked
all about him at the well-known things, so like what they used to be and
yet so different; for, where once was the bustle of many busy fellows
was now the quietness of solitude; and, as he looked, the woodlands, the
greensward, and the sky all blurred together in his sight through salt
tears, for such a great yearning came upon him as he looked on these
things (as well known to him as the fingers of his right hand) that he
could not keep back the water from his eyes.

That morning he had slung his good old bugle horn over his shoulder,
and now, with the yearning, came a great longing to sound his bugle once
more. He raised it to his lips; he blew a blast. "Tirila, lirila," the
sweet, clear notes went winding down the forest paths, coming back again
from the more distant bosky shades in faint echoes of sound, "Tirila,
lirila, tirila, lirila," until it faded away and was lost.

Now it chanced that on that very morn Little John was walking through
a spur of the forest upon certain matters of business, and as he paced
along, sunk in meditation, the faint, clear notes of a distant bugle
horn came to his ear. As leaps the stag when it feels the arrow at its
heart, so leaped Little John when that distant sound met his ear. All
the blood in his body seemed to rush like a flame into his cheeks as he
bent his head and listened. Again came the bugle note, thin and clear,
and yet again it sounded. Then Little John gave a great, wild cry of
yearning, of joy, and yet of grief, and, putting down his head, he
dashed into the thicket. Onward he plunged, crackling and rending, as
the wild boar rushes through the underbrush. Little recked he of thorns
and briers that scratched his flesh and tore his clothing, for all
he thought of was to get, by the shortest way, to the greenwood glade
whence he knew the sound of the bugle horn came. Out he burst from the
covert, at last, a shower of little broken twigs falling about him, and,
without pausing a moment, rushed forward and flung himself at Robin's
feet. Then he clasped his arms around the master's knees, and all his
body was shaken with great sobs; neither could Robin nor Allan a Dale
speak, but stood looking down at Little John, the tears rolling down
their cheeks.

While they thus stood, seven royal rangers rushed into the open glade
and raised a great shout of joy at the sight of Robin; and at their
head was Will Stutely. Then, after a while, came four more, panting with
their running, and two of these four were Will Scathelock and Midge, the
Miller; for all of these had heard the sound of Robin Hood's horn. All
these ran to Robin and kissed his hands and his clothing, with great
sound of weeping.

After a while Robin looked around him with tear-dimmed eyes and said,
in a husky voice, "Now, I swear that never again will I leave these dear
woodlands. I have been away from them and from you too long. Now do I
lay by the name of Robert, Earl of Huntingdon, and take upon me once
again that nobler title, Robin Hood, the Yeoman." At this a great shout
went up, and all the yeomen shook one another's hands for joy.

The news that Robin Hood had come back again to dwell in Sherwood as
of old spread like wildfire all over the countryside, so that ere a
se'ennight had passed nearly all of his old yeomen had gathered about
him again. But when the news of all this reached the ears of King John,
he swore both loud and deep, and took a solemn vow that he would not
rest until he had Robin Hood in his power, dead or alive. Now there
was present at court a certain knight, Sir William Dale, as gallant a
soldier as ever donned harness. Sir William Dale was well acquainted
with Sherwood Forest, for he was head keeper over that part of it that
lay nigh to good Mansfield Town; so to him the King turned, and bade him
take an army of men and go straightway to seek Robin Hood. Likewise the
King gave Sir William his signet ring to show to the Sheriff, that he
might raise all his armed men to aid the others in their chase of Robin.
So Sir William and the Sheriff set forth to do the King's bidding and to
search for Robin Hood; and for seven days they hunted up and down, yet
found him not.

Now, had Robin Hood been as peaceful as of old, everything might have
ended in smoke, as other such ventures had always done before; but he
had fought for years under King Richard, and was changed from what he
used to be. It galled his pride to thus flee away before those sent
against him, as a chased fox flees from the hounds; so thus it came
about, at last, that Robin Hood and his yeomen met Sir William and the
Sheriff and their men in the forest, and a bloody fight followed. The
first man slain in that fight was the Sheriff of Nottingham, for he fell
from his horse with an arrow in his brain ere half a score of shafts had
been sped. Many a better man than the Sheriff kissed the sod that day,
but at last, Sir William Dale being wounded and most of his men slain,
he withdrew, beaten, and left the forest. But scores of good fellows
were left behind him, stretched out all stiff beneath the sweet green
boughs.

But though Robin Hood had beaten off his enemies in fair fight, all
this lay heavily upon his mind, so that he brooded over it until a fever
seized upon him. For three days it held him, and though he strove to
fight it off, he was forced to yield at last. Thus it came that, on the
morning of the fourth day, he called Little John to him, and told him
that he could not shake the fever from him, and that he would go to his
cousin, the prioress of the nunnery near Kirklees, in Yorkshire, who was
a skillful leech, and he would have her open a vein in his arm and take
a little blood from him, for the bettering of his health. Then he bade
Little John make ready to go also, for he might perchance need aid in
his journeying. So Little John and he took their leave of the others,
and Robin Hood bade Will Stutely be the captain of the band until they
should come back. Thus they came by easy stages and slow journeying
until they reached the Nunnery of Kirklees.

Now Robin had done much to aid this cousin of his; for it was through
King Richard's love of him that she had been made prioress of the place.
But there is nought in the world so easily forgot as gratitude; so,
when the Prioress of Kirklees had heard how her cousin, the Earl of
Huntingdon, had thrown away his earldom and gone back again to Sherwood,
she was vexed to the soul, and feared lest her cousinship with him
should bring the King's wrath upon her also. Thus it happened that when
Robin came to her and told her how he wished her services as leech, she
began plotting ill against him in her mind, thinking that by doing evil
to him she might find favor with his enemies. Nevertheless, she kept
this well to herself and received Robin with seeming kindness. She led
him up the winding stone stair to a room which was just beneath the
eaves of a high, round tower; but she would not let Little John come
with him.

So the poor yeoman turned his feet away from the door of the nunnery,
and left his master in the hands of the women. But, though he did not
come in, neither did he go far away; for he laid him down in a little
glade near by, where he could watch the place that Robin abided, like
some great, faithful dog turned away from the door where his master has
entered.

After the women had gotten Robin Hood to the room beneath the eaves, the
Prioress sent all of the others away; then, taking a little cord, she
tied it tightly about Robin's arm, as though she were about to bleed
him. And so she did bleed him, but the vein she opened was not one of
those that lie close and blue beneath the skin; deeper she cut than
that, for she opened one of those veins through which the bright red
blood runs leaping from the heart. Of this Robin knew not; for, though
he saw the blood flow, it did not come fast enough to make him think
that there was anything ill in it.

Having done this vile deed, the Prioress turned and left her cousin,
locking the door behind her. All that livelong day the blood ran from
Robin Hood's arm, nor could he check it, though he strove in every way
to do so. Again and again he called for help, but no help came, for his
cousin had betrayed him, and Little John was too far away to hear his
voice. So he bled and bled until he felt his strength slipping away from
him. Then he arose, tottering, and bearing himself up by the palms of
his hands against the wall, he reached his bugle horn at last. Thrice
he sounded it, but weakly and faintly, for his breath was fluttering
through sickness and loss of strength; nevertheless, Little John heard
it where he lay in the glade, and, with a heart all sick with dread, he
came running and leaping toward the nunnery. Loudly he knocked at the
door, and in a loud voice shouted for them to let him in, but the door
was of massive oak, strongly barred, and studded with spikes, so they
felt safe, and bade Little John begone.

Then Little John's heart was mad with grief and fear for his master's
life. Wildly he looked about him, and his sight fell upon a heavy stone
mortar, such as three men could not lift nowadays. Little John took
three steps forward, and, bending his back, heaved the stone mortar up
from where it stood deeply rooted. Staggering under its weight, he came
forward and hurled it crashing against the door. In burst the door, and
away fled the frightened nuns, shrieking, at his coming. Then Little
John strode in, and never a word said he, but up the winding stone steps
he ran till he reached the room wherein his master was. Here he found
the door locked also, but, putting his shoulder against it, he burst the
locks as though they were made of brittle ice.

There he saw his own dear master leaning against the gray stone wall,
his face all white and drawn, and his head swaying to and fro with
weakness. Then, with a great, wild cry of love and grief and pity,
Little John leaped forward and caught Robin Hood in his arms. Up he
lifted him as a mother lifts her child, and carrying him to the bed,
laid him tenderly thereon.

And now the Prioress came in hastily, for she was frightened at what she
had done, and dreaded the vengeance of Little John and the others of the
band; then she stanched the blood by cunning bandages, so that it flowed
no more. All the while Little John stood grimly by, and after she had
done he sternly bade her to begone, and she obeyed, pale and trembling.
Then, after she had departed, Little John spake cheering words, laughing
loudly, and saying that all this was a child's fright, and that no stout
yeoman would die at the loss of a few drops of blood. "Why," quoth he,
"give thee a se'ennight and thou wilt be roaming the woodlands as boldly
as ever."

But Robin shook his head and smiled faintly where he lay. "Mine own dear
Little John," whispered he, "Heaven bless thy kind, rough heart. But,
dear friend, we will never roam the woodlands together again."

"Ay, but we will!" quoth Little John loudly. "I say again, ay--out upon
it--who dares say that any more harm shall come upon thee? Am I not by?
Let me see who dares touch--" Here he stopped of a sudden, for his words
choked him. At last he said, in a deep, husky voice, "Now, if aught of
harm befalls thee because of this day's doings, I swear by Saint George
that the red cock shall crow over the rooftree of this house, for the
hot flames shall lick every crack and cranny thereof. As for these
women"--here he ground his teeth--"it will be an ill day for them!"

But Robin Hood took Little John's rough, brown fist in his white hands,
and chid him softly in his low, weak voice, asking him since what time
Little John had thought of doing harm to women, even in vengeance. Thus
he talked till, at last, the other promised, in a choking voice, that no
ill should fall upon the place, no matter what happened. Then a silence
fell, and Little John sat with Robin Hood's hand in his, gazing out of
the open window, ever and anon swallowing a great lump that came in his
throat. Meantime the sun dropped slowly to the west, till all the sky
was ablaze with a red glory. Then Robin Hood, in a weak, faltering
voice, bade Little John raise him that he might look out once more upon
the woodlands; so the yeoman lifted him in his arms, as he bade, and
Robin Hood's head lay on his friend's shoulder. Long he gazed, with a
wide, lingering look, while the other sat with bowed head, the hot tears
rolling one after another from his eyes, and dripping upon his bosom,
for he felt that the time of parting was near at hand. Then, presently,
Robin Hood bade him string his stout bow for him, and choose a smooth
fair arrow from his quiver. This Little John did, though without
disturbing his master or rising from where he sat. Robin Hood's fingers
wrapped lovingly around his good bow, and he smiled faintly when he felt
it in his grasp, then he nocked the arrow on that part of the string
that the tips of his fingers knew so well. "Little John," said he,
"Little John, mine own dear friend, and him I love better than all
others in the world, mark, I prythee, where this arrow lodges, and there
let my grave be digged. Lay me with my face toward the East, Little
John, and see that my resting place be kept green, and that my weary
bones be not disturbed."

As he finished speaking, he raised himself of a sudden and sat upright.
His old strength seemed to come back to him, and, drawing the bowstring
to his ear, he sped the arrow out of the open casement. As the shaft
flew, his hand sank slowly with the bow till it lay across his knees,
and his body likewise sank back again into Little John's loving arms;
but something had sped from that body, even as the winged arrow sped
from the bow.

For some minutes Little John sat motionless, but presently he laid that
which he held gently down, then, folding the hands upon the breast and
covering up the face, he turned upon his heel and left the room without
a word or a sound.

Upon the steep stairway he met the Prioress and some of the chief among
the sisters. To them he spoke in a deep, quivering voice, and said he,
"An ye go within a score of feet of yonder room, I will tear down
your rookery over your heads so that not one stone shall be left upon
another. Bear my words well in mind, for I mean them." So saying, he
turned and left them, and they presently saw him running rapidly across
the open, through the falling of the dusk, until he was swallowed up by
the forest.

The early gray of the coming morn was just beginning to lighten the
black sky toward the eastward when Little John and six more of the band
came rapidly across the open toward the nunnery. They saw no one, for
the sisters were all hidden away from sight, having been frightened by
Little John's words. Up the stone stair they ran, and a great sound of
weeping was presently heard. After a while this ceased, and then came
the scuffling and shuffling of men's feet as they carried a heavy weight
down the steep and winding stairs. So they went forth from the nunnery,
and, as they passed through the doors thereof, a great, loud sound of
wailing arose from the glade that lay all dark in the dawning, as though
many men, hidden in the shadows, had lifted up their voices in sorrow.

Thus died Robin Hood, at Kirklees Nunnery, in fair Yorkshire, with mercy
in his heart toward those that had been his undoing; for thus he showed
mercy for the erring and pity for the weak through all the time of his
living.

His yeomen were scattered henceforth, but no great ill befell them
thereafter, for a more merciful sheriff and one who knew them not so
well succeeding the one that had gone, and they being separated here and
there throughout the countryside, they abided in peace and quietness,
so that many lived to hand down these tales to their children and their
children's children.

A certain one sayeth that upon a stone at Kirklees is an old
inscription. This I give in the ancient English in which it was written,
and thus it runs:

HEAR UNDERNEAD DIS LAITL STEAN LAIS ROBERT EARL OF HUNTINGTUN NEA ARCIR
VER AS HIE SAE GEUD AN PIPL KAULD IM ROBIN HEUD SICK UTLAWS AS HI AN IS
MEN VIL ENGLAND NIDIR SI AGEN OBIIT 24 KAL. DEKEMBRIS 1247.


And now, dear friend, we also must part, for our merry journeyings have
ended, and here, at the grave of Robin Hood, we turn, each going his own
way.



I.


Although the account of the serious engagement betwixt the _Cassandra_
and the two pirate vessels in the Mozambique Channel hath already been
set to print, the publick have yet to know many lesser and more detailed
circumstances concerning the matter;[A] and as the above-mentioned
account hath caused much remark and comment, I shall take it upon me to
give many incidents not yet known, seeking to render them neither in
refined rhetorick nor with romantick circumstances such as are sometimes
used by novel and story writers to catch the popular attention, but
telling this history as directly, and with as little verbosity and
circumlocution, as possible.

[A] A brief narration of the naval engagement between Captain Mackra and
the two pirate vessels was given in the Captain's official report made
at Bombay. It appears in the life of the pirate England in Johnson's
book: "A Genuine Account of the Voyages and Plunders of the Most
Notorious Pyrates, &c." London, 1742.

For the conveniency of the reader, I shall render this true and
veracious account under sundry headings, marked I., II., III., &c., as
seen above, which may assist him in separating the less from the more
notable portions of the narrative.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to my log--a diary or journal of circumstances appertaining to
shipboard--it was the nineteenth day of April, 1720, when, I being in
command of the East India Company's ship _Cassandra_, billed for Bombay
and waiting for orders to sail, comes Mr. Evans, the Company's agent,
aboard with certain sealed and important orders which he desired to
deliver to me at the last minute.

After we had come to my cabin and were set down, Mr. Evans hands me two
pacquets, one addressed to myself, the other superscribed to one
Benjamin Longways.

He then proceeded to inform me that the Company had a matter of
exceeding import and delicacy which they had no mind to intrust to any
one but such, he was pleased to say, as was a tried and worthy servant,
and that they had fixed upon me as the fitting one to undertake the
commission, which was of such a nature as would involve the transfer of
many thousand pounds. He furthermore informed me that a year or two
before, the Company had rendered certain aid to the native King of
Juanna, an island lying between Madagascar and the east coast of Africa,
at a time when there was war betwixt him and the king of an island
called Mohilla, which lyeth coadjacent to the other country; that I
should make Juanna upon my voyage, and that I should there receive
through Mr. Longways, who was the Company's agent at that place, a
pacquet of the greatest import, relating to the settlement of certain
matters betwixt the East India Company and the king of that island.
Concluding his discourse, he further said that he had no hesitation in
telling me that the pacquet which I would there receive from Mr. Longways
concerned certain payments due the East India Company, and would, as he
had said before, involve the transfer of many thousand pounds; from
which I might see what need there was of great caution and
circumspection in the transaction.

"But, sir," says I, "sure the Company is making a prodigious mistake in
confiding a business of such vast importance as this to one so young and
so inexperienced as I."

To this Mr. Evans only laughed, and was pleased to say that it was no
concern of his, but from what he had observed he thought the honorable
Company had made a good choice, and that of a keen tool, in my case. He
furthermore said that in the pacquet which he had given to me, and which
was addressed to me, I would find such detailed instructions as would be
necessary, and that the other should be handed to Mr. Longways, and was
an order for the transfer above spoken of.

Soon after this he left the ship, and was rowed ashore, after many kind
and complacent wishes for a quick and prosperous voyage.

It may be as well to observe here as elsewhere within this narrative
that the Company's written orders to me contained little that Mr. Evans
had not told me, saving only certain details, and the further order that
that which the agent at Juanna should transfer to me should be delivered
to the Governor at Bombay, and that I should receive a written receipt
from him for the same. Neither at that time did I know the nature of the
trust that I was called upon to execute, save that it was of great
import, and that it involved money to some mightily considerable amount.

The crew of the _Cassandra_ consisted of fifty-one souls all told,
officers and ordinary seamen. Besides these were six passengers, the
list of whom I give below, it having been copied from my log-book
journal:

Captain Edward Leach (of the East India Company's service).

Mr. Thomas Fellows (who was to take the newly established agency of the
Company at Cuttapore).

Mr. John Williamson (a young cadet).

Mrs. Colonel Evans (a sister-in-law of the Company's agent spoken of
above).

Mistress Pamela Boon (a niece of the Governor at Bombay).

Mistress Ann Hastings (the young lady's waiting-woman).

Of Mistress Pamela Boon I feel extreme delicacy in speaking, not caring
to make publick matters of such a nature as our subsequent relations to
one another. Yet this much I may say without indelicacy, that she was at
that time a young lady of eighteen years of age, and that her father,
who had been a clergyman, having died the year before, she was at that
time upon her way to India to join her uncle, who, as said above, was
Governor at Bombay, and had been left her guardian.

Nor will it be necessary to tire the reader by any disquisition upon the
other passengers, excepting Captain Leach, whom I shall have good cause
to remember to the very last day of my life.

He was a tall, handsome fellow, of about eight-and-twenty years of age,
of good natural parts, and of an old and honorable family of
Hertfordshire. He was always exceedingly kind and pleasant to me, and
treated me upon every occasion with the utmost complacency, and yet I
conceived a most excessive dislike for his person from the very first
time that I beheld him, nor, as events afterwards proved, were my
instincts astray, or did they mislead me in my sentiments, as they are
so apt to do upon similar occasions.

After a voyage somewhat longer than usual, and having stopped at St.
Helena, which hath of late been one of our stations, we sighted the
southern coast of Madagascar about the middle of July, and on the
eighteenth dropped anchor in a little bay on the eastern side of the
island of Juanna, not being able to enter into the harbor which lyeth
before the king's town because of the shallowness of the water and the
lack of a safe anchorage, which is mightily necessary along such a
treacherous and dangerous coast. In the same harbor we found two other
vessels--one the _Greenwich_, Captain Kirby, an English ship; the other
an Ostender, a great, clumsy, tub-shaped craft.

I was much put about that I could get no nearer to the king's town than
I then was, it being some seven or eight leagues away around the
northern end of the island. I was the more vexed that we could not well
come to it in boats, other than by a long reach around the cape to the
northward, which would increase the journey to wellnigh thirty miles.
Besides all this, I was further troubled upon learning from Captain
Kirby of the _Greenwich_ that the pirates had been very troublesome in
these waters for some time past. He said that having been ashore soon
after he had come to that place, in search of a convenient spot to take
in water, he had found fourteen pirates that had come in their canoes
from the Mayotta, where the pirate ship to which they belonged, viz.,
the _Indian Queen_, two hundred and fifty tons, twenty-eight guns, and
ninety men, commanded by Captain Oliver de la Bouche, bound from the
Guinea coast to the East Indies, had been bulged and lost.

I asked Captain Kirby what he had done with the rogues. He told me,
nothing at all, and that the less one had to do with such fellows the
better. At this I was vastly surprised, and that he had taken no steps
to put an end to such a nest of vile, wicked, and bloody-minded wretches
when he had it so clearly in his power to take fourteen of them at once;
more especially as he should have known that if they got away from that
place and to any of their companions they would bring the others not
only about his ears, but of every other craft that might be lying in the
harbor at the time. Something to this effect I said, whereat he flew
into a mighty huff, and said that if I had seen half the experience that
he had been through I would not be so free in my threats of doing this
or that to a set of wretches no better than so many devils from hell,
who would cut a man's throat without any scruples either of fear or
remorse.

To all this I made no rejoinder, for the pirates were far enough away by
this time, and I was willing to suppose that Captain Kirby had done
what he judged to be best in the matter. Yet the getting away of those
evil wretches brought more trouble upon me than had happened in all my
life before.

But, as was said before, I was in a pretty tub of pickle with all those
things; for I could not bring my ship to anchor in any reasonable
distance of the king's town, nor could I leave her and go on such a
journey as would take a day or more, lest the pirates should come along
in my absence. Neither did I like to send any of the officers under me
to execute the commission, it being one of such exceeding delicacy and
secrecy. At this juncture, and all of my passengers knowing that we
could not leave that place till I had communicated certain papers to the
Company's agent at the king's town, comes Captain Leach to me and
volunteers to deliver the pacquet addressed to Mr. Longways. At first I
was but little inclined to accept of his complacency, but having a
secret feeling that I might be wronging him by my prejudice against him,
I determined to give second thought to the matter before I hastily
declined his offer of aid. Indeed, I may truthfully say I would have
felt more inclined to refuse his assistance if I had entertained a more
high opinion of his person. As it was, I could see no reason for not
accepting his offer; he was regarded everywhere as a man of rectitude
and of honor, and I had no real grounds to impeach this opinion; so the
end of the business was that I accepted his aid with the best face that
I was able to command, though that was with no very good grace, and gave
him leave to choose ten volunteers as a boat's crew for the
expedition.




II.


(The reader will be pleased to observe that, in pursuance of the plan
above indicated, I here begin a second part or chapter of my narrative,
the first dealing with our voyage out as far as the island of Juanna,
and matters of a kindred nature, whilst the following relates to an
entirely different subject, namely, the nature of the trust imposed upon
me, mention only of which has heretofore been made.)

I do not now nor ever have believed that Captain Leach had any other
designs in offering to execute my commission than that of seizing so
excellent an opportunity to see a strange country and people after a
long and tiresome voyage upon the sea. Nevertheless, my allowing him to
go was one of the greatest mistakes in all of my whole life, and cost
me dearly enough before I had redeemed it.

The expedition under him was gone for three days, at the end of which
time he returned, in company with a great canoe manned by a crew of
about twenty tall, strapping black fellows, and with two or three
sitting in the stern-sheets of the craft, bedecked with feathers and
beads, whom I knew to be chiefs or warriors.

In the _Cassandra's_ boat was a stranger who sat beside Captain Leach,
talking very gayly, and who I knew could be none other than Mr.
Longways, the Company's agent.

So soon as the _Cassandra's_ boat had come alongside he skipped up the
side like a monkey, and gave me a very civil bow immediately his feet
touched the deck, which I returned with all the gravity I was able to
command.

Mr. Longways was a lean, slim little man, and was dressed with great
care, and in the very latest fashion that he could obtain; from which,
and his polite, affected manners and grimaces, I perceived that he
rarely had the opportunity of coming upon board of a craft where there
were ladies as passengers.

After Mr. Longways came Captain Leach, and after him the three great,
tall, native chiefs, half naked, and with hair dressed after a most
strange, curious fashion. At first they would have prostrated themselves
at my feet, but I prevented them; whereupon they took my hand and set it
upon their heads, which was anything but pleasant, their hair being
thick with gums and greases.

I presently led the way to my cabin, the chiefs following close at our
heels, and Mr. Longways walking beside me, grimacing like a little old
monkey in a vastly affected manner. Nor could I forbear smiling to see
how he directed his observations towards the ladies, and more especially
Mistress Pamela, who stood at the rail of the deck above. Mr. Longways
carried in his hand a strong iron despatch-box, about the bigness of
those used by the runners at the Bank, and so soon as we had come into
my cabin he clapped it down upon the table with a great noise.

"There!" says he, fetching a deep sigh; "I, for one, am glad to be quit
of it."

"Why," says I, "Mr. Longways, is there then so much in the little
compass of that box?"

"Indeed yes," says he; "enough to make you and me rich men for our
lives."

"I wonder, then," says I, laughing, "that you should bring it so easily
to me, when you might have made off with it yourself, and no one the
wiser."

"No, no," says he, quite seriously, without taking my jest, and jerking
his head towards the black chiefs, who had squatted down upon their hams
nigh to the table--"No, no. Our friends yonder have had their eyes on me
sharply enough, though they do not understand one single word that we
are saying to one another."

While we had been conversing I had fetched out a decanter of port and
five glasses, and had poured out wine for all hands, which the black men
drank with as great pleasure as Mr. Longways and myself.

After Mr. Longways had finished, he smacked his lips and set down his
glass with a great air. "And now," says he, with a comical grimace of
vanity and self-importance, "let us to business without loss of more
time. First of all, I have to ask you, sir, do you know what all this
treasure is for?"

I told him yes; that Mr. Evans had informed me that it was as payment
for certain aid which the East India Company had rendered to the king of
that country.

"And how," says he, very slowly, and cocking his head upon one
side--"and how do you think our King Coffee is to make such payments? By
bills upon the Bank of Africa? No, no. The treasure is all in this box,
every farthing of it; and I, sir, have been chosen by the honorable East
India Company to have sole and entire charge of it for more than two
weeks past." Here he looked at me very hard, as though he thought I
would have made some remark upon what he had told me; but as I said
nothing he presently resumed his discourse, after his own fashion. "I
see," says he, "that you do not appreciate the magnitude of the trust
that hath been imposed upon me. I shall show you, sir." And without more
ado he fetched up a bunch of keys out of his pocket. He looked at them
one after another until he found one somewhat smaller than the rest, and
with very curiously wrought guards. "Look at this," says he; "there are
only three in the world like it. I hold one, King Coffee the other, and
the Governor of Bombay the third." So saying, he thrust the key into the
lock of the despatch-box. "Stop a bit, sir," said I, very seriously,
and laying my hand on his arm. "Have you very well considered what you
are doing? Mr. Evans, the Company's agent, said nothing to me concerning
the nature of the trust that was to be imposed upon me further than it
was of very great value; and without you have received instructions to
tell me further concerning this business, I much misdoubt that the
Company intended me to be further informed as to its nature."

"Why, look 'ee, Captain Mackra," says he, testily, "Tom Evans is one man
and I am another, and I tell you further that I am as important an agent
as he, even though he does live in London and I in this outrageous
heathen country. Even if I had not intended showing you this treasure
before, I would show it to you now, for I do not choose that anybody
should think that Tom Evans is a man of more importance than I." So
saying, and without more ado, he gave a quick turn to the key, and flung
back the lid of the box. I happened just then to glance at the three
chiefs, and saw that they were watching us as a cat watches at a
mouse-hole; but so soon as they saw me observing them they turned their
eyes away so quickly that I hardly felt sure that I had seen them.

Inside of the box was a great lot of dried palm-leaf fibre wrapped
around a ball of cotton, which Mr. Longways lifted very carefully and
gently. Opening this, he came upon a little roll of dressed skin like
the chamois-leather such as the jewellers and watch-makers use, and
which was tied all about very carefully with a stout cord of palm fibre.
Mr. Longways began laboriously to untie the knot in this cord, and,
though I cannot tell why, there was something about the whole business
that set my heart to beating very thickly and heavily within my breast.

Mr. Longways looked up under his brows at me with a very curious leer.
"Did you ever hear," says he, "of The Rose of Paradise?"

[Illustration: MR. LONGWAYS LOOKED UP UNDER HIS BROWN EYES AT ME WITH A
VERY CURIOUS LEER.]

I shook my head.

"Then I'll show her to you," said he; and he began unwinding the cord
from about the roll of soft leather, the folds of which he presently
opened. Then, as I looked down into his hand and saw what lay within the
dressed skin, I was so struck with amazement that I could not find
either breath or tongue to utter one single word.




III.


_It was a ruby, the most beautiful I had ever seen, and about the
bigness of a pigeon's egg._

At the sight of this prodigious jewel I was so disturbed in my spirits
that I trembled as though with an ague, while the sweat started out of
my forehead in great drops. "For the love of the Lord, put it up, man!"
I cried, so soon as I could find breath and wits.

There was something in my voice that must have frightened Mr. Longways,
for he looked mightily disturbed and taken aback; but he presently tried
to pass it off for a jest. "Come, come," says he, as he wrapped up the
stone in the soft leather again--"come, come; it's all between friend
and friend, and no harm done." But to this I answered not a word, but
began walking up and down the cabin, so affected by what I had seen that
I could neither recover my spirits nor regain my composure. The more I
thought over the business the less I liked it; for if anything should
now happen to the stone, and it should be lost, every suspicion would
fall upon me, since I was possessed of the knowledge of the value of
that which was given into my charge. I could not but marvel at the
foolish and magpie vanity of Mr. Longways that should thus lead him to
betray to an unknown stranger what even I, though so ignorant of the
value of such gems, could easily perceive was a vast incalculable
treasure such as would make any one man rich for a whole lifetime; and
even to this very day it is a matter of admiration to me why the East
India Company should have put such a man in a place of important trust,
the only reason that I can assign being that no better man could be
found to take the agency in that place.

"Look'ee," said I, turning to him suddenly, "have you told of this
jewel, this Rose of Paradise, to any one else?"

"Why--" says he; and then he stopped, and began gnawing his nether lip
in a peevish fashion.

"Come, come," says I, "speak out plain, Master Longways, for this is no
time for dilly-dallying."

"Well," says he, blurting out his words, "I did say something of it to
Captain Leach, who, I would have you know, is a gentleman, and a man of
honor into the bargain."

"And tell me," said I, paying no attention to his braggadocio air, "did
you show the stone to him also?"

He looked up and down, as though not knowing what to say.

"Come, come, sir," said I, sternly, after waiting for a moment or two
and he not answering me--"come, come, sir, I should like to have an
answer, if you please. You will recollect that this trust now concerns
not only you, but also myself, and if anything happens to the jewel I
will be called upon to answer for it as well as yourself; so, as I said,
you will answer my question."

"Why," says he, "Master Captain, and what if I did? Do you mean to
impeach the honor of Captain Leach? I did show it to him one day when we
stopped along the beach for water, if you must be told; but I can
promise you that not another soul but yourself has seen it since I gave
King Coffee my written receipt for it."

I made no more comment, but began again to walk up and down the cabin,
vastly disturbed in my mind by all that I heard. Nothing could be gained
by blaming the poor fool, who all this time sat watching me with a
mightily troubled and disquieted face. "Sir," said I, at last, turning
to him--"sir, I do not believe that you know what a serious piece of
folly you have committed in this business. By rights I should have
nothing more to do with the matter, but should leave you to settle it
with the Company as you choose; but my instructions were to deliver the
stone at Bombay, and I will undertake to do my part to the best of my
power. I have nothing of blame to say to you, but I must tell you plain
that I cannot have you longer about my ship; I do not wish to order you
to leave, but I will be vastly obliged to you if you can return to the
king's town without longer stay."

At this address Mr. Longways grew very red in the face. "Sir! sir!" he
cried, "do you dare to order me, an agent of the East India Company, to
leave one of that Company's own ships?"

"That," said I, "you must salt to suit your own taste."

"Very well!" cried he; "give me a receipt for the stone and I'll go,
though I tell you plain that the Company shall hear of the fashion in
which you have been pleased to treat me."

I made no further answer to his words, but sat down and wrote out the
receipt, specifying, however, the manner in which The Rose of Paradise
had been shown both to Captain Leach and to myself.

For a while Mr. Longways hotly refused to accept it in the form in which
it was writ; but finding that he could get no better, and that he would
either have to accept of it or retain the stone in his own keeping until
some further opportunity offered for consigning it to Bombay, he was
finally fain to take what he could get, whereupon he folded up the paper
and thrust it into his pocket, and then left the cabin with a vast show
of dignity, and without so much as looking at me or saying a word to me.

He and the chiefs got into the great canoe, and rowed away whence they
had come, and I saw no more of him until above a week afterwards, of
which I shall have more to say further on in my narration.




IV.


I did not go upon deck immediately after Mr. Longways had left the
cabin, but sat there concerned with a great multitude of thoughts, and
gazing absently at the box that held the treasure, and at the empty
glasses with the dregs of the wine in the bottom.

Just in front of me was a small looking-glass fastened against the port
side of the cabin in such position that by merely raising my eyes I
could see the cabin door from where I sat.

In the upper part of the door was a little window of two panes of glass,
which opened out under the overhang of the poop-deck.

Though I do not know what it was, something led me to glance up from
where I sat, and in the glass I saw Captain Leach looking in at that
window with a mightily strange expression on his face. He was not
looking at me, but at the iron despatch-box upon the table, and I sat
gazing at him for about the space of eight or ten seconds, in which time
he moved neither his glance nor his person. Suddenly he lifted his eyes
and looked directly into the glass, and his gaze met mine. I had thought
that he would have been struck with confusion, and for a moment it did
seem as though his look faltered, but he instantly recovered himself,
and tapped lightly upon the door, and I bade him come in without moving
where I sat.

He did as he was told, and sat down upon the chair which Mr. Longways
had occupied only a few moments before. I confess that I was both
frightened and angry at finding him thus, as it were, spying upon me, so
that it was a moment or two before I trusted myself to speak.

"Sir," said I at last, "sure this voyage hath been long enough for you
to know that the courtesies of shipboard require you to send a message
to the captain to find whether he be disengaged or no."

Captain Leach showed no emotion at my reproof. "Captain Mackra," said
he, quietly, "I do not know what that gabbling fool of an agent has or
has not said to you, but I tell you plain he hath chosen to betray to me
certain important matters concerning the East India Company, and that in
yonder despatch-box is a large ruby, valued at nigh three hundred and
fifty thousand pounds sterling."

I may confess that I was vastly amazed at the value of the stone, which
was far greater than I had conceived a notion of, but I strove to show
nothing of my sentiments to my interlocutor.

"Well, sir?" said I, looking him straight in the face.

He seemed somewhat struck aback at my manner, but he presently laughed
lightly. "You take the matter with most admirable coolness," said he;
"far more than I would do were I in your place. But at least you will
now perceive why I chose rather to come to you of myself than to send a
messenger to you where a matter of such delicacy was concerned."

"Well, sir?" said I.

Captain Leach looked for a moment or two as though at a loss what next
to say, but he presently spoke again. "I came to you," said he, "not
knowing, as I said before, whether or no Mr. Longways had betrayed to
you, as he has to me, the value of the trust imposed upon you; and as I
myself am now unfortunately concerned in the knowledge of this treasure,
and so share in your responsibility, I come hither to discover what
steps you propose taking to insure the safety of the stone."

Now it hath come under my observation that if a man be permitted to talk
without let or stay, he will sooner or later betray that which lieth
upon his mind. So from the very moment that Captain Leach uttered his
last speech I conceived the darkest and most sinister suspicions of his
purposes; nor from that time did I trust one single word that he said,
or repose confidence in any of his actions, but was ready to see in
everything something to awaken my doubts of his rectitude. Nor did these
sentiments arise entirely from his words, but equally as much from my
having discovered him, as it were, so prying upon my privacy.

"Sir," said I, rising from my seat, "I am infinitely obliged to you for
your kindness in this affair, but as I have at present matters of
considerable import that demand my closest attention, I must beg you to
excuse me."

Captain Leach looked at me for a moment or two as though he had it upon
his mind to say something further. However, he did not speak, but
rising, delivered a very profound bow, and left the cabin without
another word. But there was no gainsaying the wisdom of the advice
which he had given me as to concealing the treasure. Accordingly I
obtained from the carpenter a basket of tools, and, bearing in mind the
late visit with which he had favored me, having shaded the little window
in the door of my cabin, I stripped off my coat and waistcoat, and after
an hour or so of work, made shift to rig up a very snug little closet
with a hinged door, in the bottom of my berth and below the mattress,
wherein I hid the jewel. After that I breathed more freely, for I felt
that the treasure could not be discovered without a long and careful
search, the opportunities for which were not likely to occur.

Although my interview with Captain Leach might seem of small and
inconsiderable moment to any one coolly reading this narrative in the
privacy of his closet, yet coming to me as it did upon the heels of my
other interview with Mr. Longways, it cast me into such disquietude of
spirit as I had not felt for a long time. I would have heaved anchor
and away, without losing one single minute of delay, had it been
possible for me to have done so; but not a breath of air was stirring,
and there was nothing for it but to ride at anchor where we were,
though, what with the heat and delay, it was all that I could do not to
chafe myself into a fume of impatience.

So passed the day until about four o'clock in the afternoon, when there
happened a certain thing that, had thunder and lightning burst from a
clear sky, it could not have amazed me more. I being in my cabin at the
time, comes Mr. Langely, my first mate, with the strange news that the
lookout had sighted a vessel over the point of land to the southward. I
could hardly accredit what he said, for, as above stated, not a breath
of air was going. I hurried out of my cabin and upon deck, where I found
Mr. White, the second mate, standing at the port side of the ship, with
a glass in his hand directed a few points west of south, and over a
spit of land which ran out in the channel towards that quarter, at which
place the cape was covered by a mightily thick growth of scrub-bushes,
with here and there a tall palm-tree rising from the midst of the
thickets. Over beyond these I could see the thin white masts of the
vessel that the lookout had sighted. There was no need of the glass, for
I could see her plain enough, though not of what nature she might be.
However, I took the telescope from Mr. White's hands, and made a long
and careful survey of the stranger, but as much to hide my thoughts as
for any satisfaction that I could gain; for what confounded me beyond
measure was that a vessel should be sighted so suddenly, and in a dead
calm, where I felt well assured no craft had been for days past. Nor was
I less amazed to find, as I held the stranger steadfastly in the circle
of the object-glass, a tall palm-tree being almost betwixt the
_Cassandra_ and her, and almost directly in my line of sight, that she
was slowly and steadily making way towards the northward, and at a very
considerable angle with the Gulf current, which there had a set more to
the westward than where we lay at anchor.

I think that all, or nearly all, of my passengers were upon the
poop-deck at that time, Captain Leach with a pocket field-glass which he
had fetched with him from England, and with which he was directing
Mistress Pamela's observation to the strange craft. Nearly all the crew
were also watching her by this time, and in a little while they
perceived, what I had seen from the first, that the vessel was by some
contrivance making head without a breath of wind, and nearly against the
Gulf current.

As for the stranger herself, so far as I could judge, seeing nothing of
her hull, she was a bark of somewhat less tonnage than the _Cassandra_;
and the masts, which we could perceive very clearly against the clear
sky, had a greater rake than any I had ever before seen.

I do not know whether or not it was because my mind was running so much
upon the pirates and upon the great treasure which I had in my keeping,
but I am free to say that I liked the looks of the strange craft as
little as any I had ever beheld in my life, and would have given a
hundred guineas to be safe away from where I was, and with no more favor
than a good open sea and a smart breeze, for the _Cassandra_ was a
first-rate sailer, and as good a ship as any the East India Company had
at their docks.

As it was, we were cooped up in what was little more than a pond, and I
did not like the looks of the business at all.

"What do you make her out to be, Mr. Langely?" said I, after a bit,
handing him the glass.

He took a long and careful look at the stranger without speaking for a
while. By-and-by he said, without taking his eye from the glass, and as
though speaking half to himself, "She's making way against the current
somehow or other."

"Yes," said I; "I saw that from the first. But what do you make of her?"

"I can make nothing of her," says he, after a little while.

"Neither can I," I said; "and I like her none the better for that."

Mr. Langely took his eye from the glass, and gave me a very significant
look, whereby I saw that he had very much the same notion concerning the
stranger that I myself entertained.

By this time there was considerable bustle aboard the _Greenwich_, which
rode at anchor not more than a furlong or two from where we lay, and by
the gathering of the men on the forecastle I could see that they had
sighted the craft, as we had already done.

So the afternoon passed until six o'clock had come, against which time
the stranger had almost come into open sight beyond the cape to the
south, the hull alone being hidden by the low spit of sand which formed
the extremity of the point.

That evening I took my supper along with the passengers, as I had been
used to do, for I wished to appear unconcerned, as, after all, my
suspicions might be altogether groundless. Nevertheless, I came upon
deck again as soon as I was able, and found that the stranger was now so
far come into sight as to show a part of her hull, which was low, and
painted black, and was of such an appearance as rather to increase than
to lessen my serious suspicions of her nature.

I could see there were two whale-boats ahead of her, and it was very
plain to me that it was by means of these that the bark was making head
against the current. At first I was more than ever amazed at this,
seeing that the current at that point could not run at less than the
rate of two or three knots an hour, against which two boats could not
hope to tow a craft of her size without some contrivance to aid their
efforts. Every now and then I could hear the clicking of the capstan, as
though the vessel was heaving anchor, and led by this sound, I after a
while perceived how she was making way, though if I had not seen the
same plan used in the Strait of Malacca by the _City of Worcester_, when
I was there in the year '17, I much misdoubt whether I could have so
readily discovered the design which they were in this instance using. As
it was, I was not long in finding out what they were about.

The two boats ahead of the strange craft were towing a square sail
through the water by a line fastened to the middle of the same. From all
four corners of this sail ran good stout ropes, which were made fast to
the anchor cable of the bark. The two boats might tow this square
through the water easily enough by that one line fastened to the middle,
because the sail would then close and so slip easily through the water;
but so soon as the bark began to haul upon it from all four corners it
spread out as though filled with wind, and so offered a vast resistance
to the water. By this contrivance the bark was making headway at about
the rate of a knot an hour against the current, so that by seven o'clock
she was clear out beyond the cape and into the open water beyond.

At that time the sun had not yet gone down, and the distant vessel stood
out against the reddish-gray sky to the eastward, with all the cordage
and the masts as sharp as so many hairs and straws in the red light of
the setting sun.

I was standing just under the poop-deck at the time, with the glass to
my eye, when, of a sudden, I saw something black begin rising from the
deck to the fore. There was not enough breeze going to spread it, but I
knew as well as anything in all of my life that it was the "Black
Roger," and that the white that I could see among the folds was the
wicked sign of the "skull and crossbones," which those bloody and cruel
wretches are pleased to adopt as the ensign of their trade. Nor were we
long in doubt as to their design, for even as I watched I saw a sudden
puff of white smoke go up from her side and hang motionlessly in the
still air, whilst a second or two later sounded the dull and heavy boom
of the distant cannon, and a round shot came skipping across the water
from wave to wave, though too far away and with too poor aim to do any
damage from that distance, which could not have been less than two
miles.

"What does that mean, captain?" said Mistress Pamela, who stood with the
other passengers observing the bark from the poop-deck above.

"A salute, madam," said I, and so shut my glass and went into my cabin,
where Mr. Langely presently joined me at my request, and where we talked
over this very ugly piece of business at our leisure.




V.


In those hot latitudes, such as Madagascar, the darkness cometh very
sudden after sunset, and with no long twilights such as we have in
England, so that within half an hour after the pirate had saluted us
with a round shot, as told above, it had passed from daylight to
night-time, and there being no moon until about four o'clock in the
morning, it was very dark, with an infinite quantity of stars shining
most beautifully in the sky.

I ordered my gig to be made ready, and went aboard the _Greenwich_,
where I found Captain Kirby suffering under the utmost consternation of
spirits. He took me straight to his cabin, where, when we were set down,
he fell to blaming himself most severely for not having clapped chains
upon the fourteen pirates whom he had found on the island upon his
arrival at that place, and who, it was very plain to see, had given such
information to their fellows as had brought a great number of them down
upon us.

So soon as I was able I checked him in his self-reproaches. "Come, come,
Captain Kirby," says I, "'tis no time for vain regrets, but rather to be
thinking to protect ourselves and those things that we have in trust
from these bloody wretches, who would strip us of all."

So, after a while, he quieted in some measure, and the captain of the
Ostender coming aboard about this time, we made shift betwixt us to
settle some sort of a plan for mutual protection.

According to my suggestions it was determined to get out warps upon the
port side of all three crafts, which now lay heading towards the south,
because of the set of the current. By means of these warps the vessels
might be brought to lie athwart the channel, which was so narrow at
this place that, should the pirate craft venture into the harbor, she
would be raked by all three in turn. These matters being settled, I
returned to the _Cassandra_ again.

That night I had but little sleep, but was in and out of my cabin
continually. Whenever I was upon the deck I could hear the "click,
click, click" of the capstan aboard the pirate vessel, sounding more
clearly through the dampness of the night than in the daytime. There was
still not a breath of air going, and I thought it likely that the pirate
intended making her way into the harbor that night, but about three
o'clock in the morning the noise of working the capstan ceased, and I
fancied that I heard a sound as of dropping anchor, though I could make
out nothing through the darkness, even with the night-glass.

Nor was I mistaken in my surmise that the pirate craft had come to
anchor, for when the day broke I perceived that she lay between two and
three miles away, just outside of the capes, and directly athwart the
channel, being stayed by warps, broadside on, as we ourselves were in
the harbor, so as to rake any vessel that should endeavor to come out,
as we might rake any that would endeavor to come in.

As this day also was very quiet, with not a breath of wind stirring, I
expected that the pirate would open fire, though at such a long range.
However, this she did not do, but lay there as though watching us, and
as though to hold us where we were until some opportunity or other had
ripened. And so came the night again, with nothing more of note having
happened than the day before.

Ever since we had lain at this spot native canoes (called by the sailors
bumboats) had come from the shore from day to day, laden with fruit and
fresh provisions, which are most delicious, refreshing luxuries after a
prolonged sea-voyage, such as ours had been. That day they had come as
usual, though there was little humor for bartering with them upon such a
serious occasion.

However, I had observed, and not without surprise, that Captain Leach,
though he knew the nature of the pirate craft, and the serious situation
in our affairs, appeared so little affected by the danger which
threatened us that he bought a lot of fresh fruit, as usual, and held a
great deal of conversation with one of the natives, who spoke a sort of
English which he had picked up from our traders.

I had not thought much of this at the time, although, as I had observed
before, it was not without surprise that I beheld what he did; beyond
this I reckoned nothing of it, nor would have done so had not matters of
the utmost importance afterwards recalled it to my attention.

That night I had no more appetite for sleep than the night before, and
finding little rest or ease in my cabin, was up upon deck for most of
the time. Though I did not choose just then to hold conversation with my
passengers, I noticed that they were all upon deck, where they sat
talking together in low tones. As the night advanced, however, they
betook themselves to their cabins, one after another, until only Captain
Leach was left sitting alone.

He remained there for maybe the space of half an hour, without moving a
hair's-breadth, so far as I could see. At the end of about that length
of time, being in a mightily anxious state, I stepped forward to see for
myself that the watch was keeping a sharp lookout. I was not gone for
more than a minute or two, but when I came back I saw that Captain Leach
was no longer where he had been before; yet although I noticed this
circumstance at the time, I gave no more thought to it than I would upon
an ordinary occasion.

As there was no one on the poop, I myself went up upon that deck, it
being so much cooler there than on the quarter-deck below. I took out
my pipe and filled it, thinking to have a quiet smoke, which is a most
efficacious manner of soothing any perturbation or fermentation of
spirits. Just as I was about to strike my flint for a light, I heard a
noise under the stern-sheets, as of some one stepping into a boat, and
almost immediately afterwards a slight splash, as of an oar or a paddle
dipped into the water. I ran hastily to the side of the vessel, and
looked astern and into the water below.

Although the sky was clear, the night was excessively dark, as one may
often see it in those tropical latitudes; yet I was as well assured that
a boat of some sort had left the ship as if I had seen it in broad
daylight, because of the phosphorescent trail which it left behind it in
its wake.

I had slipped a pistol into my belt before quitting my cabin, and as I
hailed the boat I drew it and cocked it, for I thought that the whole
occurrence was of a mightily suspicious nature. As I more than half
expected, I got no answer. "Boat, ahoy!" I cried out a second time, and
then, almost immediately, levelled my pistol and fired, for I saw that
whoever the stranger was, he had no mind to give me an answer.

At the report of the pistol both Mr. Langely and Mr. White came running
to where I was, and I explained the suspicious circumstances to them,
whereupon Mr. Langely suggested that it might have been a shark that I
had seen, vast quantities of which voracious animals dwell in those and
the neighboring waters. I did not controvert what he said, although I
knew beyond a doubt that it was a craft of some sort which I had
discovered--possibly a canoe, for the dip of the paddle, which I had
distinctly seen in the phosphorescence of the water, appeared first upon
the one side of the wake and then upon the other, as the blade was
dipped into the water from side to side; so although, as I said, I did
not undertake to controvert Mr. Langely's opinion, I was mightily
discomposed in my own mind concerning the business.

At this time there was a vast deal of disturbance aboard the _Greenwich_
and the Ostender because of my hail and the discharge of the pistol,
which, however, soon quieted down when they found that nothing further
followed upon the alarm.

I walked up and down the poop-deck for a great while, endeavoring to
conceive what could be the meaning of the boat, which had most
undoubtedly been lying under the stern of the _Cassandra_, and how it
came that the watch had failed so entirely to discover its arrival. It
would not have been possible for an ordinary ship's boat to come upon us
so undiscovered, for, as I myself knew, the watch were keeping a sharper
lookout than usual; therefore this circumstance, together with that
which I had above observed concerning my opinion that the craft had been
rowed with a paddle, led me to conclude that it was one of the native
canoes, though I was as far as ever from guessing what the object of the
visit had been, or what it portended. As I sat ruminating upon this
subject, looking straight ahead of me, without thinking whither my
observation was directed, I presently perceived that I was looking
absently at the spot where Captain Leach had been sitting a little while
before. This led me to think of him, and from him of the jewel that was
in my keeping, and of its excessive value. Of a sudden it flashed into
my mind, as quick as lightning, what if Captain Leach should have it in
his mind to practice some treachery upon us all?

I may truly say that this thought would never have entered my brains had
not the circumstance of Captain Leach's conversation with me in my cabin
tended to set it there. But no sooner had this gloomy suspicion found
place in my mind than it and those troubles which had beset me of late,
and the loss of that sleep which I had failed to enjoy the night before,
together cast me into such a ferment of spirits as I hope I may never
again experience. Nor could I reason my mind out of what I could not but
feel might be insane and unreasonable fancyings.

At last I could bear my uncertainties no longer, but went down into the
great cabin, and so to the door of the berth which Captain Leach
occupied. I knocked softly upon the door, and then waited a while, but
received no answer. After that I knocked again, and louder, but with no
better success than before. Finding I was like to have no answer to my
knocking, I tried the door, and found that it was locked.

My heart began to beat at a great rate at all this; but I suddenly
bethought me that perhaps the captain was a sound sleeper and not easily
roused. If this were so, and he were in his cabin, and had locked the
door upon himself, I could easily convince myself of the fact, for it
hardly could be doubted but that the key would be in the key-hole. I
drew out my pocket-knife, opened a small blade which it contained, and
thrust it into the key-hole. There was no key there!

This discovery acted upon my spirits in such a manner that a douse of
water could not have cooled me quicker; for now that my worst suspicions
were so far confirmed--for I felt well assured that Captain Leach was
nowhere aboard the ship--my perturbation left me, and I grew of a sudden
as calm as I am at this very moment. However, to make matters more
assured, I rapped again upon the door of the cabin, and this time with
more vigor than before; but although I repeated the knocking four or
five times, I received no answer, and so went upon deck to consider the
matter at my leisure.

My first thought was of the jewel in my keeping, and that Captain Leach
had made off with it. My cooler reason told me that this could not be,
I having taken such effectual means to hide it, as before stated.
Nevertheless, I went to my cabin and examined my hiding-place to set my
mind at rest, finding, as might be expected, that the jewel was safely
there.

My first impulse was to tell Mr. Langely of my suspicions, but in
digesting the matter it appeared to me best to keep them to myself for
the present; for if I should, after all, prove wrong in my surmise, it
would only add to the entanglement to have another involved in the
business before anything certain had been discovered; moreover, should I
observe sufficient cause for using extreme measures against Captain
Leach, I might easily arrest him at any time, having him entirely in my
power.

Having settled this matter to my own satisfaction, I determined to lie
in wait for his return, and to discover how he himself would explain his
absence.

I surmised that he must have left the ship from the boat which was
hanging to the davits astern, and on inspecting the matter, found that I
was correct, and that a stout line, such as might easily bear the weight
of a man, had been lashed to one of the falls, and hung to within a foot
or two of the water. I was then well assured that Captain Leach must
have clambered into the boat astern whilst I had gone forward, as told
above, and had dropped thence into the canoe by means of the line just
spoken of. The noise which I had heard I conceived to have been caused
by his making a misstep, or by the canoe rising with the ground-swell
more than he had expected.

Now, if he left the ship in that manner, of which, according to my mind,
there could be but little doubt, there was equal certainty that he would
return by the same way; so I determined to lie in watch for him there,
and to tax him with his absence so soon as he should come aboard.
Accordingly I laid myself down in the boat astern as comfortably as I
could contrive, and lighting my pipe, watched with all the patience I
could command for the return of the fugitive.

I judge that I lay there for the space of two or three hours, and in all
that time saw or heard nothing to arouse my suspicions; nor do I believe
that I would have discovered anything had I not been watching at that
very place, for so quiet was Captain Leach's return that I heard no
sound of oars nor knew anything of it until I saw the line that hung at
the davits moved from below by some one climbing aboard. I lay perfectly
still and made no noise until he had clambered into the boat and stood
within a few feet of me.

"Well, sir," says I, as quietly as I could speak, "and may I ask where
you have been for all this long time?"




VI.


Had a pistol been fired beside his head he could not have started more
violently, and I had thought that he would have been utterly dumfounded;
but he recovered himself with a most amazing quickness.

"Why, Captain Mackra," says he, with a laugh, "and is it you that
welcome me back again, like the prodigal that I am?"

"Sir," said I, very sternly, "you will be pleased to answer my question,
for I tell you plain that I am in no humor for jesting upon this
occasion."

"And why should I not jest?" says he; "the whole business is a jest from
first to last. As all this coil has been made about a very simple piece
of business, I am forced to tell what I had not intended to tell, and
which I am surprised that a man of your feeling should urge another
into declaring. A man of parts, sir, may find favor with dusky beauties
as well as with white; nor can I see what more harm there may be in
visiting a sweetheart here than at Gravesend, which I doubt not you
yourself have done, and that more than once."

I confess that I was vastly struck aback at this reasonable answer, and
began for a moment to misdoubt that my suspicions of the captain were
correct. For a while I stood, not knowing what to say, when of a sudden
certain circumstances struck me that Captain Leach's words had not
explained.

"And why," said I, "at a time of such anxiety and uncertainty, did you
not ask permission to leave the ship?"

"I should think," says he, "a man of delicacy would have no need to ask
such a question as that."

"Then tell me this," I cried, "_why did you not direct your course
towards the land instead of towards the open sea?_"

"Why," says he, laughing, and answering with the utmost readiness, "I
thought of nothing at all but of getting away from the ship as fast as
possible, seeing that some hasty fool aboard was blazing away at me with
a pistol or musquetoon, and that if I had been picking my course at the
time I might have wound up the business with an ounce of lead in my
brains, instead of enjoying this pleasant conversation in such good
health."

All this time we had been standing within a foot or two of one another,
I looking him straight in the face, though I could see nothing of it in
the darkness. For a moment or two I could make no answer, his words
being so mightily plausible; and yet I did not believe a single one of
them, for they ran so smoothly and glibly that I could not but feel
convinced that he had them already sorted and arranged for just such an
occasion as the present.

"Sir," said I, in a low voice, for I was afraid lest my indignation
should get the better of me, "I tell you plain that, though your words
are so smooth, I do not believe that which you tell me. Go to your
cabin, sir, and let me tell you that if I see anything that may tend to
confirm my suspicions of you, I will clap you in irons, without waiting
a second, and as sure as you are a living man."

"Captain Mackra," said he, in a voice as quiet as that I myself had
used, "if ever I come safely to land, you shall answer to me for these
words, sir."

"That as you please," said I; and thereupon turned and left the boat,
entering my own cabin so soon as I had seen that Captain Leach had
obeyed my orders by betaking himself to his.

I was not thus quickly to see the last of this part of the affair, for
early the next morning, and before I had left my cabin, Mr. Langely
comes to me with a message from Captain Leach to the effect that he
would like to have a few words with me. I at once sent a return message
that I would be pleased to see him at whatever time it might suit him to
come. Accordingly in about five minutes he knocked upon the door of my
cabin, and I bade him enter. I motioned him to a chair, but he only
bowed and remained standing where he was, nigh to the door.

"Captain Mackra," said he, coldly, "you were pleased to put upon me last
night a gross and uncalled-for insult. I cannot summon you to account
for it at present, although I hope to do so in the future. But you may
perceive, sir, that it will be best both for you and for myself that I
should withdraw from this ship, and finish my passage to India, as the
opportunity now offers, either in the _Greenwich_ or the _Van Weiland_"
(which was the name of the Ostend boat).

[Illustration: "CAPTAIN MACKRA," SAID HE, COLDLY, "YOU WERE PLEASED TO
PUT UPON ME LAST NIGHT A GROSS AND UNCALLED-FOR INSULT."]

I was overjoyed at so propitious an opportunity of getting thus easily
rid of my uncomfortable passenger. However, I think I showed nothing
of this to him--at least I endeavored not to do so--and told him that a
boat was at his service if he chose to look for another berth for the
rest of the voyage. I myself went upon deck and had the gig lowered,
into which Captain Leach presently stepped, having bid good-by to his
fellow-passengers, and having said that he would send for his chest so
soon as he had secured a berth in one or the other of the vessels
mentioned. I gave directions to the boatswain, who was captain of the
gig, to await Captain Leach's orders until he should indicate that he
had no further use for the boat, and then saw him rowed away to the
_Greenwich_ with the most inexpressible pleasure.

The _Cassandra's_ boat lay alongside of the _Greenwich_ for maybe half
an hour, at the end of which time I was surprised to see Captain Leach
re-enter her, and direct his course to the Ostender, which lay a little
distance beyond. He remained aboard of her for about the same length of
time that he had stayed with the _Greenwich_, after which he climbed the
boat for a third time, and directed his course for the _Cassandra_
again.

I was standing upon the quarter-deck when he came aboard, and he
approached me with a countenance expressive of the utmost mortification
and chagrin.

"Captain Mackra," said he, "I find that by a most unfortunate sequence
of events I can find a berth neither aboard the _Greenwich_ nor the
Ostender, so that nothing remains but for me to force my unwelcome
presence upon you for the balance of the voyage."

I own that I was very much disappointed by these words. However, nothing
remained but to put the best face possible upon the matter. "Sir," said
I, as graciously as I could contrive to speak, although I am afraid that
my tone was expressive of my disappointment, "it was at your own
suggestion that you quitted the _Cassandra_; your berth, sir, is still
ready for your occupation."

He said nothing further, but indicating his acknowledgments with a bow,
proceeded directly to his cabin.




VII.


As I was in such a ferment of spirit for all this time, and so fearful
of an attack from the pirate craft, having continually in my mind not
only the treasure, but also the helpless women intrusted to my keeping,
it might occur to the reader to ask why I did not send both it and them
to such a place of safety upon the land as the king's town offered to
English people beset as we were. I may now say that I had considered it,
and had perceived that more than one difficulty lay in the way. In the
first place, I could not send the ship's boat to the king's town,
because that in passing the cape to the northward they would come within
a mile or less of the pirate craft, from which they might not hope to
escape without molestation. Secondly, I could not send them across the
country, because it would require not only an escort such as could be
ill spared at this juncture, but also an efficient leader, who might be
spared even less readily. Besides this, I could not tell what dangers
such a party might encounter, not only from natives, of whose
disposition I knew nothing, but also from wild beasts, which we could
hear distinctly every night, howling in the jungles in a most
melancholy, dreadful manner.

Thirdly and lastly, I did not believe the pirates would stay long where
they were, as I had often heard of the cowardly disposition of these
bloody wretches; wherefore I hoped that, seeing how well we were posted
to guard ourselves against an attack from them, they might take
themselves away upon the first occasion, which they could not now do
because of the calm weather. I furthermore argued that in any event,
should occasion render it necessary, I could easily disembark my
passengers with but little loss of time, and as easily and safely then
as now.

Such had been the nature of my thoughts whenever I had directed them
upon the melancholy and gloomy state of our affairs. Yet had the most
sinister forebodings which I had entertained at those times been
fulfilled, our misfortunes could not have equalled those which in truth
fell upon us, the history of which I have immediately to tell.

Captain Leach's trip in search of a new berth had been undertaken so
early in the morning that it was not yet noon when he had returned. Some
little time after that, I being in my own cabin at the time, there came
of a sudden a sound that was, as it were, the first muttering of the
storm that was so soon to fall upon us. It was the dull and heavy boom
of a single cannon, sounding from a great way off, and which I instantly
knew had been fired aboard of the pirate craft. I went straight upon
the deck, where I found the weather still as dead a calm as it had been
the two days before, with not so much as a breath of air stirring or a
cat's-paw upon the water. The ground-swell rose and fell as smoothly as
though the sea ran with oil instead of water, and the sky above had an
appearance as of a solid sheet of steel-blue, with not so much as one
single cloud upon the whole face of it. But the first thing that I
beheld was the pirate craft, and that they were hoisting sail as though
they perceived a breeze coming, of which we saw nothing. Across her port
bow the smoke of her gun still hung like a round white cloud just above
the glassy surface of the sea.

"Sure she means to quit us, Mr. Langely," said I; but Mr. Langely never
answered, for just as he opened his lips to speak, the lookout roared,
"Sail ho!"

"Where away?" sang out Mr. White, who was officer of the deck at that
time. But before the word reached us I myself, and I suspect most of
the others, had sighted the craft away to the southward, coming up under
full sail, and with a breeze of which we could see nothing.

She was at that time some six or seven miles distant, and just emerging
from behind a raised thicket of scrub bushes that lay betwixt her and
the _Cassandra_, and which had hidden her until now.

The strange craft was a large sloop, of such an appearance that even had
not the pirate fired that which was no doubt a signal-gun, methinks I
should have entertained the most sinister and gloomy forebodings
concerning her nature and her character.

"What do you think of her, Mr. Langely?" said I, after watching her for
some time in silence.

"It is the pirate's consort, sir," said he, very seriously.

"I do believe you are right," said I, "and that is why she has been
waiting for all these days, keeping us bottled up so that we could not
have got away even if we had had a breeze."

I did not tell Mr. Langely all that was upon my mind; nevertheless, I
could not but regard our present position as one of the most extreme
peril. For if one pirate craft, with its crew of blood-thirsty wretches,
was a match for us sufficient to hold us where we now were, what harm
might not two of them accomplish should they attack us peaceful
merchantmen, unused as we were to the arts of war, in this narrow
harbor, where we might hope neither to manoeuvre nor to escape.

We were already cleared for action, having had full time to prepare
ourselves since danger had first threatened us; accordingly, leaving Mr.
Langely to supervise such few details as might still remain to demand
attention, I had my gig lowered, and went aboard of the _Greenwich_ to
consult with Captain Kirby as to means of defending ourselves against
this new and additional danger that threatened our existence.

The Ostend captain was there when I came aboard, and I fancied, though I
then knew not why, that he and Captain Kirby looked at one another in a
very strange and peculiar manner when I entered the cabin. Besides that,
I noticed little or no preparation for action had been made.

"We'll stand by you," says Captain Kirby; "in course we'll stand by you,
though you must know it is each one for himself, and devil take the
hindmost, at such times as these."

I was mightily amazed and taken aback at this speech. "And why do you
talk so about standing by me, Captain Kirby?" said I. "Is it not, then,
that we stand by one another? Is my craft in greater peril than yours,
or am I to be given up as a sacrifice to these wicked and bloody
wretches?"

I thought he seemed vastly disturbed at this speech. "In course," says
he, "we'll stand by one another. All the same, each must look out for
himself."

I regarded Captain Kirby for a while without speaking, and he seemed
more than ever troubled at my gaze.

"Sir! sir!" I cried, "I must tell you that I do not understand this
matter. Do you not mean to make a fight of it?"

At this he flew into a mighty fume. "How!" says he; "do you mean to
question my courage? Do you call me a coward?"

"No, sir," says I, "I call you nothing; only I did not understand your
speech. Sure, sir, you cannot but remember that I have three helpless
women aboard my ship, and that it behooves you as a man and an
Englishman to stand by me in this time of peril."

So saying, I left the cabin and the ship, but with the weight of trouble
that lay upon my mind anything but lightened, for I could not
understand why, we all being in this peril together, neither he nor the
Ostend captain had spoken a single word concerning our defence.

However, I yet retained the hope that the pirates would not venture into
our harbor, seeing that we were three to two, and lying in a chosen
position whence we might hope to defend ourselves for a long time, and
to their undoing.

Upon my return I found my passengers all in the great cabin, and in a
very serious mood, having heard some rumor as to the danger that
threatened. I stood for a while as though not knowing what to say, but
at last I made shift to tell them how matters stood, and in what danger
we were like to be, though I smoothed everything over as much as lay in
my power. I think that our peril had been pretty well discussed amongst
them before I confirmed it with that which I said. Nevertheless, I am
amazed even now at the coolness with which all hands regarded it.

Mistress Pamela, I recollect, laid her hand lightly upon my arm.
"Whatever our danger may be," she cried, "this we all know, that we
could confide our safety to no truer sailor nor more gallant man than he
who commands this ship." This she said before them all who were there
standing.

In my cabin I summoned Mr. Langely and Mr. White (my second mate) to a
serious consultation, which was the last we were to hold before that
great and bloody battle concerning which so much hath been writ and
spoken of late. When we had finished our councils we came upon deck
again, and found that the sloop was rather less than a mile distant from
the other craft, and in a little while she hove to nigh to the barque,
and let go her anchor with a splash and rattle of the cable which we
could hear distinctly whence we lay.

For half an hour Mr. Langely and I stood upon the poop-deck watching
the two crafts by aid of the telescope, and what we saw in that time
foreboded to my mind no good to ourselves.

First we beheld a boat pass from the barque to the sloop, and in which
was one evidently of great consequence amongst the pirates, for by aid
of the glass we could distinguish that his apparel was better than the
others, and also that he wore what appeared to be a crimson scarf tied
about his body.

He remained aboard the sloop for maybe the space of ten minutes, at the
end of which time he returned again to the barque, where they
immediately began lowering away the boats. Four of these boats were
filled with men who were all transported to the sloop, up the side of
which we soon saw them swarm to the number of fifty or more.

Whilst these things had been going forward, Mr. Langely and I had been
standing in silence, but now my first mate turned to me, "Sir," said
he, "methinks that they mean to attack us."

I nodded my head in answer, but said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time the breeze was wellnigh upon us, for the smooth water all
around us was dusked by the little cat's-paws that swept the glassy
surface.

Now that morning, just before the pirate sloop hove in sight, I had got
out warps by means of which I hoped to change our position, bringing the
_Cassandra_ nigher to the _Greenwich_, and to a station of greater
defence. In this, however, we had made but little progress, for the
current set strong against us at the present state of the tide. Seeing
now the imminence of the attack, I hoisted sail, hoping to take
advantage of the first wind, and bring the _Cassandra_ closer to the
_Greenwich_.

What followed I am even now not able to explain, for I am slow to
believe that one English captain could desert another in such an
emergency as the present. It might be that Captain Kirby thought that we
intended trying to get away upon the wind, for the _Greenwich_ also
began immediately to set all her sail. Seeing what they were about I
hailed the other craft, but got no answer. Then I hailed her again and
again, but still received no reply.

The next minute she, being open to the first puffs of the breeze by a
valley, filled and bore away, followed by the Ostender, who had also set
her sails, leaving me becalmed where I was.

"My God!" cried Mr. Langely, "do they mean to desert us? Look, sir, here
come the pirates!"

I had just then been so intent upon the other vessels that I had not
thought of observing what our enemies were about, not thinking that they
would take such immediate action. But, no doubt, seeing us set our
sails, and fearing that we might get away, slipped their own cables;
for they were now coming down upon us with the freshening wind, having
already entered the channel as boldly as though there were none to
oppose them, the sloop leading the others by a quarter of a mile or so.
Indeed the _Greenwich_ and the Ostender bearing away had left the
passage entirely open to them, with no one but ourselves to oppose them.

In this extremity I hailed the _Greenwich_ for a third time, and getting
no answer, ordered the gunner to fire across her bows, but in spite of
this she did not heave to, whereupon we gave her a round shot, but
whether to her harm or no I am not able to say.

And now nothing remained for us but to fight what appeared a hopeless
battle against heavy odds.

       *       *       *       *       *

The main ship-channel leading from the offing to the bay or harbor
wherein the _Cassandra_, the _Greenwich_, and the Ostender had been
riding for these days past, lead almost easterly and westerly, but so
shaped by the sand-bars to the south and those shoals that ran out from
the northern cape as to take the form of a very crooked letter S.
Nowhere was this channel over half or three-quarters of a mile wide, and
in some places it was hardly more than a quarter of a mile wide.

From the position which the _Cassandra_ occupied this entrance to the
harbor was so well defended that any vessel entering thereat must be
twice raked by our broadside fire, once in rounding the northern, and
once the southern angle of the channel. Hence it was that I determined
to hold our present position as long as I was able.

But the pirates did not both attack us by way of the main ship-channel
as we had expected, for when they had rounded the northern angle the
sloop, fearing perhaps that we would try to get away upon the wind,
instead of keeping in consort with the barque, made directly for us
across the shoals that lay between us and them. This they were able to
do without running aground, both because of their intimate knowledge of
these intricate waters and of the small amount of water which the sloop
drew.

"We'll rake 'em anyhow," says I to Mr. Langely, for I could see no other
means for them to approach us but to come upon us bow on, there being no
room to manoeuvre among the bars and shoals that lay betwixt us and
them.

But the devilish ingenuity of these cruel, wicked wretches supplied them
with other means than a direct attack upon the _Cassandra_, for, when
they had come within about a mile or so of us, they hove to, dropped
their main-sail, and, running out great oars from the ports between
decks, began rowing towards us in a clumsy fashion, somewhat after the
manner of a galleon. By this means, and by the aid of the current which
set towards us, they were enabled to keep nearly broadside on, and so
avoid being raked by our fire.

"Mr. Langely," said I, "if they are able to board us we are lost. Order
the gunner to fire upon the oars and not upon the decks."

"Ay, ay," says he, and turned away.




VIII.


The pirates were the first to open the battle, which they did when
within about a quarter of a mile from us, giving us a broadside. It was
the first time that I had ever been under fire in all of my life, and
never shall I forget it as long as I may live. Their aim was wonderfully
accurate, so that when their shot struck us a great cloud of white
splinters flew from a dozen places at once. I saw three men drop upon
the deck, and one who stood at a gun on the quarter-deck just below me
leaned suddenly forward half across the cannon with a deep groan, whilst
a fountain of blood gushed out from his bosom across the carriage and
upon the deck. One of the others caught him by the arm, whereupon he
turned half round and then slipped and fell forward upon his face. He
was the first man killed in this action, and the first that I ever
beheld die in a like manner.

The _Cassandra_ answered the pirate's fire almost immediately. But our
guns were trained, as I had ordered, upon the oars and not upon the
crowded decks, so that while every shot that they delivered told upon
the lives of the poor fellows aboard the _Cassandra_, our return fire
did apparently no harm to them.

I hope I may never again feel such an agony of impatience and doubt and
almost despair, as I beheld my men fall by ones and twos upon the deck,
which soon became stained and smeared with their blood whilst the pirate
craft came drifting ever nigher and nigher to us, its decks swarming
with yelling, naked wretches that in their aspect and manners resembled
demons incarnated rather than mortal men.

"Mr. Langely," said I, in a low voice, "if those oars are not broken in
five minutes' time we are all lost." For there yet remained three
thrust through the ports upon the side nighest to the _Cassandra_, and
the current was carrying the pirate craft in such a direction that if
they were able to hold their course a little while longer they would be
almost certain to drift upon us and so board us.

One minute passed, and two minutes, then there was a shiver of
splinters, and only one oar was left. Instantly the stern of the sloop
began to swing slowly around towards us, for one oar was not enough to
keep her to the current. I could see the ash wood bend with the strain
like a willow twig, then--snap!--it broke, and around came the stern
with a swing directly under our fire. The pirates sprang to the
main-sheets, but it was too late to save themselves.

When the crew of the _Cassandra_ saw the result of their fire they burst
out shouting and cheering like madmen. Down came the sloop drifting
stern on, whilst the _Cassandra_, making up for lost time, poured
broadside after broadside into her. Never did I behold such a sight in
all of my life, for every shot we gave her ploughed great lanes along
her crowded decks. To make matters worse for them, their mast was
presently shot through, falling alongside in a great tangled wreck, thus
preventing any manoeuvres which they might still have hoped to make.
They drifted by us at about forty or fifty yards' distance, shouting and
yelling, and giving us a last broadside with great courage and
determination. They presently ran aground upon a sandbar and there stuck
fast for the time, though in such shoal water that we could not come
nigher to them than we then were.

All this while the barque had been slowly making her way through the
tortuous turnings of the channel. At one point, the water being low, she
had run aground, and though she had cleared again with the rising tide,
she had been so delayed by this mischance that she had not been able to
come up in aid of her consort.

But immediately they discerned what mishap had befallen the sloop, and
that she was fast aground and in no present position to attack us, they
hove to and lay directly athwart the channel.

I at once perceived their intentions, and that they were determined to
keep us shut up where we were until the sloop could float clear away
with the rising tide and resume her attack against us. It was then that
the resolve entered my mind not to await an attack but to seek it
ourselves; for though the crew of the barque must have outnumbered that
of the _Cassandra_ two to one, she was yet much the smaller vessel of
the two and the less heavily armed. Now, if we could only once get past
her and safe into the channel our safety would be wellnigh assured; for,
as said above, the _Cassandra_ was one of the best sailers at the East
India Company's docks.

I turned and beckoned my first mate to me. "Sir," said I, "yonder is our
one and only chance of getting away; we must run down upon that vessel
in the channel, engage her, and trust to God and take our chance of
getting safe past her and away. If we are fortunate enough to pass her
we can gain a good start before she can round to in such narrow
sea-room." Mr. Langely opened his mouth as though to speak. "Nay, nay,
sir," I cried, "it is our only chance, and we _must_ take it."

       *       *       *       *       *

At first we did not suffer so much as I had expected from the fire of
the pirate; but when we had come within one hundred or two hundred yards
of them, and when within range of the musketry in their fore and main
tops, their fire was truly dreadful.

The _Cassandra's_ wheel was stationed under the overhang of the
poop-deck, and upon the helmsman most of their aim was concentrated;
for if the _Cassandra_ was once allowed to fall off, and should run
aground in the narrow channel, she would then be in their power, and
they could destroy her at their leisure.

One after another three men fell at that dangerous post, which was
entirely open to the pirate's fire. We were now within one hundred and
fifty yards of them, and a fourth took hold, but only for a minute, for
he presently dropped upon his knees, though he still kept a tight grip
on the wheel, keeping the ship upon her course. Mr. Langely and I were
standing under the overhang of the poop, whereupon he, seeing that the
man was wounded, without waiting for orders from me, sprang forward and
seized the wheel in his own hands just as the other fell forward upon
his face.

The next minute Mr. Langely cried out, "My God, captain, I am shot!" His
right hand fell at his side, and in an instant I beheld his shirt
stained with blood that gushed out from the wound in his shoulder.

The ship beginning to fall off, I ran forward and took the wheel myself,
for in a minute more, if we held our course, we would be under the
pirate's stern, and in a position to rake them with our starboard
broadside. I heard a dozen bullets strike into the wood-work around me;
one struck the wheel, so that I felt as if my hand and my wrist were
paralyzed by the jar. The next instant I felt a terrible blow upon my
head; a hot red stream gushed over my face and into my eyes, and for a
moment my brain reeled. Some one caught hold of me, but just as darkness
settled upon me I felt the ship shake beneath me and heard the roar of
our broadside. We were under the pirate's stern at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

I could not have lain insensible for many minutes, for when I opened my
eyes and saw the surgeon and my second mate bending over me, it was
still with the roar of cannon in my ears.

"How is this, Mr. White?" cried I; "are we not then past the pirate?"

"Sir," said my second mate, in a very serious voice, "we are run
aground."

"And the pirate?" cried I.

"She is also aground," said he, "and we rake her with every shot."

I got to my feet, in spite of the surgeon's protest, putting him
impatiently aside.

It was as Mr. White said; the pirate was aground about two or three
hundred yards away from us, fast stuck upon the bar, stern towards us.
She must have received more than one shot betwixt wind and water, for
she was heeled over to one side, and I could see a stream of bloody
water pouring continually from her scupper-holes.

But I also saw that we were stuck hard and fast, and that though our
position was better than theirs, every shot that we fired drove us with
the recoil more firmly aground. I at once gave orders that all firing
except with muskets should be stopped; so there we lay aground for more
than half an hour, answering the pirate's fire with our flintlocks.

Although this was dreadful for us to bear at the time, in the end it
proved to be our salvation; for when the tide raised we floated clear
fully ten minutes before the pirates, and so escaped immediate
destruction.

In the mean time, whilst we lay there the sloop had floated clear, and
the pirates having cut away the wreck of the main-mast, and having
rigged up oars like those we had shot away, presently came to the aid of
their consort. Seeing our situation, and that we were fast aground, they
did not attack us directly, but made for the channel by the way which
they had left it, thus entering above us and cutting off all our chance
of escape. For though we had so nearly passed the other craft, we could
not hope to pass them without being boarded, for with their oars they
could come as they chose, and were not dependent on the wind.

So soon as they had entered the channel they laid their course directly
for us, but before they could come up with us, we also had floated
clear, as before stated; and though we could not escape to the open
water, we were yet enabled to enter the harbor again, which we did,
followed by the fire of the pirate barque.

The wind now had almost fallen away again, so that the sloop, driven by
her oars, and enabled by her light draught to cross the shoals and bars
which we could not make, began to draw up with us, endeavoring with all
diligence to board us. Nevertheless, we contrived to make a running
fight of it for almost an hour.

At last, the other vessel having repaired her damages, and having some
time since floated clear off, came down upon us in aid of her consort,
for the sloop was very plainly filling rapidly, having heeled over so
much to one side that her decks were greatly exposed to our fire.

For all this long time the _Greenwich_ and Ostender had been riding at
about three or four miles distant, not being able to escape to open
water whilst the pirates held the channel. But so far from coming to our
assistance, they made no sign of help or fired so much as a single gun
in our aid.

By this time more than half of my officers and men had been either
killed or wounded, so that when I beheld the barque, crowded with naked,
howling wretches, thirsting for our blood, come bearing down upon us,
and when I beheld how little hope there was of Captain Kirby's coming to
our assistance, I could see no other chance for our safety than to run
the _Cassandra_ ashore, and, if possible, to escape to the beach as best
we could. Accordingly, I gave the necessary orders to Mr. White, and the
_Cassandra_ laid her course for the beach, closely followed only by the
pirate barque, the sloop having already been run ashore about half a
mile below to keep her from sinking.

In five minutes the _Cassandra_ struck, grounding at about fifty yards
from the shore. The pirate drew fully four feet less water, but it
pleased God that she stuck fast on higher ground, so that, after all,
they were prevented from boarding us.

Here we fought, for nearly an hour, the last, and I know not whether it
was not the bloodiest engagement of that whole day; nor can I
sufficiently praise the behavior not only of the officers, but of the
men, who even in this extremity behaved with the most extraordinary
courage, though the crew of the sloop supplied the larger vessel with
three boatfuls of fresh men.

Meantime the _Greenwich_ followed the lead of the Ostender and stood
clear away to sea, leaving us struggling in the very jaws of death. Soon
after the pirate craft floated clear off with the rising tide, and
immediately fell to work fitting out warps to haul out under our stern,
though still at some distance from us.

Seeing this, no hope remained for us but to leave the ship, if possible,
with the passengers and such of our men as were still alive, trusting to
Providence not only to bring us safe away, but to keep us all in that
desolate country amongst a strange and savage people.




IX.


As said above, it was now past six o'clock, and Mr. White and the
boatswain were the only unwounded officers with whom I dared intrust the
command of the boats in executing my plans for leaving the ship.[B]

[B] Mr. Richards, the third mate, had been killed by a grape bullet when
we ran down upon the larger of the pirate crafts. He was a young man of
great promise, of but twenty-two years of age, and my cousin's son.

The long-boat and the gig were all that remained sound and uninjured,
the others having been shot or stove during the engagement. It was
arranged that Mr. Jeks, the boatswain, should command the long-boat, and
Mr. White the gig. The passengers and the less seriously wounded were to
go in the long-boat; Mr. White to take those who had been more
dangerously hurt in the gig.

By this time the wind had died down again, and it was as calm as it had
been the two days before, so that the smoke hung thick about the ship
and upon the water, and did not drift away. Although, because of this
thick cloud, we could not see our enemy, and so could not point our guns
with any sureness of aim, it also prevented him from seeing us and what
we were about, so that all our movements were concealed from him as his
were from us.

Mr. Langely having come upon deck at this time, though very weak and
feeble from the pain of his wound, I intrusted the clearing away and
lowering of the boats to him, while I went below to advise the women of
our plans, and to tell them to get together such matters as they might
need in this emergency. I found them in a most pitiable state, having
been sent below at the first sign of the approaching battle, and left
by themselves for all this long time with no light but that of a
lantern slung from the deck above, hearing the uproar of the fight and
the groans of the wounded without once knowing whether matters were
going for us or against us.

The two ladies sat, or rather crouched, upon a chest or box, holding one
another by the hand. Mistress Ann lay huddled in a corner in a most
extreme state of terror and distraction.

I may even yet see in my mind's eye how Mistress Pamela appeared when I
clambered down the ladder: her face was as white as marble, and her eyes
gazed out from the shadow of her brows with a most intense and burning
glance. My heart bled for the poor creatures when I thought how much
they must have suffered since they were sent to this dreadful place.

So soon as they saw me they fell to screaming, and clung to one another.
Nor did I wonder at their distraction when I beheld myself a few
minutes later in the glass in my cabin, for my face and hands were
blackened with the smoke of the powder, my shirt and waistcoat were
stained with the blood which had poured out from the wound in my head,
and around my brow was bound a bloody napkin which I had hastily wrapped
about my head so soon as I had recovered from the first effects of my
wound. But just then I knew not how I looked, nor reckoned anything of
it, for in a fight such as we had passed through one has little time to
think of such matters.

"Ladies," said I, speaking as gently as I could, "be not afraid; it is
I, Captain Mackra."

At this Mrs. Evans burst into a great passion of weeping, with her face
buried in her hands, while Mistress Pamela still regarded me, though
with a fixed and stony stare.

"Oh God!" she cried; "and are you hurt?" And she pointed with her
outstretched finger to my head.

[Illustration: SO SOON AS THEY SAW ME THEY FELL TO SCREAMING, AND CLUNG
TO ONE ANOTHER.]

"Why, no," says I, making shift to force a laugh in spite of the anxiety
with which I was consumed; "it is a mere scratch, and nothing to speak
of. There is no time now to talk of such little matters as this, but
only of leaving the ship, for we can defend ourselves no longer. Get
together what things you need from your cabin, and make haste, for there
is no time to lose."

I believe that Mistress Ann had fainted clean away when she had caught
sight of me climbing down the ladder, for we found that she was in no
condition to move, so I picked her up in my arms and bore her to the
great cabin, the others following close behind. There I left them and
went again upon deck, where I found that they were bringing the wounded
up from below.

I hope I may never see such a sight again to the very last day of my
life, for it is one thing to behold a man shot in the heat of an action,
and another and a mightily different thing to see one of one's own
shipmates carried groaning in a hammock wet and stained with his blood.

We had so grounded that we lay within fifty yards of the shore, and it
could take but a little while for a boat to go thither and return to the
ship again. Nevertheless, I deemed it necessary to give the Rose of
Paradise into the keeping of some one going upon this first passage, and
upon whom I could entirely rely. The boatswain had the care of the
women, which was, of course, of the first importance of all; therefore,
there remained no one in whose hands I could place it with as much
confidence as in those of Mr. White.

It was very necessary to keep up the show of fighting, lest the pirates
should think we had surrendered, and so come aboard of us, but all hands
who could be spared from the guns were engaged in lowering the wounded
into the long-boat and gig.

Leaving Mr. Langely in charge of this, I took Mr. White into my cabin;
there I opened the locker that I had made in my berth, and took out the
box containing the jewel.

"Sir," said I, "I am about to show you a sign both of my regard and of
my esteem. In this box is a jewel worth above three hundred thousand
pounds; this I intrust for the present into your keeping. When you get
to the shore you will not return with the gig, but will remain where you
are, sending the boat back under some one whom you may choose among your
crew. Should I perish, or should the pirates board this ship before you
return (in which event I cannot hope to escape with my life), you will
convey this trust to Mr. Longways, the Company's agent at the king's
town. And now, sir, I wish you God's speed."

Mr. White was about to reply, but I checked him, telling him that he
could best show his regard for me by leaving the ship without further
words.

We quitted my cabin together, and just outside we met Captain Leach,
whom I had noticed repeatedly for the last half-hour, and never very far
away from me. He came directly towards Mr. White and me, but he did not
so much as glance at the box that Mr. White held, but spoke to me.

"I came upon Mistress Pamela Boon's account," said he. "The women are
ready to quit the ship, and Mistress Ann is yet in a dead swoon."

"I will go to them," said I; and then turning to Mr. White, I said, very
seriously, "Remember!"

He did not answer, but bowed his head, and I turned and left him,
Captain Leach following close behind me. He did not enter with me into
the great cabin, but waited without, and when I came out a few minutes
later I saw that he was gone.

I found the ladies waiting in the cabin, each with a bundle tied up in a
kerchief. The waiting-woman lay upon the floor, still in a swoon, with
Mistress Pamela kneeling beside her, chafing and slapping her hands,
whilst Mrs. Evans sat at the table with her face buried in her palms. So
soon as I entered Mistress Pamela arose.

"Sir," said she, "Captain Leach told me he would inform you that we were
ready."

"So he did, madam," said I, "and I am come to help you embark."

As there was no sign of the waiting-woman's revival from her fit, I was
constrained to carry her upon the deck, as I had already done from
below.

The boat under command of Mr. White was already gone, for it had taken
several minutes for me to bring the women upon deck. We stowed them into
the long-boat, and it pushed off immediately and was lost in the smoke.
We then brought up the rest of the wounded from below, who were those
who had been most desperately hurt in the action. These we laid upon the
deck, so as to be in readiness for lowering into the boats so soon as
they should return. In the mean time I had given orders to those not
thus occupied with the wounded to load many of the guns, with
slow-matches in the breeches to burn from five to ten minutes. Thus the
firing might be kept up after all had left the ship, whereby we hoped
that the pirates would be stayed a while from boarding and so discover
our absence. In about ten minutes the gig returned without Mr. White,
and the master's mate, who was in command in his stead, said that he had
remained ashore with the women, as I had commanded him. In a very little
while, the long-boat also returning, we got all hands aboard and pushed
off, the guns still firing now and then as the slow-matches burned down.
So we came safe to shore, but with no time to spare, for by the great
shouts that were presently raised we knew that the pirates had come
aboard the _Cassandra_, and in less than three minutes after the last
man had quitted her. Not more than fifteen or twenty minutes had been
occupied in making ready and quitting the ship; for which celerity, and
for the great coolness shown in this trying emergency, all praise is due
both to the officers and the men. The fight had lasted for more than
four hours and a half, during which time we had nine men killed, among
whom was the third mate above mentioned, and twenty-two wounded, three
of whom afterwards died upon the island.

Besides the clothes and valuables which many had fetched away with
them[C] we had also brought off with us from the ship a quantity of
musquets and pistols, and a dozen or more rounds of ammunition for each
able-bodied man.

[C] I may say here that I myself was but poorly equipped in this
respect, having not only forgot my watch, which I had left hanging in my
cabin, but being also without shoes and stockings, which I had stripped
off so that I might more readily swim for it if the pirates should come
aboard whilst the boats were gone on their first trip to the shore. At
the last moment I was so busied in supervising the lowering of the
wounded into the boats that I did not think of returning for the one or
of securing the other.

As soon as we landed we plunged directly into the thick brush, which
there grew close down to the edge of the beach. Having thrust our way
through these thickets for some distance, we found the others waiting
for us at a little open space at the base of three palm-trees which
stood about two hundred yards from the shore, it being then nigh to
sunset, and with but little chance of the pirates following us that day.

Mr. White was standing near my passengers, who were gathered together in
a group, but one of them was missing. _It was Captain Leach._

"And where is Captain Leach?" I cried, looking directly at Mr. White.

He gazed at me in an exceedingly strange manner, and I saw that he grew
as pale as death to the very lips. "And did he not come in the boat
with you, sir?" said he at last, in a low and husky voice.

At these words a terrible fear came over me. "Where is the box I gave
you?" I cried; and seeing that he was not like to answer, repeated the
question--"Where is the box I gave you?"

By way of reply Mr. White fumbled for a moment or two in his
waistcoat-pocket, and presently handed me a scrap of paper. I opened it,
and tried to read, though my hand trembled so that I could hardly
contrive to make out what it was. But in spite of that, and the blurring
of my eyesight, every word and every letter is stamped upon my memory as
upon a plate of brass.

It was written as though in mine own handwriting, and very hastily
scrawled, but so like that I could not have told it myself had I not
known it to be a forgery.

These were the words:

"_Sir,--I have altered my mind in regard to the box. Please deliver it
to the bearer (Captain Leach), who will take present charge of it, and
will convey it to me._

                                                  "John Mackra."

As I still held the letter in my hand, gazing stupidly at it, but seeing
nothing, the whole villany of the business was, as it were, revealed to
me. I saw that when Captain Leach had left the ship in the native canoe
two nights ago he had come straight to the pirates and had made some
bargain with them for that accursed Rose of Paradise; that when he had
gone aboard the _Greenwich_ and the Ostender the next day, it was not to
secure a passage for himself, but rather to persuade them to sacrifice
the _Cassandra_, and so save their own wretched hulks; that when he had
sent me to the women in the great cabin it was to get rid of me so that
he might tamper with Mr. White; and last of all, that he had kept this
forged letter about him for just such an occasion as this. Then I
thought of my shipmates killed and wounded, of my vessel and cargo lost,
of all these poor people outcasts upon this savage, desert coast, with
no present prospect or hope of help, and of the stone itself thus
cheated out of my hands at the last moment, and after all the suffering
and the blood that had been shed. There came a great roaring in mine
ears, all things began to reel before my sight, a dark cloud seemed to
encompass me, and then I knew nothing more.




X.


After I had thus swooned away, which happened both from the fever of my
wound and the loss of blood, there followed a long time during which
everything was confused and dream-like. I may call to mind what seemed
to me a great and toilsome journey, but so commingled with the visions
of my fever that I knew not whether it had taken hours, days, or weeks,
and of which I may remember almost nothing. After that I have a memory
of tossing upon a pallet which was both rough and hard, of a darkened
and silent room, and of people coming and going and talking in whispers.
Then one morning I awoke as though from a deep sleep, and felt that the
heat of the fever had left me, though mightily weak and weary. This
awakening must have happened betwixt four and five o'clock in the
morning, for the mat which hung at the door had been raised, and a cool
and refreshing breeze swept through the mud hut.

I lay for a long time looking out of the door towards which my couch was
facing, and through which I could see hillocks of gray sand intermingled
with rich and luxuriant vegetation; beyond, the rim of the ocean
stretched like a black thread against the gray sky. I gave no thought to
anything, but lay quite still, feeling mighty peaceful and quiet.
By-and-by I turned mine eyes and saw that some one sat beside me, and
that it was Mr. White. He did not see that I was observing him, but sat
reading his Bible, for he was a young man of great earnestness of
spirit. The sight of him brought first one thing and then another back
to my memory, until the whole was complete as I have told it.

"Mr. White," said I. I spoke very quietly, but he could not have started
more violently had a clap of thunder sounded from the sky. He came
straight to me, and laid his hand upon my forehead. "Yes," said I,
making shift to smile, "the fever has left me now; and will you tell me
where I am?"

"Sir," says he, "you are safe, and in the king's town; and now I will go
and tell the surgeon of the bettering of your condition." So saying he
left me, and Mr. Greenacre, the surgeon, presently came to me. He told
me that all hands had been brought safe to the king's town; that I might
set my mind at rest both regarding the passengers and the crew; and that
I must not now talk further, but should seek to rest myself, which was
very necessary for me to do in my present condition. Nor was I inclined
to disobey this command, but presently closed mine eyes and fell into a
most refreshing slumber, from which I did not awake until nigh sunset,
when I found that Mr. White was once more beside me. When he saw that I
was awake he made as if he would again go and call the surgeon, but I
stopped him from doing as he intended.

"Stay, Mr. White," said I. "I should like now to know something more of
what has happened. How long have I been lying in this condition?"

"About six days, sir," said he. And then, in a trembling voice, "Oh,
Captain Mackra, can you forgive me for the injury I have done?"

"Why, sir," said I, "I have nothing to forgive, nor have you done
anything for which to beseech forgiveness. What you did you did with the
best intent; nor can I blame you for being so deceived by such a wicked
and cunning villain as Captain Leach. And now tell me, what news is
there of the pirates?" To this he answered that they were still lying at
anchor in the bay on the east side of the island, repairing the damages
which we had wrought; that the chief or them was one Edward England, a
fellow of great note among these wicked villains; that they had been so
enraged at that bloody fight, which had cost them so dear, that they had
set a reward of two thousand pounds upon my head; and that the king of
the island had offered us his protection, and had undertaken to guard us
securely from any attack the pirates might be inclined to make against
us. But, nevertheless, lest any of the natives should be of a mind to
betray me for this great and magnificent reward, it had been deemed best
that it should be reported that I had been killed in the late
engagement.

After having recounted these things as briefly as possible, Mr. White
again went in search of the surgeon, who soon came, and put a very
cheerful face upon my case, which he said was now without doubt upon the
mend.

After having eaten a very hearty supper of rich and savory broth, I was
so far refreshed as to be able to receive some few who particularly
desired to have speech with me, and who were presently ushered in by
Mr. Greenacre.

The first to come was my former acquaintance, Mr. Longways, the
Company's agent, and with him a great tall native chief, who had rather
the appearance of a Malay than an African negro, and who was none other
than King Kulakula himself. With these two came a black interpreter from
Mozambique, for King Coffee could not speak one single word of English,
but only a little Dutch, which he had picked up from the traders along
the coast.

After them came the two ladies, escorted by Mr. Langely, who had now so
far recovered from his wound as to be able to be about with ease,
although he still carried his arm in a sling.

Mrs. Evans, when she saw me, gushed into tears, but Mistress Pamela came
straight to me, took my hand, and set it to her lips, though I strove my
best to stay her from doing so. "Sir," said she, "what do we not owe to
our brave preserver, who hath brought us safe through all this great
trouble!"

"No, madam," cried I, hastily, for I could not bear that she should lay
credit to me, who had so little earned it, seeing how helpless I had
been in bringing them safe off from the _Cassandra_--"no, madam, give no
credit to me; give it first of all to God, and then to Mr. Langely, who,
though so sorely wounded, brought you, I understand, safe through the
wilderness to this place."

After they had so spoken, comes King Kulakula forward with the
interpreter, and through the black man expressed many kind and
condescending wishes for the continued bettering of my condition. He
furthermore gave me every assurance that we should all be protected from
our enemies so long as we chose to remain at that place.

After a little while my visitors left me, except Mr. Longways, who, by
permission of the surgeon, remained behind to exchange a few words with
me. I then observed for the first time how sadly different he was in his
appearance from what he had been; for the jauntiness of his carriage was
gone, and he looked mightily perturbed in his spirits.

So soon as he had made sure that no one was by to overhear us, he began
without preface to talk about the Rose of Paradise, saying that Mr.
White had told him that it had been lost, and also some details of the
matter; that that loss meant ruin to him, who could say no word in his
own defence excepting by letter, while I had every opportunity of
stating my case in my own fashion to the East India Company when I
should come home, and so clear myself and leave him in the mire. But in
spite of that it was his opinion that even I, with all these advantages
in my favor, would have great trouble in making matters straight; for
the loss of three hundred thousand pounds, besides my ship and cargo,
was a thing that was not likely to be passed over very lightly. I could
hardly forbear smiling at this discourse, although it was of such a
serious nature, for it seemed very strange to me that Mr. Longways
should so readily suspect me of being disposed to ruin him.

"Sir," said I, "I know not what you would do in such a case as this, but
I tell you plain that if I am compelled to make an unfortunate report to
the East India Company, I will make it without blaming you or myself or
any one, but simply tell the truth, and so let them adjudge the matter
as they see fit."

"That is it, sir," cried he--"that is it, sir. If the Company are
informed that I betrayed this important secret to Captain Leach, I'll
have to whistle for it a long time out in the cold before I get a snug
berth with them again."

"I am mightily sorry for you," said I, gravely. "But of course, sir,
that is a matter concerning which you alone are responsible.
Nevertheless, I must tell you that I am not inclined to leave this
place without endeavoring to recover that which has been so
unfortunately lost."

"What, sir!" he cried; "do you mean to say that you will undertake to
recover the Rose of Paradise again? And how do you purpose doing it, may
I ask?"

"You may ask, sir," says I, smiling; "but as for my telling you, why,
that is a very different matter."

Yet I had determined upon one point almost as soon as Mr. White had
informed me who was the pirate captain into whose hands the _Cassandra_
had fallen, and that was to go aboard of the pirate craft, and to speak
with Captain Edward England himself. I had known him before he had
entered into the nefarious life which he now followed, and while he was
still first mate of the _Lady Alice_. I was then with Captain Wraxel in
the West Indies, and had met England at Kingston, in the island of
Jamaica, upon which occasion he had appeared to conceive quite a liking
for me, though I cannot say it was returned in kind. I knew him as a
wild and reckless blade, but neither blood-thirsty nor cruel, and making
every allowance for the change in his nature which this wicked life
might effect, I did not believe that injury would happen to me if I
could once gain his promise of safety in visiting his ship.

As for the jewel, I did not believe that Captain Leach would disclose
the secret of it without he had been compelled to do so; wherefore, if
he had it still in his own keeping, I entertained a hope that I might by
some trick or other snatch the precious stone away from him again. In
that event I did not believe he would say anything, for fear that the
pirates might punish him for keeping it a secret from them.

But although I could perceive, as Mr. Longways had said, that it was of
great importance both to his future and mine own that the Rose of
Paradise should be regained, I ventured my life not so much in the hope
of obtaining the stone as of procuring some means by which all hands
might be able to quit the island; for we--and more especially the
women--could not but be in constant danger from the bloody wretches
thirsting for revenge on account of the check which we of the
_Cassandra_ had lately put upon them. Wherefore I thought it best that I
should boldly visit the pirate captain, for I had great hopes of being
able to persuade him to allow us to escape, and even of procuring from
him some means to that end.

In any case, the venture could not but be of advantage to us, for even
if I should perish, their revenge might thereby be satisfied, and they
might depart without molesting the rest of the ship's company, for they
were pleased to regard me as the chief cause of all their mishaps in the
late engagement.

Before I dared venture aboard the pirate craft it was necessary that I
should first write a letter to the captain, and also that I should have
a trustworthy person to convey my communication to him; nor did I give
two thoughts to this matter, for common justice pointed to Mr. White as
the only fitting one to be my messenger; accordingly I sent for him, and
he soon came. I told him that I desired to open communication with the
pirate captain upon a matter of great importance, and that I gave him
this opportunity towards redeeming his self-respect by conveying my
message to Captain England. Nor have I ever seen a man more grateful
than Mr. White upon this occasion; two or three times he strove to
speak, and when he did contrive to do so it was only simply to say,
"Sir, I thank you."

The surgeon having given me permission, I wrote my letter, and Mr. White
took it that very night, having no companion with him but two natives
who acted as guides. I have a copy of the letter, made at the time,
which runs as follows:

_"To Captain Edward England:_

_"Sir,--I write you this in a most forlorn and distressing situation._

_"Having defended ourselves, our ship, and those intrusted to our
keeping, from you, who sought to encompass our destruction by all means
in your power, we now find ourselves reduced to the necessity of
imploring aid from you, who so lately sought our lives. Nor would we
even yet ask anything from you were it not for three poor and helpless
women, whose safety here is a matter of uncertainty from day to day, and
who, without aid is extended to them, may perish miserably in this
desolate and savage land._

_"Sir, though a wild and ungoverned nature, I never knew you to be a
cruel man; therefore I ask this aid of you for the sake of these three
women._

_"Furthermore, I ask that you do not hastily refuse this plea for aid,
but may allow me to come aboard of your craft and speak to you in
person._

_"I know that there is with you one who is mine enemy, because of a great
injury which he hath done me, and who will no doubt conspire against my
life--I mean Captain Leach, lately one of my passengers, and who, I
suspect, along with others, betrayed us into your hands. But although I
believe he would seek my life, yet I am willing to trust it into your
hands if you will promise me safety in my coming and my going._

_"Sir, I beseech you to grant me this speech with you, that I may plead
the cause of the weak and helpless, and am, sir,_

_"Your very obedient and humble servant,_

                                                  "John Mackra."




XI.


Mr. White was only gone for a little more than two days, and when he
returned he brought with him a letter from the pirate captain. The
communication ran thus:

_"To Captain John Mackra, late of the 'Cassandra:'_

_"Sir,--If you choose to risk your life by coming hither, devil a word
have I to say against it. They're a wild set of blades under me, and
mind the helm no better than a washing-tub, so that my orders have
little or no weight with them. All the same, if you're the man to come
aboard, and have the courage to face the matter out, I'll do what I can
to see that no harm happens to you. But if you'll take a friend's advice
you'll stay where you are, and let a bad matter cure itself, for you
know very well that there is no use splicing a rotten rope. As for the
pickle you're in, lay that to your luck, and not to me._

                                                  "Edward England."

I was none too well pleased with this precious epistle, for I could see
very readily how little command Captain England held upon the wretches
under him. Nevertheless, it did not alter my determination to to go
aboard of the pirate craft and to speak with him. I was the more
inclined to do this as I felt well assured that the pirates could not
now be as hot for my blood as they had been at first.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was necessary for me to get away from the king's town without
confiding my determination to any one, or any one having knowledge of my
departure, for I knew very well that there was not one of my officers
but would have stayed me from acting on my plans had they been informed
of them, even if they should find it needful to use force to prevent my
going.

It was the evening of the eighth day since the fight when Mr. White
returned with Captain England's letter, and I determined that that very
night should witness my departure upon my enterprise, which to one
looking coolly upon it might seem little if any better than the frantic
act of a madman. Nor was it that I myself was unconscious of the
magnitude of these dangers, for I entered upon them only because that in
the desperate state of our necessities I could see no other course out
of our difficulties, and so had to choose this for lack of a better.
Accordingly, as said above, I determined to set out that very night, for
nothing could be gained by further delay.

There was no other choice left me but to make my way along the beach,
which, although it would increase the distance by five or six miles,
would yet afford me a sound and level highway for my journeying, the
sand being firm and hard when the water was out at low tide.

That night I wrote a lengthy letter to Mr. Langely, giving him full
particulars as to what I was about to undertake, and also instructions
as to how he should proceed in the event of my not returning from my
adventure. I also wrote my will, and settled all my affairs as well as I
was able. This took until nigh midnight.

All this I managed to do without the knowledge of any one, and by the
light of a little wick floating in a dish of oil, the flame of which I
kept so well shaded that no one perceived it in all that time.

About one o'clock I came out from my hut, and found the stars shining
most beautifully in the sky, and all the air full of the noises of the
night. I did not tarry, however, but walked straight to the beach, and
along it towards the northern end of the island, around which and beyond
the cape I knew the bay to lie, about ten leagues distant from the
king's town.

I had only been twice upon my feet since the fever had left me, and
found that I was far more weak than I had supposed myself to be, so that
I had to rest myself at frequent intervals. However, I managed to cover
some ten miles of my journey by about six o'clock in the morning, by
which time I was so exhausted that I could go no farther, but had to lie
down under the shade of the bushes and rest myself for a long time.

I speak of these things to show why it was that my journey should have
occupied nigh upon two days, for it was not until the afternoon of the
second day that I came within sight of a boat, drawn up on the beach,
which I knew to belong to the pirates, and from which the crew had gone
into the thickets, either to search for game or for water.

I had eaten nothing all that day, for I had not thought that my journey
would have taken me so long, and I did not care to burden myself with
any more food than necessary. So I was glad to see the boat, not only
being very weary, but also having my feet so badly blistered by the
unwonted exposure to the hot sun on the bare sand that it was only with
pain that I could take a single step.

As I drew nigh, two fellows who had been lying in the shade upon the
further side sprang to their feet and hailed me.

"Who are you?" says one of them--a great black-bearded fellow with a
dirty yellow handkerchief tied around his head, a ragged scarf about his
loins, a brace of pistols hanging from a leathern belt, and a dirty
shirt opened at the breast, showing a hairy throat and chest.

"I am Captain John Mackra," said I, and I sat down upon the gunwale of
the boat, for I could go no farther.

[Illustration: "I AM CAPTAIN JOHN MACKRA," SAID I, AND I SAT DOWN UPON
THE GUNWALE OF THE BOAT.]

"The devil you are!" says he, and he stared at me from top to toe as
though I had been some strange creature the like of which he had never
beheld before. Then, without another word, he put his fingers to his
lips and gave a great, long, shrill whistle. I presently heard a great
crackling in the bushes and the noise of loud voices, and soon there
burst out of the thickets six or eight great, bearded, dirty, villanous
rascals, who came running down to the boat, having caught sight of me,
and knowing me to be a stranger. "It's Captain Leach," said the one of
the pirates who had not yet spoken--a young fellow of not more than
twenty.

Some of those who had just come had been drinking, as could be very
plainly seen from the way in which they acted. One of them was for
killing me off-hand, and I verily believe would have done so, in spite
of all that the others could do or say, had not another of them knocked
him down with an oar with such a blow that I thought at first the fellow
had been killed outright.

After that they bound me hand and foot, and chucked me into the
stern-sheets of the boat along with the fellow who had been knocked down
by the oar, and who lay without life or motion, as though neither were
of more account than so much old junk. After that they shoved off from
the beach in the direction of my old craft the _Cassandra_, which rode
at anchor about a mile and a half or two miles away.

The boat had hardly come alongside when the news of my coming ran fore
and aft like a train of powder. They hoisted me upon deck and laid me
just aft of the main-mast, whilst a great crowd gathered round me and
stared at me, some of them grinning and some of them cursing me.

Most of them were more or less in liquor, and it was this circumstance
that came nigh to costing me my life, and this was how it happened:

One great fellow with a dreadful scar across his face gave me a kick in
the loins which I thought at first had finished me, and for no cause
that I could see but that he was drunk and in a savage humor. One or two
of them sang out to him not to kill me just then, but he made no answer
except by aiming another kick at my head, which I warded off with my
arm so that it did me little or no harm. He drew back his foot for
another blow, but just then an iron belaying-pin came whizzing through
the air and struck the fellow in the jaw, knocking him down upon the
deck as though he had been shot.

I turned mine eyes and saw that it was Captain England himself who had
struck the blow.

"Look 'ee," says he, "we'll have none of this; if killing is to be done,
it is to be done lawyer-like. He's come aboard himself, and if he's to
be killed he's to be killed after his trial, and not before."

There was a moment or two of pause, for Captain England had drawn a
brace of pistols, and held one cocked in either hand; but just then up
stepped a fellow who it was very plain to see was of some account
amongst them, for his clothes were of rich stuff, and he had a gold
chain with a cross slung around his neck, and golden ear-rings in his
ears. He walked up to England until he stood face to face with him.

"Look 'ee, Ned England," says he, "what I've got to say is this: you're
carrying things with too high a hand to suit us easy-going fellows. D'ye
think you're king or emperor, and that we're nigger slaves, that you
knock us about as it suits your humor?"

I had expected that England would have shot the fellow down where he
stood, but he stayed his hand, and by the muttering of the rest I knew
that the speaker carried most of them with him.

"Look 'ee, now," says he, more boldly, "didn't we choose you for our
captain ourselves? And here you knock us around with belaying-pins as
though you owned every man of us; and all for what? Why, for giving this
here precious sea-captain an innocent kick or two for all of the good
fellows he's sent to h--ll since ten days ago. What I say is, hang him
up to the yard-arm;" and he fetched me a terrible kick in the side
without taking his eyes from his captain's face.

At this time, although I heard what was said, I thought but little of
what was passing about me, my mind being beclouded with my weakness and
my pains, for I had wellnigh swooned from the agony of those two kicks
upon my flank and loins. Therefore I lay with mine eyes shut, feeling
deathly sick and faint.

A time of silence followed, though how long it might be I could not
exactly tell. Then I heard Captain England speak, the words coming to my
ears as though from a great distance, because of my condition.

"D--n you, Burke, what do I care for the fellow? If you want the man's
life, take it!" and I knew that he swung upon his heel and walked away.




XII.


I could not at that minute see that anything stood between me and death,
for the pirates were so bent upon my immediate destruction that they set
about getting ready a line to hang me up without more ado.

Yet though I had cause to apprehend that the very next moment would be
my last upon earth, the dread of death was in no wise keen upon me, for
in my half-swoon I lay as one in a dream, and neither saw nor heard very
clearly the preparations they were making for my destruction, and so was
mercifully spared that pain. But God in His great mercy determined it
otherwise than was the intention of these wicked men, for just at that
moment some one forward began bawling out, in a great hoarse voice,
"Where is Jack Mackra? Where is he, I say? Show him to me! ---- ----
---- ye! out of my way, and let me get at him!"

As I might turn my head, I looked whence my voice came, and there saw,
as in a dream, a great, tall, lantern-jawed man, with a patch over one
eye and a crutch under his left arm. In his right hand he held a long
sharp knife, with which he jabbed at those who stood in his way, so that
they were glad enough to make room for him, one or two of them cursing
him, the others grinning and laughing as though it were all a fine piece
of sport. As those around me drew aside I beheld him more plainly; his
left leg had been cut off at the knee, he was loose-jointed and
ungainly, and he had one of the most villanous countenances that it was
ever my fortune to look into. I could also see that he, like many of the
others, had been drinking. It was very plain that he was a great
favorite amongst the rest, for they made room for him and took all his
curses and many blows, which he gave with his crutch, without either
answering him or striving to defend themselves. Even the fellow who had
spoken so boldly to the captain's face, and whom I afterwards found to
be the chief of the "lords," as they are pleased to call those in
authority amongst them, grinned and stood aside as the villanous cripple
came and leaned over me.

"D--n you," says he, "and is it you, Jack Mackra? Then I have a score to
pay you that has stood on the slate for this many a day."

He turned me over upon my face with his crutch, and the next moment I
felt the cords that tied my hands give way, and knew that they had been
cut, then my legs and feet were loosened from their lashings, and I was
a free man. I heard the fellow say, "Get up!" whereupon I stood upon my
feet and gazed about me, though my brain still swam, and all things
appeared blurred and distorted to my sight, the sky and the sea and the
faces around me being all strangely mingled together. Then presently,
as my confusion began to fade away from me, I heard the one-legged man
speaking to me.

"And do you know who I am?" said he.

"No," says I, at last gathering my wits to speak; "I cannot bring you to
mind."

"Why," says he, "don't you remember Jimmy Ward, the cook aboard the
_Pembroke Castle_--him as you saved from five drunken Spanish devils
over at Honduras? Hey? don't you mind how they had me down under the
table, jabbing at me with their d--d snickershees and swearing that they
would cut the living heart out of me? If it hadn't been for you, it
would have been all over with Jimmy Ward at that time." He waited for an
answer, but as yet I could say nothing. "Well, I haven't forgot it if
you have," he continued; "I owe you a good turn, and I'll pay it if I
have to bleed for it."

Just then up steps the fellow who had faced England so boldly a moment
or two before. "Come, come, Jimmy," says he, "a joke's a joke, and I can
laugh as loud as any; but here's a man has done us more damage than
anybody we've fell in with since we ran foul of the _Eagle_."

"Hang him up!" Hang him up!" sang out several of those who stood around,
and I verily believe the business would have gone against me, after all,
only for Captain England, who must have been near for all this time, and
who came to the aid of the cripple. Both together, they contrived so to
argue and talk and threaten the others that the end of the matter was
they led me off to the captain's cabin, the one on one side of me and
the other on the other, whilst the crowd followed behind, though they
came no further than the door, which was clapped to in their faces.

"You've had a narrow miss of it," says England, so soon as we were come
fairly within and had sat down, "and you've nobody to thank for it but
yourself, for if you'd minded what I told you you'd have staid where you
were and let your bad luck sail her own craft without putting your hand
to the helm. Even yet I don't know if we'll be able to get you off, for
Tom Burke is hot for your blood, and will get it if he's able."

"That he will," says Ward; "for he's not the man to give up what he's
laid his hand to."

"Have you had anything to eat?" said England, presently.

"Not since five o'clock this morning," said I.

"Why," said he, "you'll have to be fed, whether they hang you or no."
Whereupon he fetched out from a locker a great lot of biscuit and a
decanter of the very port-wine with which I had entertained Mr. Longways
when he came aboard the _Cassandra_ with The Rose of Paradise; nor have
I ever tasted food that was more refreshing than that which I then ate,
for I was wellnigh exhausted with hunger.

No one spoke for a while, and England walked up and down the cabin with
his hands clasped behind his back. During all this time I had been
looking around me, and of a sudden my heart seemed to leap into my
throat, for in the corner of the cabin, lying amongst a lot of litter,
where it seemed to have been flung as of no account, I saw the iron
despatch-box.

My danger had been so great and my mind in such a maze for all this time
that there had been no room in my brain for other matters, the very
objects of my adventure having been forgotten for a while; but with the
sight of this everything came back to me with a rush, and I wondered for
the first time that I had not yet seen my betrayer.

"Where is Captain Leach?" said I to England.

He stopped short in his walk, and regarded me with a very strange
expression, which at the time I could in no wise understand.

"Why," says he, presently, "he was shot--shot by accident--when we first
came aboard of this here craft after you left her."

I sat silent for a great long time after this, nor could I think of one
word to say, for of all the things which my mind had forecasted, this
was the very furthest from my imaginings. So I sat staring at the pirate
captain, who, upon his part, sat gazing back again at me, answering my
look with a grin. I had been well assured that Captain Leach had stolen
the jewel, but was it possible that I had misjudged him in suspecting
that he had betrayed us to the pirates, and that they, finding him alive
upon the vessel, whence he had not had sufficient time to escape, had
thereupon instantly murthered him, as is their custom upon such
occasions? "And tell me this," said I at last, "was it through Captain
Leach's machinations that we were betrayed into your hands?"

"Why," says he, "I may tell you plain, if I had never met Captain Leach
I should never have ventured into this harbor in the face of three armed
vessels lying across the channel."

"Then I was not mistaken," said I. But I dared ask no more questions,
lest the pirate captain's suspicions should be aroused, for, from the
appearance of the despatch-box, which did not yet seem to have been
tampered with, but rather held as of no account whatever, I did not
believe that Captain Leach had betrayed the presence of the jewel to the
pirate, but rather had reserved the secret for his own advantage, which,
indeed, was the most likely supposition that could be imagined. If now I
could but by some means or other contrive to find opportunity to examine
the box, I could very speedily tell whether the lock had been forced;
which would, in my estimation, decide whether or not the jewel was still
safe and undiscovered.

Presently Ward spoke. "And how," said he, "did you come to get into such
a pickle as I found you, sir?"

I told him the main reason for my visit in as few words and with as
little circumlocution as possible; how I had entertained hopes of
procuring a promise of safety for my passengers and ship's crew, and
even possibly of obtaining some means of transportation from the place
where they now were to one of greater ease and security. Both men
listened without a word to what I said, and when I had ended Ward pursed
his mouth up in a most comical fashion, and gave a great long whistle,
half under his breath, regarding me the while with his one eye as round
as a saucer.

"And do you mean to say," says he, "that you, a sick man, have gone and
travelled ten leagues all for to give yourself up to such a gang of
bloody cutthroats as we be?"

"Why, yes," says I; "sure ten leagues is not such a long journey that
one need make much of a stir about it."

"Ten leagues be blowed!" says he. "Suppose they had shot you dead when
they had found out who you were; what then?"

"But they did not shoot me," said I.

"But perhaps they may kill you yet," put in England.

"That matter is neither in your hands nor mine," said I.

Ward looked in a very droll manner, first at England and then at me.
"Well, I'm blowed!" he said at last.

At this Captain England burst into a great loud laugh. "Why," says he,
"it would be a vast pity to let a man of such spirit lose his life after
all. What d'ye say, Ward?"

"I say yes," said Ward, and he thumped his fist down on the table; "and
by the Eternal he shall get what he wants--in reason--Tom Burke and the
devil notwithstanding!"

"Come," says England; "come, Ward, we'll go and fetch Burke in, and see
if we can't drink him into a good humor." And so saying both men went
out of the cabin, shutting the door behind them. As soon as their backs
were turned I sprang to where the despatch-box lay, snatched it up, and
began eagerly examining it. It was still securely locked; the lid had
not been forced, and I could see no marks of violence upon it. But I had
just then but short time for such an examination, for in a little while
I heard footsteps outside, whereupon I replaced the box where I had
found it and resumed my chair, composing my countenance as far as I was
able to do. Presently I heard voices at the door, and from their tones I
could gather that Captain England and the crippled cook were trying to
persuade Burke to come into the cabin, he being mightily unwilling to
do so. For a while they held the door ajar, and I could hear Burke
cursing and swearing at a great rate, and calling Heaven to witness that
he would have my life before he was done with me. Meantime the others
were busied in talking to him, and soothing him, and reasoning with him,
but all to no purpose. No; he would come in and drink a glass of grog
with them, if that was what they were after, but he would have my
life--yes, he would; and he was not to be wheedled out of his purpose by
soft words either. So they, after a while, all came into the cabin and
sat down to the table, though Burke never so much as turned his eyes in
my direction.

Captain England brought out a bottle of Jamaica, which he set upon the
board, and each of the three pirates mixed himself a glass of grog.
Burke drank three or four glasses of the stuff without its seeming in
the least to smooth his ill-temper. The cripple kept pace with him in
his drinking, at which I was mightily anxious, for when such bloody
wretches as they become heated with liquor, it is a toss of a farthing
whether they murder a man in their sport or lavish caresses upon him.
However, I was glad to see that Captain England drank but sparingly,
wherefore I entertained great hopes that he would remain sufficiently
cool to prevent any violence being used against me.

But I greatly doubt that my life would have been in danger under any
circumstances, for after a while, as Burke became more warmed in his
cups, his displeasure against me became more and more softened. At
first, without speaking directly to me, he began, with many imprecations
upon his own head, to say that though he was a bloody sea-pirate, and a
murderer, and a thief, he knew a man of courage when he saw him, and
loved him as his brother. By-and-by he insisted upon shaking hands with
me across the table, swearing that if harm had happened to me through
him he would have repented it to the very last day of his life. I now
perceived that the time had come for me to act; accordingly I began,
first by hints and afterwards by direct appeals, to beseech them that
they would give me the smaller of their two crafts, which had been so
injured in the late engagement that it was still lying upon the beach
where they had run it aground, and from which position they had made no
efforts to rescue it. I had noticed the craft as I came down the beach,
and though I observed that she had been very much shattered by the
broadsides which we had fired into her, I yet had hopes that if I could
get possession of her I might be able to patch her up sufficiently to
transport my passengers and crew to some place of greater security than
the island offered, even perhaps to Bombay, weather permitting. I had
thought that the pirates would have made some objection, and I believe
that even England himself was startled at the boldness of my request,
for he looked anxiously at the others, but ventured nothing. However, I
think that that very boldness recommended itself to these reckless
spirits, for they granted what I desired with hardly a word of
objection. Emboldened by this, I went still further, and besought them
to give me back some of the cargo which they had captured along with the
_Cassandra_.

At this, though he said nothing, Captain England grinned as though
vastly amused. Nor was I wrong in venturing such a seemingly foolhardy
request, for not only did they promise to give me back one hundred and
twenty-nine bales of the Company's goods, but also gave me a written
agreement to that effect, which they each of them signed, Captain
England first of all.

I may say here that though it might seem absurd to set any value upon a
mere written agreement signed by such bloody and lawless men, it was
really of very great moment, for these fellows have a vast respect and
regard for any instrument to which they set their hand, wherefore I knew
that the chances were many to one that they would do as they promised,
after once having superscribed to it.

Then, with my heart beating so that I could hardly speak, I turned to
Captain England. "And you, sir," said I, "will you grant me one small
favor?"

"That depends upon what it is," says he.

I looked at him steadily for a moment or two whilst I was collecting
myself; then I spoke with all the coolness I could command, although I
felt that I could scarcely forbear trembling at this trying moment.
"Why, sir," says I, "if my despatches are lost, I can make but a poor
sort of a report to the Honorable Company."

"Well, John Mackra, and how can I help you in that?" said he, very
coolly.

"Easily enough," said I. "Yonder is my despatch-box in the corner,
which can be of but little use to you, and yet it is of great import to
me."

"And you want it?" says he.

"Indeed yes," said I, "though of course that is as you please."

He regarded me for a while in silence, his head upon one side, and his
face twisted up into a most droll, quizzical, cunning expression, of
which I could make nothing whatever.

"And is that all that you want of me?" said he.

I nodded my head, for I could not trust myself to speak.

Upon this he burst suddenly into a great loud laugh, and gave the table
a thump with his fist which made the glasses jingle. I sat regarding
him, not knowing what to make of it all; but his next words were a vast
relief to me.

"Why," says he, "I thought you were going to ask me for something of
some account. If that is all you want, it is yours, and welcome to it."

Finding all three of the pirates to be in such a complacent mood, I
asked them for some of my clothes, for those that I had hung in tatters
about me, and, as said before, I was in my bare feet. But this they
would not do, Master Burke asking me whether they had not granted enough
already, without giving me togs to cover my bloody carcass. Upon this I
perceived that I had gotten all that I was likely to obtain, and so had
to go without my clothes.

The pirates were for keeping me on board all night, that they might, as
they were pleased to say, entertain me in a decent fashion. But I,
having gained possession of the precious despatch-box, and trembling
with anxiety lest by some sudden shift of luck it should be taken away
from me again, was most eagerly anxious to take myself away. England
himself urged my departure. So about seven o'clock I was put ashore,
with the despatch-box in my possession, giving thanks that I had come
off from my adventure with such exceeding good fortune, for I felt that
I had not only recovered the most precious prize of all, but England had
promised to do his uttermost to hold the others to their written
agreement, saying that if he were successful he would depart in two
days, leaving the bales of goods behind upon the shore.




XIII.


England himself chose a crew to row me across the beach, and I have no
doubt selected the least reprehensible of all the gang; for although
they said little to me, they showed no disposition either to be insolent
or to offer violence to me; one of them even took off his jacket and
laid it in the stern-sheets for me to sit upon. And truly, in spite of
their wicked ways, there is not so much difference betwixt some of these
fellows and the common sailors in our merchant service, excepting that
the poor wretches have been led astray by evil counsel until they have
broken the laws and committed outrages upon the high-seas, and so are
become outlawed and desperate. Moreover, I believe there are many of
them who would return to better ways had they opportunity of so doing,
and were not afraid of suffering for the evil things which they have
committed.

But at that time I thought little or nothing of how they regarded me, my
only desire being to get ashore, that I might hide the precious
despatch-box in some place of safety. This I did as soon as might be
after I had landed, burying the casket in the sand, and marking the
place so that I might know it again.

Some little distance beyond where I had been put ashore from the pirate
boat I came upon a party of my own men under Mr. White, who had been
despatched after me by Mr. Langely so soon as he had read the
communication which I had left behind me at the king's town, and who had
for some time been lying hidden in the thickets, whence they might
observe the pirates and still remain unseen by them.

I may confess that I was mightily glad to behold such kind and friendly
faces again, nor did they seem less rejoiced than myself at the
meeting. They would not allow me to walk, but making a litter of two
saplings, bore me by turns upon the way, so that against the morning had
come we were safe in the king's town once more.

Mr. Longways was among the first to visit me, and betrayed the most
lively signs of joy upon finding that I had been fortunate enough to
secure the great ruby once more, though he regretted that I had not
fetched the box with me instead of having buried it in the sand, so that
we might have assured ourselves of the safety of the treasure. Upon this
point I put him at his ease by convincing him that the box was in such a
condition and of such an appearance as to make me feel certain that it
had neither been forced nor the lock tampered with.

We only remained in the king's town about three days longer; at the end
of that time the lookout which we had placed at the cape came in and
reported that the pirate crafts had hoisted sail and borne away to the
southward, leaving behind them the battered hulk of the smallest vessel,
as they had promised to do. This much many had expected of them, but I
doubt if any excepting myself had ventured to hope that they would
fulfill the other part of the agreement to which they had superscribed,
viz., to leave behind them the bales of goods which in their
half-drunken fit of generosity they had promised. Yet there they were,
neatly stacked upon the beach, and even covered with a tarpaulin. And I
know not whether it may be merely superstition upon their part or no,
but this much I have frequently observed, that sailors of whatever
condition have such a vast regard and respect for any paper or written
document that they will go to great extremity before they will do aught
to rupture or disobey the articles of such a bond. So it was that I was
not so much surprised at this fulfillment as either Mr. Langely or Mr.
White. By this time I was sufficiently recovered of my fever and of my
wound to take upon me the direction of affairs once more; accordingly,
in the space of two weeks, we had so far patched up the battered hulk of
the pirate craft as to make her tolerably sea-worthy, provided we
encountered no great stress of weather.

It took us about a week longer to victual and water the vessel (the
bales of goods which I had begged from the pirates having been already
stowed away under cover), so that it was not until the 18th of August
that we were able to leave the country--which we did, giving thanks for
all the mercies that had been vouchsafed to us in this trying and
terrible time.

We were becalmed off the coast of Arabia, where we suffered greatly from
the scarcity of water; but being brought safely through that and other
dangers, we arrived at last at Bombay, where we dropped anchor early in
the afternoon of the 13th of October, it being nigh upon two months
since we had left the coast of Juanna.

I immediately sent a message to the Governor, Mr. Boon, notifying him of
the safe arrival of Mistress Pamela, and that I was now ready to deliver
the despatch-box at such time as he should choose to appoint. I also
forwarded to him by the messenger a full report of all that had
happened, and of the loss of the _Cassandra_ in the engagement on the
23d of July.

In about an hour and a half Mr. Boon came aboard. He spoke most kindly
and flatteringly of the service which he was pleased to say I had
rendered the Company. He urged me to accompany him to the shore, but
though I was mightily inclined to accept of his kindness, I was forced
to decline at that time; for, finding that the Company's ship, the _City
of London_, was about ready to sail, I had determined to send by her a
brief account of the things herein narrated, and was at that moment
engaged in writing the letter which was afterwards so widely published
both in the newspapers and in Captain Johnson's book relating to the
lives of the nine famous pirate captains. Finding that I could not just
then quit the ship, he insisted that I should sup with them that very
night. I was only too glad to accept of this, for I had determined that
I would discover in what manner of regard Mistress Pamela held me, and
that without loss of time. I had now every right to offer my addresses
to her, which I had not had heretofore. Accordingly, having delivered
the despatch-box into Mr. Boon's hands with feelings of the most sincere
and heart-felt relief, and having obtained his receipt for the same, I
escorted Mistress Pamela to the Governor's boat, thence returning to my
own cabin feeling strangely lonely and melancholic.

This was about half-past two o'clock in the afternoon; at about four a
small boat came alongside, and a young man of some twenty-three years
of age stepped upon the deck, who introduced himself as Mr. Whitcomb,
the Governor's secretary. He brought a written message from the Governor
requesting my immediate presence at the Residency upon a matter of the
very first importance. I turned to Mr. Whitcomb and asked if he knew
what was the nature of the business the Governor would have with me.

He said no, but that the Governor and Mr. Elliott, the Company's agent,
had been closeted together with Mr. McFarland and Mr. Hansel, of the
banking-house, for some time, and then had sent this message to me by
him, which was plainly one of very great consequence.

I immediately entered the boat with the secretary, and was rowed to the
shore, where, when we had come to the Residency, I found the four
gentlemen waiting for me. They were seated around a table, whereon was
the despatch-box and my written report, which consumed some six or eight
sheets of paper. The Governor invited me to be seated, which I had
hardly done when one of the company, whom I afterwards found to be Mr.
Elliott, began questioning me. I answered fully to everything he asked,
the others listening, and now and then putting in a word, or asking for
fuller particulars upon some point or other which was perhaps more
obscure. When I came to the part that related to Captain Leach I saw
them glance at one another in a very peculiar way; but I continued
without stopping until I had told everything concerning the matter from
the beginning to the end. No one said anything for a little time, until
at last Mr. Elliott spoke:

"Do I correctly understand from this report," says he, touching the
papers which lay upon the table as he spoke, "that Mr. Longways betrayed
the nature of the contents of the despatch-box both to you and to
Captain Leach?"

"Yes, sir," said I.

"And you are sure that no one knew of the presence
of the jewel but you and he?"

"Yes, sir," said I, again.

At this the gentlemen exchanged glances, and Mr. Elliott continued his
questioning.

"And did you not know that Captain Leach had been left behind when you
quitted the _Cassandra_?"

"Why, no, sir," said I. "It was intended that he should go in the first
passage of the long-boat with the boatswain."

"But did you not say that you helped the women aboard of the long-boat?"

"Yes, sir, I did," I said.

There was a pause of a moment or two, and all sat regarding me.
Presently Mr. Elliott spoke again.

"And did you not then see that Captain Leach was absent from the boat?"
said he.

"No, sir," said I, "I did not; the boat was very full, and the air so
thick with gunpowder smoke that I could see little or nothing at any
distance."

"But did you not then take care to see that all your passengers were
safe aboard?"

"Why, no, sir," said I. "The order had been passed for all passengers to
go aboard the long-boat, and I supposed that Captain Leach had obeyed
with the rest. I was so occupied with the safety of the women just then
that I thought of nothing else."

"You say that the pirate England told you that Captain Leach had been
killed when they first came aboard the _Cassandra_. Did you take any
other evidence in the matter than his word?"

"Why, no, sir," said I, "I did not."

Mr. Elliott said "Humph!" and another short space of silence followed,
during which he played absently with the leaves of my report.

"But tell me, Captain Mackra," said he, presently, "did you not speak to
any one of your suspicions concerning Captain Leach after he had
quitted the ship on the night of the 21st in such a mysterious manner?"

"Why, no, sir," said I; "for I saw no sufficient grounds to accuse him
of any underhand practices."

"And yet," said a thin, middle-aged gentleman, with a sharp voice, whom
I afterwards found to be Mr. McFarland--"and yet you saw him quit the
_Cassandra_ in a most suspicious manner, and under the most suspicious
circumstances, and also had reason to suspect him of having knowledge of
the jewel. Why, then, did you not examine him publicly or put him under
arrest after he returned?"

"Sir," said I, "I disliked Captain Leach, and feared that my prejudice
might lead me astray."

"But, Captain Mackra," said the Governor, "your personal feelings should
never interfere with your duty."

I knew not where all these matters tended, but I began to be mightily
troubled in my mind concerning them. However, I had little time for
thought, for Mr. Elliott began questioning me again. He asked me if I
had told any one of my intended visit to the pirate-ship, of whom I had
seen there, and of what inducements I had offered to persuade them to
give me one of their crafts and return such a quantity of the Company's
goods. He cross-questioned me so keenly in regard to the last point that
I found myself tripping more than once, for it is mightily difficult to
remember all of the petty details even of such an important event as
that. I believe that I answered more loosely than I otherwise would have
done from the agitation into which I was cast by the serious shape which
matters seemed to be taking.

"Sir," I cried to Mr. Elliott, "do you blame me for getting back so much
of the Company's goods as I was able?"

"I blame you for nothing, Captain Mackra," said he. "I merely question
you in regard to a matter of great importance."

"But, sir," I said, hotly, "am I to be blamed for losing my ship after a
hard-fought battle? You should recollect, sir, that I was wounded in the
Company's service; methinks, sir, that should weigh some in my favor."

"But, Captain Mackra," said Mr. McFarland, very seriously, "are not
accidents likely to happen to any one under any circumstances? Captain
Leach, you may remember, was killed in spite of all the precautions he
may have taken to preserve his life."

A great weight of dread seemed to have been settling upon me as the
examination had progressed, but at these words it was as though a sudden
light flashed upon me; I rose slowly from my chair, and stood with my
hand leaning upon the table. For a moment or two my head swam with
vertigo, and I passed my hand across my forehead. "I am not so well,
gentlemen," said I, "as I was some time since, for I have gone through
many hardships; therefore I beseech you to excuse me if I have appeared
weak in the manner or the matter of my discourse." Then turning to the
Governor, "Will you be pleased to tell me, sir, what all this means?"

"Sir," said he, in a low tone, "the ruby has been stolen, and was not in
the box when you gave it to me."

I stood looking around at them for a while; I know that I must have been
very pale, for Mr. McFarland sprang to his feet.

"Captain Mackra, you are ill," he said; "will you not be seated?"

I shook my head impatiently, and collecting myself, I said, very slowly
and somewhat unsteadily, "Do you suspect me of being instrumental in
taking it?"

[Illustration: I ROSE SLOWLY FROM MY CHAIR, AND STOOD WITH MY HAND
LEANING UPON THE TABLE.]

No one answered for an instant. Then the Governor said, "No, Captain
Mackra, we suspect you of nothing; only it is best that you should
return to England and make your report to the Company in person.
Meanwhile you will make no effort to leave this country until I find
means to secure your passage for you."

"I am to consider myself under arrest?" said I.

"No, sir," said the Governor, kindly, "not under arrest; but you must
hold yourself prepared to stand your examination before the proper
agents of the Company at London, and at such time as they may decide
upon."




XIV.


So soon as I had left the Residency I went straight aboard my craft. I
entered my cabin, locked the door, and began pacing up and down,
striving to collect my thoughts and to shape them into some sort of
order. At first I was possessed with a most ungovernable fury--that I,
who had suffered so much, who had fought till I could fight no more, and
who had freely risked my life in the Company's cause, should now be
accused of stealing that very thing that had cost me such suffering and
so great a weight of trouble. But by-and-by the ferment of my spirits
began somewhat to subside, and I could look matters more coolly in the
face. Then, instead of anger, I became consumed with anxiety, for I
began, little by little, to perceive what a dreadful cloud of suspicion
overshadowed me. I had acted to the best of my light in not accusing
Captain Leach of what I feared might be unfounded suspicions bred of my
dislike of his person. Now all men would think that I was leagued with
him in robbing the Company of the great ruby. In return for my
forbearance in not making a public accusation against him, he had
betrayed me and all that were aboard the _Cassandra_, and now every one
would believe that I had aided him in that as in the rest. He had
remained behind in the hopes of joining the pirates, and so securing
himself in the possession of his booty. Instead of accomplishing this,
he had perished miserably on board of that craft, wet with the blood of
those whom he had betrayed; but as for me, how could I ever disprove the
horrid charge that I had deserted my confederate in guilt, leaving him
to his death, so that I might gain all for myself. The very fact of my
taking my life into my hands, and going so freely among those wicked
and bloody wretches, instead of weighing in my favor, would seem to
point to some sort of bargain with them whereby I was the gainer; for
who would believe that they would voluntarily have resigned so great a
part of those things which they had a short time before torn away from
us at the cost of so much blood? Even the fact of my having so carefully
guarded the secret of the stone might be twisted into sinister
suspicions against me.

As for those bright hopes that I had but lately entertained, how could I
now raise my eyes towards Mistress Pamela, or how could I look for
anything, who was stained with such dreadful suspicions, without
prospect of being cleansed from them?

Perceiving all these things so clearly, I resigned myself to the depths
of gloomy despair, for the more I bent my mind upon these matters the
less did I see my way clear from my entanglements. I sat long into the
night, thinking and thinking, until the temptation came upon me to shoot
out my brains, and be quit of all my troubles in that sudden manner. In
this extremity I flung myself upon my knees and prayed most fervently,
and after a while was more at peace, though with no clearer knowledge as
to how I might better my condition. So I went to my berth, where I was
presently sound asleep, with all my troubles forgot.

A day or two after these things had befallen comes one of the Company's
clerks aboard, with an order from Mr. Elliott relieving me of my
command, and appointing Mr. Langely in my stead. This appointment Mr.
Langely would have refused had I not urged him to accept of it, seeing
he could better settle the affairs of which he would be in charge than
one who would come aboard a stranger. Accordingly he consented to do as
I advised, though protesting against it most earnestly.

About two weeks after our arrival at Bombay the Governor notified me
that the Company's ship _Lavinia_ was about quitting her anchorage, and
that he had secured a berth to England in her for me. I was very well
pleased that the Governor had hit upon this one ship of all others in
the Company's service, for her commander, Captain Croker, was an old and
well-tried friend of mine, and one with whom it would be more pleasing
to be consociated at a time of such extreme ill fortune as I was then
suffering under. I went aboard her at once, and was most kindly received
by Captain Croker, whom I found had had a very comfortable berth fitted
up for me, and had arranged all things to make my voyage as pleasant as
possible.

The day after I came aboard, wind and tide being fair, and Captain
Croker having received his orders, we hoisted anchor and sailed out of
the harbor, and by four o'clock had dropped the land astern.

During the first part of that voyage, before I had contrived to leave
the _Lavinia_, of which I shall hereafter tell, my mind was constantly
and continually filled with my troubles, so that they were the first
thing which I remembered in the morning, and the last thing which I
forgot before I fell asleep. But that which puzzled me more than
anything else was to account for the mysterious manner in which the Rose
of Paradise had been spirited away from the iron despatch-box, and what
had become of it after it had passed from Mr. White's possession. Of
this I thought and pondered until my brain grew weary.

One night, we being at that time becalmed off the Gulf of Arabia, I sat
upon the poop-deck looking out over the water and into the sky, dusted
all over with an infinite quantity of stars, and with my mind still
moving upon the same old track which it had so often travelled before. I
know not whether it was the refreshing silence which reigned all about
me, but of a sudden it seemed as though the uncertainties which had
beset my mind were removed, and the whole matter stood before me with a
most marvellous clearness. Then I knew, as plain as though it had been
revealed to me, that the only man in the world who either had the Rose
of Paradise in his possession, or knew where it was hidden, was Captain
Edward England.

I do not think that I came to this conclusion through any line of
reasoning, but rather with a sudden leap of thought; but as soon as I
had fairly grasped it I marvelled at the dulness of my understanding,
which should have prevented my perceiving it before; for every single
circumstance that had happened pointed but in one direction, and that
was towards the end which I had but just reached.

It was as plain as the light of day that when Captain Leach went aboard
of the pirate craft on the night of the 21st of July, Captain England
would require him to explain his object in betraying the _Cassandra_
into their hands; and it was equally plain that Leach would have to tell
the truth; for it was not likely that he could deceive such a sharp and
cunning blade as that famous freebooter. I recalled the strange look
which Captain England had given me when he told me that Captain Leach
had been "shot by accident" upon their coming aboard the _Cassandra_;
whereupon, regarding matters from my present stand-point, I felt assured
that England had killed Leach with his own hand, so that with him the
secret of the stone might perish from amongst them. I also felt
convinced that he must, with great care and circumspection, have picked
the lock of the despatch-box and have despoiled it of its contents,
which he had kept for himself without informing any of his shipmates of
what he had found.

I could not at first account for the treatment that I had met with at
the pirates' hands, nor why I had not been shot so soon as I had
stepped upon their decks, for it was plain to see that that would be the
easiest and quickest way for Captain England to rid himself of me; yet
it was very apparent to me that he desired that my life should be saved,
and was even inclined to show me some kindness after his own fashion;
and I do verily believe that that wicked and bloody man entertained a
sincere regard for my person, and had it in his mind to do me a good
turn; for even the very worst of men have some seed of kindness in them,
otherwise they could not be of our human brotherhood, but wild beasts,
thinking only of rending and tearing one another.

But I could easily perceive that so soon as England felt assured of my
coming aboard of his craft, he would strive to mislead me into thinking
that he knew nothing of the stone, lest by some inadvertent word I
should betray a knowledge of it to the others, and he would have to
share his spoil with them. Therefore he would carefully lock the box
again, and would toss it in the corner to lead me to think he knew
nothing of the contents.

All this train of reasoning I followed out in my mind, and when I
recalled the quizzical, cunning look which the rogue had given me when I
asked for the despatch-box, I felt certainly assured that I was right.

I remember that when I had clearly cogitated all this out in my own mind
I felt as though one step had been gained towards the recovery of the
stone, and for an instant it seemed as though a great part of the weight
of despondency had been lifted from my breast. But the next moment it
settled upon me again when I brought to mind that I was as far as ever
from regaining the jewel; for I knew not where the pirates then were,
and even if I did know, and was venturesome enough to face their captain
a second time, it was not likely that he would be so complacent as to
give back such a great treasure for the mere asking. Nor do I think it
likely that I would ever have gained anything by this knowledge which
had come to me (unless I might have used it to help my case with the
East India Company) had not Providence seen fit to send me help in a
most strange and unexpected manner. And thus it was:

One morning when I came upon deck I saw several of the passengers,
together with the captain and the first mate, standing at the lee side
of the ship and looking out forward, Captain Croker with a glass to his
eye. Upon inquiring they told me that the lookout had some little time
before sighted a small open boat, which had been signalling the ship
with what they were now able to make out was a shirt tied to the blade
of an oar. We ran down to the boat, which we reached in twenty or thirty
minutes, and then hove to, and it came alongside.

There were three men in her, who seemed to be in a mightily good
condition for castaways in an open boat. I stood looking down into it
along with other of the passengers, watching the men as they took in
their oars and laid them along the thwarts. Just then one of the fellows
raised his face and looked up; and when I saw him I could not forbear a
sudden exclamation of amazement. I remember one of my fellow-passengers,
a Mr. Wilson, who stood next to me, asked me what was the matter. I made
some excuse or other that was of little consequence, but the truth was
that I recognized the fellow as that very pirate who had first kicked me
in the loins when I lay bound upon the deck of the _Cassandra_, and whom
Captain England had knocked down with the iron belaying-pin.

However, the fellow did not recognize me, for I was a very different
object now than when he had seen me lying upon the pirate deck, pinched
with my sickness, barefoot and half naked, and my cheeks and chin
covered over with a week's growth of beard. The three fellows presently
came aboard, and were brought aft to the quarter-deck, where Captain
Croker stood, just below the rail of the deck above. They told a very
straightforward story, and I could not help admiring at their coolness
and the clever way in which they passed it off. They said that they had
been part of the crew of the brigantine _Ormond_, which had been lost in
a storm about a hundred and twenty leagues north of the island of
Madagascar. That the captain and six of the crew had taken the
long-boat, and that they had become separated from her in the darkness
two nights before. They answered all of Captain Croker's questions in a
very straightforward manner, and with all the appearance of truth. After
satisfying himself, he told them that they might go below and get
something to eat, and that he would carry them to England as a part of
the ship's crew.

[Illustration: THE THREE FELLOWS WERE BROUGHT AFT TO THE QUARTER-DECK,
WHERE CAPTAIN CROKER STOOD, JUST BELOW THE RAIL OF THE DECK ABOVE.]

At first I was inclined to tell the real truth concerning them to
Captain Croker, but on second thoughts I determined to see what the
fellows had to say for themselves; for I only recognized one of them,
and, after all, their story might be true, and that one have given up
his wicked trade in the four or five months since I had last seen him.

About an hour after this I saw my friend the pirate engaged forward in
coiling a rope. I came to him and watched him for a while, but he kept
steadily on with what he was about, and said nothing to me.

"Well, sir," said I, after a bit, "and how was Captain England when you
saw him last?"

The fellow started up as suddenly as though the rope had changed to an
adder in his hands. He looked about him as though to see if any one were
near and had overheard what I said to him, and then recovered himself
with amazing quickness. He grinned in a simple manner, and chucked his
thumb up to his forelock. "What was it you were saying, sir?" says he.
"I didn't just understand you."

"Come, come," said I; "that will never pass amongst old friends. Why,
don't you remember me?"

He looked at me in a mightily puzzled fashion for a while. "No, sir;
asking your pardon, sir," said he, "I don't remember you."

"What!" said I, "have you forgot Captain Mackra, and how you gave him a
kick in the side when he lay on the deck of the _Cassandra_, down off
Juanna?" As the fellow looked at me I saw him change from red to yellow
and from yellow to blue; his jaw dropped, and his eyes started as though
a spirit from the dead had risen up from the decks in front of him.
"So," said I, "I see you remember me now."

"For God's sake, sir," said he, "don't ruin a poor devil who wants to
make himself straight with the world. I was drunk when I kicked you,
sir--the Lord knows I was; you wouldn't hang me for that, sir, would
you?"

"That depends," said I, sternly, "upon whether you answer my questions
without telling me a lie, as you did Captain Croker just now."

"I wish I may die, sir," said he, "if what I tell you ain't so. We all
three of us left the _Royal James_ last night--she was the _Cassandra_,
sir, but we christened her a new name, and hoisted the Black Roger over
her. We got scared, sir, at the way things was going since Ned England
left us and Tom Burke turned captain; for he ain't the man England was,
and that's the truth. All we ask now, sir, is to start fair and square
again; and so be if we don't hang for this, I wish I may be struck dead,
sir, if I, for one, go back to the bloody trade again. So all I want is
to have a fair trial, and I begs of you, sir, that you won't say the
word that would hang us all up to the yard-arms as quick as a wink." I
am mightily afraid that I did not hear the last of the fellow's
discourse, for one part of the speech that he had dropped went through
me like a shot. "How is that?" I cried. "Was not Captain England with
you when you deserted the ship?"

"Why, no, sir," says he. "You see, sir, when we sailed away from Juanna,
Tom Burke began to move heaven and earth against England, and back of
him he had all of the worst of the crew aboard. First of all he began
setting matters by the ears because England and Ward had been wheedled
into giving you--asking your pardon, sir--a good sound vessel and all
them bales of cloth stuff. I tell you plain, sir, Burke would never have
let you had 'em if he hadn't wanted to use the matter against England.
Well, sir, one night Ward fell overboard--nobody knowed how--and there
was an end of him. After that they weren't long in getting rid of
England, I can tell you."

"Yes, yes," I cried, impatiently, "but how
did you get rid of him?"

"Why, sir," says he, "they marooned him on a little island off the
Mauritius, and six others with him; they was--"

"Never mind them," I cried; "but tell me, do you know what became of
him?"

"Why, yes, sir," says he; "leastways we knew of him by hearsay; and this
was how: About eight weeks ago we ran into a cove on the south shore of
Mauritius to clean both ships, which had grown mightily foul. While we
lay there on the careen a parcel of the crew who had been off hunting
for game fetched back one of the self-same fellows we had marooned two
months and more before. He told us that England and his shipmates had
made a little craft out of bits of boards and barrel-staves, and had
crossed over to the Mauritius in a spell of fair weather, though it was
five leagues and more away."

To all this I listened with the greatest intentness. "And is that all
you know of him?" said I. "And can you not tell whether he is yet on the
island?"

The fellow looked at me for a moment out of the corners of his eyes
without speaking. "Look 'ee, sir," said he, after a little while, "what
I wants to know is this: be ye seeking to harm Ned England or not?"

"And do you trouble yourself about that?" says I. "Sure he can be no
friend of yours, for did I not myself see him knock out a parcel of your
teeth with an iron belaying-pin?"

"Yes, you did," says he; "but I bear him no grudge for that."

"Why," said I, "then neither do I bear him a grudge, and I give you my
word of honor that I mean no harm to him."

The fellow looked at me earnestly for a while. "You wants to know where
Ned England is, don't you, sir?" said he.

I nodded my head. "And I wants to be perserved from hanging, don't I?"

I nodded my head again.

"Then look 'ee, sir," says he, "we'll strike a bit of a bargain: if
you'll promise to say nothing to harm me and my shipmates, I'll tell you
where to find Ned England."

I considered the matter for a while. The fellow had told me a
straightforward story, nor did I doubt that he intended to break away
from his evil courses. I may truly say that I verily believe I would not
have betrayed the three poor wretches under any circumstances. "Very
well," said I, "I promise to keep my part of the bargain."

"Upon your honor?" said he.

"Upon my honor," said I.

"Then, sir," said he, "you will find him at Port Louis, in the
Mauritius," and he turned upon his heel and walked away.




XV.


I was filled with the greatest exultation by the knowledge which I had
gained through the deserter from the pirates, for not only had I
discovered the whereabouts of the one man in all of the world whom I
felt well convinced had knowledge of the Rose of Paradise, but that man
no longer had a crew of wicked and bloody wretches back of him, but
stood, like me, upon his own footing. Therefore I determined that I
would by some means or other either regain the treasure or perish in the
attempt, for I would rather die than live a life of dishonor such as now
seemed to lie before me. However, I plainly perceived that if I would
recover the treasure I would have to escape from the ship by some means
or other whilst we were upon our passage and near the isle of
Mauritius, for if I lost time by going home and standing my examination,
many things might occur which would lose the chance to me forever:
England might quit the Mauritius, or gather together another crew of
pirates upon his own account, for with such a treasure as the Rose of
Paradise he had it clearly in his power to do that and much more.

At that time our English vessels were used to lay their course up and
down the Mozambique Channel, and not along the eastern coast of
Madagascar; for the Mauritius and other islands which lie to the
north-east of that land belong to the French or Dutch, as those in the
Channel belong to us. Therefore it was necessary to my purpose that I
should persuade Captain Croker to alter his course, so as to run down
outside the island instead of through the Channel, for it was plain to
see that even if I should be able to escape from the _Lavinia_ to Juanna
or to any of the coadjacent islands, I would be as far as ever from
getting to Mauritius, which lieth many leagues away around the northern
end of Madagascar.

So I determined to make a clean breast of it, and confide the whole plan
to Captain Croker from beginning to end, only I would say nothing as to
how I had gained my knowledge of England's whereabouts, for I would not
break the promise which I had given to the deserter, as told above.

As no time was to be lost in following out the plans which I had
determined upon, I requested that I might have speech with Captain
Croker that very night. I told him everything concerning the affair from
beginning to end, adding nothing and omitting nothing. Although so old
and so well-tried a friend, he was cast into the utmost depths of wonder
and amazement at my audacity in proposing that he should alter the
course of his vessel, and at my boldness in daring to tell him my plans
for escaping from the restraint under which I had been placed. He
questioned me closely concerning many matters: as to what led me to
think that England was the present possessor of the jewel; as to how I
proposed to proceed after I had escaped to the land; and as to how I had
become informed of the pirate's whereabouts, concerning which last
particular I would give him no satisfaction.

I knew not what he had in his mind, nor where all these questions
tended, and by-and-by left the cabin, though in a sad state of
uncertainty, not knowing how Captain Croker inclined, nor what might be
his feelings in regard to me.

Nor was my uncertainty lessened for several days, in which time I knew
not what to think, but waited for some sign from him. One evening,
however, the whole matter was resolved in a most simple, natural, and
unexpected manner.

At that time we were about seventy or eighty leagues north of the island
of Madagascar. All the passengers being at supper, with Captain Croker
at the head of the table, conversation began to run upon those pirates
who had much infested these waters of late.

"Why," says Captain Croker, "the presence of the rascals has so affected
me that I have determined to alter the course of my vessel, and to run
outside of Madagascar instead of through the Mozambique Channel, for it
is well to have plenty of sea-room either to fight or to run from these
wicked rogues. So now, if the wind holds good, seeing we are such
friends with the Frenchmen in these peaceful days, I purpose stopping at
the Mauritius to take aboard fresh provisions."

Captain Croker did not look at me whilst he was saying all this, but
studiously kept his eyes upon the plate before him, and presently rose
and left the table.

As for me, I sat with my heart beating within my breast as though it
would burst asunder, for I saw that my fate was decided at last, and
that one of the greatest happenings in all of my life was soon to come
upon me.

In two days, as Captain Croker had predicted, we dropped anchor in the
harbor off Port Louis at about three o'clock in the afternoon. I ate but
little supper that night, my mind being so engrossed upon that which I
had undertaken to do.

We lay about half a mile from the shore, the water in the bay being very
calm and still. I had procured four large calabash gourds, with which I
had made shift to rig up a very decent float or life-preserver, for I
had need of some such aid in my expedition, not being a very expert
swimmer.

In all this time I had said nothing to Captain Croker, nor he to me; but
about seven o'clock, it being at that time pretty dark, he came to me
where I stood by the rail of the poop-deck.

"Jack," said he, in a low voice, "are you still in the mind for
carrying this thing through?"

"Yes, I am," I said.

"To-night?" says he.

"To-night," says I.

"Then God bless you!" said he, and he gave my hand a hearty grip. Then
he turned upon his heel and went below, and I knew that my time for
acting had arrived.

I had not much fear of sharks, for I had seen enough of those cowardly
creatures to know that they rarely or never attack a swimmer or a moving
man, but only a body floating upon the water as though dead; moreover,
at night they are asleep or in deep water, for they are not often seen
upon the surface after the darkness has fairly fallen.

After the captain left me I looked around and saw that no one else was
nigh upon the deck. I took my calabash gourds and entered the boat that
hung from the davits astern. Taking a hint from Captain Leach, I had
secured a coil of line by which I might lower myself into the water,
for if I had dropped with a splash I would have been pretty sure to have
been discovered. Having removed my shoes and stockings, which I wrapped
in a piece of tarpaulin, together with my tinder-box and flint and
steel, all of which I secured upon my head, and having slipped the cords
which bound the calabashes under my arms, I slid down the line into the
water astern.

Having committed my life into the keeping of Providence, I struck out
boldly for the shore, being aided by a current which set towards it, and
directing my course by the lights which glimmered faintly in the
distance. So I reached the beach, and built a fire, whereby I dried my
clothes. Then, having put on my shoes and stockings, which had been kept
pretty dry by the tarpaulin, I walked up the beach in the direction of
the scattered row of houses which, the moon having now risen, stood out
very plain at about a quarter of a mile distant. I found the town to
consist of a great straggling collection of low one-story buildings,
mostly made of woven palm-branches, smeared over with mud which had
dried in the sun. At this time it could not have been much less than
nine o'clock, and all was dark and silent. I went aimlessly here and
there, not knowing whither to direct my steps, until at last I caught
sight of a little twinkle of light, which I perceived came through a
crack of an ill-hung shutter. I went around to the front of the hut,
which seemed larger and better made than others I had seen. Above the
door hung an ill-made sign, and the moon shining full upon it, I could
plainly see a rude picture of a heart with a crown above it, and
underneath, written in great sprawling letters,--

                    "Le Coeur du Roy."

--From this I knew that it was an ordinary, at which I was greatly
rejoiced, and also what suited me very well was to find that it was
French, for I had no mind to fall in with English people just then, and
I knew enough of French to feel pretty easy with the lingo. So into the
place I stepped, as bold as brass, and ordered a glass of grog and
something to eat.

There were perhaps half a score of rough, ill-looking fellows gathered
around a dirty table playing at cards by the light from a flame of a bit
of rope's-end stuck in a calabash of grease. They laid down their cards
when I came in, and stared at me in a very forbidding fashion. However,
I paid no attention to them, but sat down at a table at some little
distance, and by-and-by the landlord, a little pot-bellied, red-faced
Frenchman, brought me a glass of hot rum and a dish of greasy stew
seasoned with garlic. He would have entered into talk with me, but I
soon gave him to understand that I had no appetite for conversation just
at this time; so after having made a bargain for lodgings during the
night, he withdrew to a bench in the farther corner of the room, where
I presently saw him fall asleep.

If I had hoped to escape from meeting my own countrymen, I soon
discovered that I was to be sadly disappointed, for before I had been in
the place a quarter of an hour I found that at least half the fellows
around the table were Englishmen. They were the most villanous,
evil-looking set of men that I had beheld in a long time, and I could
not but feel uneasy, for I had with me gold and silver money to the
value of between ten and eleven guineas, and by their muttering together
and looking in my direction now and then I knew that they were talking
concerning me.

Presently one of the fellows got up from the table and came over to the
place where I sat.

"Look 'ee, messmate," said he, seating himself upon the corner of the
table beside me; "be ye English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, or what?"
At first I was of a mind to deny being an Englishman, but on second
thoughts I perceived that it would be useless to do so, there being the
scum of so many peoples at that place that I could not hope to escape
exposure.

"Why, shipmate," said I, "I'm an Englishman."

"Where do ye hail from?" said he.

"Over yonder," said I, pointing in the direction of the _Lavinia_.

"Did ye come aboard of the craft that ran into the harbor to-day?"

I nodded my head.

"Did ye come ashore without leave?"

I nodded my head again.

The others had all laid down their cards and were looking at us by this
time, and I knew not what would have been the upshot of the matter had
not the door just then been flung open and a great rough fellow come
stumping into the place.

"Well," he bawled, in a loud, hoarse voice, "poor Ned is on his way to
h--l hot-foot to-night. I just came by his stew-hole over yonder.
Pah!"--here the fellow spat upon the floor--"he was screeching and
howling and yelling as though the d--l was basting him already."

"Who's with him now?" says one of the fellows at the table.

"Who's with him?" says the other, in a mightily contemptuous tone. "Why,
d'ye think that anybody would be such a ---- ---- fool as to stay with him
now, with nothing to be got for it but the black tongue and a cursing?"

"But what I say is this," said an ill-looking one-eyed fellow: "he's not
the man to serve his trade for all these here years and nothing to show
for it. It's all very well to say that Jack Mackra shot the hoops off
his luck; but you mark my words, he's got a cable out to windward
somewhere, and he ain't goin' to run on the lee shore with an empty
hold." I was so amazed to hear my own name spoken that I knew not at
first whether to believe that which mine ears had heard or whether they
had heard aright. Then it was as though a sudden light flashed upon me.
I needed not the next speech to tell me everything.

"Well," says one of the fellows, "even if so be as Ned England is going
to smell brimstone before this time to-morrow, I for one see no reason
to lose our game. Come along, Blake," he sang out to the fellow who had
been speaking to me, and who rejoined the others upon being bidden.

I was in a great ferment of spirits at all this, for I perceived very
clearly that England was mightily sick, and perhaps dying, with that
dangerous fever known as the "black tongue," from which it is a rare
thing for a man to recover with his life.

I observed that the fellow who had lately come into the ordinary did not
join in the game along with the rest, but sat looking on. By-and-by I
contrived to catch his eye as he glanced in my direction, whereupon I
beckoned to him, and he came over to the table where I sat. Only a few
words passed between us, and those in a very low tone.

"Is Ned England all alone?" said I.

"Yes," said he.

"Will you show me where he is?" said I.

He shot a quick look at me from under his brows. "How much will you
give?"

"A guinea" said I.

"I'll do it."

"When?"

"To-morrow morning."

That was all that passed, and then he moved away and joined the others
at the table.

The next morning I purchased a good large pistol from mine host, for I
saw that with such companions as I was like to fall in with I would need
some sort of weapon to protect myself. Having loaded it with a brace of
slugs, I thrust it in my belt, and then stepped out of the door, where
I found my acquaintance of the night before waiting for me.

"Are you ready?" said I.

"Yes," said he, "I am; but I must see the color of your money before I
go a single step."

"It is yellow," said I, and held the guinea out in the palm of my hand.

When he saw it his eyes shone like coals and his fingers began to
twitch. "Hand it over," says he, "and I'll take ye straight."

"No, no," said I; "avast there, shipmate. You get your money when I see
Captain Edward England, and not before."

"So be it," says he. "Lay your course straight ahead yonder, and I'll
follow after and tell you how to go."

I looked coolly into the fellow's face, and could not help grinning.
"Why," says I, "to tell the truth, shipmate" (here I drew my pistol out
of my belt and cocked it), "I have no appetite for a knife betwixt the
ribs; so you'll just march ahead, and if you try any of your tricks
I'll put a brace of bullets through your head as sure as you're alive."

The fellow looked at me for a while in a puzzled sort of way; then he
grinned, and swinging on his heel strode away, I following close behind
him with the pistol ready cocked in my hand. We went onward in this way
for about half a mile, until we came to a little hut that stood by
itself beyond the rest of the town. My guide stopped short about fifty
paces away from the hut. "There's where you'll find Ned England," said
he, "and I'll go no farther for ten guineas, for I've no notion of
catching the black tongue; and if you'll hearken to a bit of advice,
shipmate, you'll give it a wide berth yourself."

I felt assured the fellow was telling me the truth, so I paid him his
guinea, and then turned away and left him standing where he was, and as
I stopped in front of the hut and looked back I saw that the man was
yet standing in the very same spot, staring after me.

I may confess that I myself was somewhat overcome with fear of the
dreadful disease, wherefore I stood for a moment before I knocked upon
the door. But I presently rallied myself, calling to mind that this was
the only means of recovering the Rose of Paradise, even if it was at the
risk of my own life; therefore I knocked loudly on the door with the
butt of my pistol.

My guide, who stood still in the same place, called out to me that there
was no one to hear my knocking; so I pushed open the door and entered
the hut.

For a while I saw nothing, for it was very dark within. But I heard a
hoarse and chattering voice, scarce above a whisper, crying continually,
"Hard a-lee!--hard a-lee!--hard a-lee!"

Presently mine eyes became accustomed to the gloom, and I might see the
things around more clearly. There, in the corner of the room, lying
upon a mat of filthy rags, his body almost a skeleton, his bloodshot
eyes glaring out from under his matted hair, I beheld the famous pirate,
Captain Edward England.

[Illustration: THERE, IN THE CORNER, I BEHELD THE FAMOUS PIRATE, CAPTAIN
EDWARD ENGLAND.]




XVI.


I may truly say that when I saw the doleful state of the poor wretch,
and how he lay there without so much as a single soul to moisten his
lips or to give him a draught of cold water, I forgot mine own troubles
for the time being, and thought only of his pitiable condition.

I sometimes misdoubt whether I should have felt grieved for such a
wicked and bloody man, who had for years done nothing but commit the
most dreadful crimes, such as murther and piracy and the like, yet
seeing him thus prostrated, lying helpless, and deserted by all his
kind, I could not help my bowels being stirred by compassion; wherefore
I thought neither of the danger from his fever, nor of the many grievous
injuries which he had done, both to myself and to others, but only of
relieving his present distresses.

My first consideration was to make him more clean, wherefore I fetched
some water from a rivulet which I had noticed flow nigh to that place,
and washed his hands and face, and so much of his body as seemed to me
fitting. Then I gathered some fresh palm-leaves, and covered them over
with a bit of sail which I found rolled up in the back part of the hut,
and having thus made thereof a clean and comfortable bed, I carried the
poor wretch thither and laid him upon it.

As I had eaten nothing that morning, I went back into the town and
bought a lump of meat and some fresh fruit, and then back again to the
hut. I noticed here and there some that stood and looked after me,
though they said nothing to me, nor molested me in any manner. I
afterwards found that my guide had so spread the news of my going to
England's hut that many knew it, and accredited me with being a friend
of the pirate's, and even a partaker in his wicked and nefarious deeds.
Whether it was from this or from fear of contagion of the fever I know
not, but certain it is I was never once molested so long as I was upon
that island.

When I returned to the hut it seemed to me that the sick man had less
fever than when I left him, which perhaps happened from the refreshment
of the washing that I had given him, though it might have been that the
crisis of his distemper had arrived, and that his complaint had now
lessened in its intensity.

Some time after mid-day I was sitting beside the sick man, fanning both
him and myself, for though the nights were cool at this season of the
year, the middle of the day was both exceeding hot and sultry. He had
ceased in his incessant and continuous muttering and talking, and was
now lying quite silent, though breathing short and quick with the
fever. Suddenly he spoke. "Who are you?" said he, in a quick, sharp
voice.

I thought at first he was still rambling in his mind, but when I looked
at him I saw that his bloodshot eyes were fixed upon me. I placed my
hand upon his brow, and though still very hot, I fancied that the skin
was not so dry nor so hard as it had been.

"Who are you?" said he again in the same tone.

"There," said I, "lie still and rest. You have been mightily sick."

"Is it Jack Mackra?" said he.

"Yes," said I.

"And what do you do here?" said he.

"I am come to care for you just now," said I; "but now rest quietly, for
I will not answer one single question more, and that I promise you."

He did not seek to speak again, but lay quite still, as though
meditating; and presently, as I sat fanning him, I saw him close his
eyes, and after a while, by his deep and regular breathing, knew that he
was asleep, and that his fever had turned.

As I remember all the circumstances concerning these things, I think
that up to this time I had given little if any thought concerning the
treasure of which I had been in quest; but now, seeing the sick man
fairly asleep, and in what seemed to me a fair way to mend, my mind went
instantly back to it again, for I felt well assured that I should find
it or some signs of it about the place where I then was.

It is not needful to recount all the manner in which I prosecuted my
search for the gem, for not only did I examine every scrap of paper
about the place in hopes of finding some matter concerning it, but I
sounded the walls, and pierced wellnigh every inch of the dirt floor
with a sharpened stick of wood, but found not one single sign of it
anywhere. I even searched in the pockets of the breeches which the sick
man wore, and of his coat and waistcoat, which hung against the wall,
but discovered nothing to reward my search--all that I found there being
a book of needles and thread, a tailor's thimble, a great piece of
tobacco, such as seafaring men always carry with them, a ball of yarn
about half the bigness of an orange, and a hasp-knife.

I cannot tell the bitter disappointment that took possession of me when
my search proved to be of so little avail; for I had felt so sure of
finding the jewel or some traces of it, and had felt so sure of being
able to secure it again, that I could not bear to give up my search, but
continued it after every hope had expired.

When I was at last compelled to acknowledge to myself that I had failed,
I fell into a most unreasonable rage at the poor, helpless,
fever-stricken wretch, though I had but just now been doing all that lay
in my power to aid him and to help him in his trouble and his sickness.
"Why should I not leave him to rot where he is?" I cried, in my anger;
"why should I continue to succor one who has done so much to injure me,
and to rob me of all usefulness and honor in this world?" I ran out of
the cabin, and up and down, as one distracted, hardly knowing whither I
went. But by-and-by it was shown me what was right with more clearness,
and that I should not desert the poor and helpless wretch in his hour of
need: wherefore I went back to the hut and fell to work making a broth
for him against he should awake, for I saw that the fever was broken,
and that he was like to get well.

I did not give over my search for the stone in one day, nor two, nor
three, but continued it whenever the opportunity offered and the pirate
was asleep, but with as little success as at first, though I hunted
everywhere. As for Captain England himself, he began to mend from the
very day upon which I came, for he awoke from his first sleep with his
fever nigh gone, and all the madness cleared away from his head; but he
never once, for a long while, spoke of the strangeness of my caring for
him in his sickness, nor how I came to be there, nor of my reasons for
coming. Nevertheless, from where he lay he followed me with his eyes in
all my motions whenever I was moving about the hut.

One day, however, after I had been there a little over a week, against
which time he was able to lie in a rude hammock, which I had slung up in
front of the door, he asked me of a sudden if any of his cronies had
lent a hand at nursing him when he was sick, and I told him no.

"And how came you to undertake it?" says he.

"Why," said I, "I was here on business, and found you lying nigh dead in
this place."

He looked at me for a little while in a mightily strange way, and then
suddenly burst into a great loud laugh. After that he lay still for a
while, watching me, but presently he spoke again.

"And did you find it?" says he.

"Find what?" I asked, after a bit, for I was struck all aback by the
question, and could not at first find one word to say. But he only burst
out laughing again. "Why," says he, "you psalm-singing, Bible-reading,
straitlaced Puritan skippers are as keen as a sail-needle; you'll come
prying about in a man's house looking for what you would like to find,
and all under pretence of doing an act of humanity, but after all you
find an honest devil of a pirate is a match for you."

I made no answer to this, but my heart sank within me; for I perceived,
what I might have known before, that he had observed the object of my
coming thither.

He soon became strong enough to move about the place a little, and from
that time I noticed a great change in him, and that he seemed to regard
me in a very evil way. One evening when I came into the hut, after an
absence in the town, I saw that he had taken down one of his pistols
from the wall, and was loading it and picking the flint. He kept that
pistol by him for a couple of days, and was forever fingering it,
cocking it, and then lowering the hammer again.

I do not know why he did not shoot me through the brains at this time;
for I verily believe that he had it upon his mind to do so, and that
more than once. And now, in looking back upon the business, it appears
to me to be little less than a miracle that I came forth from this
adventure with my life. Yet had I certainly known that death was waiting
upon me, I doubt that I should have left that place; for in truth, now
that I had escaped from the _Lavinia_, as above narrated, I had nowhere
else to go, nor could I ever show my face in England or amongst my own
people again. Thus matters stood until one morning the whole business
came to an end so suddenly and so unexpectedly that for a long while I
felt as though all might be a dream, from which I should soon awake.

We were sitting together silently, he in a very moody and bitter humor.
He had his pistol lying across his knees, as he used to do at that time.

Suddenly he turned to me as though in a fit of rage. "Why do you stay
about this accursed fever hole?" cried he; "what do you want here, with
your saintly face and your godly airs?"

"I stay here," said I, bitterly, "because I have nowhere else to go."

"And what do you want?" said he.

"That you know," said I, "as well as I myself."

"And do you think," said he, "that I will give it to you?"

"No," said I, "that I do not."

"Look 'ee, Jack Mackra," said he, very slowly, "you are the only man
hereabouts who knows anything of that red pebble" (here he raised his
pistol and aimed it directly at my bosom); "why shouldn't I shoot you
down like a dog, and be done with you forever? I've shot many a better
man than you for less than this."

I felt every nerve thrill as I beheld the pistol set against my breast,
and his cruel, wicked eyes behind the barrel; but I steeled myself to
stand steadily and to face it.

"You may shoot if you choose, Edward England," said I, "for I have
nothing more to live for. I have lost my honor and all except my life
through you, and you might as well take that as the rest."

He withdrew the pistol, and sat regarding me for a while with a most
baleful look, and for a time I do believe that my life hung in the
balance with the weight of a feather to move it either way. Suddenly he
thrust his hand into his bosom and drew forth the ball of yarn which I
had observed amongst other things in his pocket. He flung it at me with
all his might, with a great cry as though of rage and of anguish. "Take
it," he roared, "and may the devil go with you! And now away from here,
and be quick about it, or I will put a bullet through your head even
yet."

I knew as quick as lightning what it was that was wrapped in the ball of
yarn, and leaping forward I snatched it up and ran as fast as I was able
away from that place. I heard another roar, and at the same time the
shot of a pistol and the whiz of a bullet, and my hat went spinning off
before me as though twitched from off my head. I did not tarry to pick
it up, but ran on without stopping: but even yet, to this day, I cannot
tell whether Edward England missed me through purpose or through the
trembling of weakness; for he was a dead-shot, and I myself once saw him
snap the stem of a wineglass with a pistol bullet at an ordinary in
Jamaica. As for me, the whole thing had happened so quickly and so
unexpectedly that I had no time either for joy or exultation, but
continued to run on bareheaded as though bereft of my wits; for I knew I
held in my hand not only the great ruby, but also my honor and all that
was dear to me in my life.

But although England had so freely given me the stone, I knew that I
must remain in that place no longer. I still had between five and six
guineas left of the money which I had brought ashore with me when I left
the _Lavinia_. With this I hired a French fisherman to transport me to
Madagascar, where I hoped to be able to work my passage either to Europe
or back to the East Indies.

As fortune would have it, we fell in with an English bark, the
_Kensington_, bound for Calcut, off the north coast of that land, and I
secured a berth aboard of her, shipping as an ordinary seaman; for I had
no mind to tell my name, and so be forced to disclose the secret of the
great treasure which I had with me. After arriving at Calcut I was
fortunate enough to be able to find a vessel ready to sail for Bombay,
whereon I secured a berth, and so arrived safe at that place about the
middle of March.

I had unrolled the ball of yarn and looked at the stone so soon as I had
been able to do so after getting it into my possession. Then, finding
that it was safe and unhurt, as I had seen it last, I had rolled it up
again, for I could perceive that there was no better hiding-place for it
than the one the cunning pirate had provided. So for all this last
voyage I had carried a fortune of three hundred and fifty thousand
pounds in my pocket, wrapped up in a ball of yarn.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was early in the morning when we arrived at Bombay, and so soon as I
was able I disclosed my name and condition to the captain under whom I
had sailed, and contrived to impress him with the importance of my
commission, without disclosing anything to him in regard to the stone.
He was very complacent to me, and would have had me dress myself in a
more fitting manner, and in some of his own clothes, for I was clad no
better than the other seamen with whom I had consociated for all this
time; but I was too impatient to delay my going ashore for one moment
longer than was needful, so he kindly sent me off without any further
stay.

I went straight to the Residency, and though the attendants would have
stayed me, I so insisted, both with words and with force, that they were
constrained to show me directly into the presence of the Governor.

I found him seated with Mistress Pamela at breakfast, beneath the shade
of a wide veranda overlooking a beautiful and luxuriant garden. The
Governor arose as I came forward, looking very much surprised at my
boldness in so forcing my presence upon his privacy. As for Mistress
Pamela, I beheld her eyes grow wide and her face as white as marble, and
thereby knew that she had recognized me upon the instant.

I came direct to the table, and drawing forth the jewel, still wrapped
in the yarn (for my agitation had been so great that I had not thought
to unroll the covering from the stone), I laid it upon the table, with
my hands trembling as though with an ague.

"What does all this mean?" cried the Governor. "Who are you, and what do
you want?" For I was mightily changed in my appearance by the rough life
through which I had passed, and he did not recognize me.

But I only pointed to the ball of yarn. "Open it," I cried; "for God's
sake, open it!"

I saw a sudden light come into Mistress Pamela's eyes. She clasped her
hands, and repeated after me, "Open it, open it!" The Governor himself
seemed to be impressed by our emotion; for, instead of troubling himself
to unwind the yarn, he snatched up a bread-knife and cut through the
strands, so that they fell apart, and the jewel rolled out upon the
white linen table-cover.

The Governor gazed upon it as though thunderstruck. Presently he slowly
raised his eyes and looked at me. "What is this?" said he.

In the mean time I had somewhat recovered from my excessive emotion.
"Sir," said I, "it is the Rose of Paradise."

"And you?"

"I am Captain John Mackra."

The Governor grasped my hand, and shook it most warmly. "Sir," said he,
"Captain Mackra, I am vastly delighted to find you such a man as my
niece has always maintained you to be. The little rebel has led me a
most disturbed and disquieted life ever since I was constrained to order
you back to England under restraint. I now leave you a captive in her
hands, trusting to her to give you a famous dish of tea, whilst I go and
consign this great treasure to some place of safe-keeping. I shall soon
return, for I am most impatient to hear your narrative of those events
which led to the recovery of this stone."

So saying, he turned and left us, bearing the Rose of Paradise with him,
and I sat down to a dish of tea with Mistress Pamela.

When the Governor returned he had first to listen to other matters than
those concerning the Rose of Paradise; for, with his consent, Pamela
Boon had promised to be my wife.

                              THE END.


Prologue


A very famous pirate of his day was Captain Robertson Keitt.

Before embarking upon his later career of infamy, he was, in the
beginning, very well known as a reputable merchant in the island of
Jamaica.  Thence entering, first of all, upon the business of the
African trade, he presently, by regular degrees, became a pirate, and
finally ended his career as one of the most renowned freebooters of
history.

The remarkable adventure through which he at once reached the pinnacle
of success, and became in his profession the most famous figure of his
day, was the capture of the Rajah of Kishmoor's great ship, The Sun of
the East.  In this vessel was the Rajah's favorite Queen, who, together
with her attendants, were set upon a pilgrimage to Mecca.  The court of
this great Oriental potentate was, as may be readily supposed, fairly
a-glitter with gold and jewels, so that, what with such personal
adornments that the Queen and her attendants had fetched with them,
besides an ample treasury for the expenses of the expedition, an
incredible prize of gold and jewels rewarded the freebooters for their
successful adventure.

Among the precious stones taken in this great purchase was the splendid
ruby of Kishmoor.  This, as may be known to the reader, was one of the
world's greatest gems, and was unique alike both for its prodigious
size and the splendor of its color.  This precious jewel the Rajah of
Kishmoor had, upon a certain occasion, bestowed upon his Queen, and at
the time of her capture she wore it as the centre-piece of a sort of a
coronet which encircled her forehead and brow.

The seizure by the pirate of so considerable a person as that of the
Queen of Kishmoor, and of the enormous treasure that he found aboard
her ship, would alone have been sufficient to have established his
fame.  But the capture of so extraordinary a prize as that of the
ruby--which was, in itself, worth the value of an entire Oriental
kingdom--exalted him at once to the very highest pinnacle of renown.

Having achieved the capture of this incredible prize, our captain
scuttled the great ship and left her to sink with all on board. Three
Lascars of the crew alone escaped to bear the news of this tremendous
disaster to an astounded world.

As may readily be supposed, it was now no longer possible for Captain
Keitt to hope to live in such comparative obscurity as he had before
enjoyed.  His was now too remarkable a figure in the eyes of the world.
Several expeditions from various parts were immediately fitted out
against him, and it presently became no longer compatible with his
safety to remain thus clearly outlined before the eyes of the world.
Accordingly, he immediately set about seeking such security as he might
now hope to find, which he did the more readily since he had now, and
at one cast, so entirely fulfilled his most sanguine expectations of
good-fortune and of fame.

Thereafter, accordingly, the adventures of our captain became of a more
apocryphal sort.  It was known that he reached the West Indies in
safety, for he was once seen at Port Royal and twice at Spanish Town,
in the island of Jamaica.  Thereafter, however, he disappeared; nor was
it until several years later that the world heard anything concerning
him.

One day a certain Nicholas Duckworthy, who had once been gunner aboard
the pirate captain's own ship, The Good Fortune, was arrested in the
town of Bristol in the very act of attempting to sell to a merchant of
that place several valuable gems from a quantity which he carried with
him tied up in a red bandanna handkerchief.

In the confession of which Duckworthy afterward delivered himself he
declared that Captain Keitt, after his great adventure, having sailed
from Africa in safety, and so reached the shores of the New World, had
wrecked The Good Fortune on a coral reef off the Windward Islands; that
he then immediately deserted the ship, and together with Duckworthy
himself, the sailing-master (who was a Portuguese), the captain of a
brig The Bloody Hand (a consort of Keitt's), and a villainous rascal
named Hunt (who, occupying no precise position among the pirates, was
at once the instigator of and the partaker in the greatest part of
Captain Keitt's wickednesses), made his way to the nearest port of
safety.  These five worthies at last fetched the island of Jamaica,
bringing with them all of the jewels and some of the gold that had been
captured from The Sun of the East.

But, upon coming to a division of their booty, it was presently
discovered that the Rajah's ruby had mysteriously disappeared from the
collection of jewels to be divided.  The other pirates immediately
suspected their captain of having secretly purloined it, and, indeed,
so certain were they of his turpitude that they immediately set about
taking means to force a confession from him.

In this, however, they were so far unsuccessful that the captain,
refusing to yield to their importunities, had suffered himself to die
under their hands, and had so carried the secret of the hiding-place of
the great ruby--if he possessed such a secret--along with him.

Duckworthy concluded his confession by declaring that in his opinion he
himself, the Portuguese sailing-master, the captain of The Bloody Hand,
and Hunt were the only ones of Captain Keitt's crew who were now alive;
for that The Good Fortune must have broken up in a storm, which
immediately followed their desertion of her; in which event the entire
crew must inevitably have perished.

It may be added that Duckworthy himself was shortly hanged, so that, if
his surmise was true, there was now only three left alive of all that
wicked crew that had successfully carried to its completion the
greatest adventure which any pirate in the world had ever, perhaps,
embarked upon.




I. Jonathan Rugg


You may never know what romantic aspirations may lie hidden beneath the
most sedate and sober demeanor.

To have observed Jonathan Rugg, who was a tall, lean, loose-jointed
young Quaker of a somewhat forbidding aspect, with straight, dark hair
and a bony, overhanging forehead set into a frown, a pair of small,
deep-set eyes, and a square jaw, no one would for a moment have
suspected that he concealed beneath so serious an exterior any appetite
for romantic adventure.

Nevertheless, finding himself suddenly transported, as it were, from
the quiet of so sober a town as that of Philadelphia to the tropical
enchantment of Kingston, in the island of Jamaica, the night brilliant
with a full moon that swung in an opal sky, the warm and luminous
darkness replete with the mysteries of a tropical night, and burdened
with the odors of a land breeze, he suddenly discovered himself to be
overtaken with so vehement a desire for some unwonted excitement that,
had the opportunity presented itself, he felt himself ready to embrace
any adventure with the utmost eagerness, no matter whither it would
have conducted him.

At home (where he was a clerk in the counting-house of a leading
merchant, by name Jeremiah Doolittle), should such idle fancies have
come to him, he would have looked upon himself as little better than a
fool, but now that he found himself for the first time in a foreign
country, surrounded by such strange and unusual sights and sounds, all
conducive to extravagant imaginations, the wish for some extraordinary
and altogether unusual experience took possession of him with a
singular vehemence to which he had heretofore been altogether a
stranger.

In the street where he stood, which was of a shining whiteness and
which reflected the effulgence of the moonlight with an incredible
distinction, he observed, stretching before him, long lines of white
garden walls, overtopped by a prodigious luxuriance of tropical foliage.

In these gardens, and set close to the street, stood several
pretentious villas and mansions, the slatted blinds and curtains of the
windows of which were raised to admit of the freer entrance of the cool
and balmy air of the night.  From within there issued forth bright
lights, together with the exhilarating sound of merry voices laughing
and talking, or perhaps a song accompanied by the tinkling music of a
spinet or of a guitar.  An occasional group of figures, clad in light
and summer-like garments, and adorned with gay and startling colors,
passed him through the moonlight; so that what with the brightness and
warmth of the night, together with all these unusual sights and sounds,
it appeared to Jonathan Rugg that he was rather the inhabitant of some
extraordinary land of enchantment and unreality than a dweller upon
that sober and solid world in which he had heretofore passed his entire
existence.

Before continuing this narrative the reader may here be informed that
our hero had come into this enchanted world as the supercargo of the
ship SUSANNA HAYES, of Philadelphia; that he had for several years
proved himself so honest and industrious a servant to the merchant
house of the worthy Jeremiah Doolittle that that benevolent man had
given to his well-deserving clerk this opportunity at once of
gratifying an inclination for foreign travel and of filling a position
of trust that should redound to his individual profit.  The SUSANNA
HAYES had entered Kingston Harbor that afternoon, and this was
Jonathan's first night spent in those tropical latitudes, whither his
fancy and his imagination had so often carried him while he stood over
the desk filing the accounts of invoices from foreign parts.

It might be finally added that, had he at all conceived how soon and to
what a degree his sudden inclination for adventure was to be gratified,
his romantic aspirations might have been somewhat dashed at the
prospect that lay before him.




II. The Mysterious Lady with the Silver Veil


At that moment our hero suddenly became conscious of the fact that a
small wicket in a wooden gate near which he stood had been opened, and
that the eyes of an otherwise concealed countenance were observing him
with the utmost closeness of scrutiny.

He had hardly time to become aware of this observation of his person
when the gate itself was opened, and there appeared before him, in the
moonlight, the bent and crooked figure of an aged negress.  She was
clad in a calamanco raiment, and was further adorned with a variety of
gaudily colored trimmings, vastly suggestive of the tropical world of
which she was an inhabitant. Her woolly head was enveloped, after the
fashion of her people, in the folds of a gigantic and flaming red
turban constructed of an entire pocket-handkerchief.  Her face was
pock-pitted to an incredible degree, so that what with this deformity,
emphasized by the pouting of her prodigious and shapeless lips, and the
rolling of a pair of eyes as yellow as saffron, Jonathan Rugg thought
that he had never beheld a figure at once so extraordinary and so
repulsive.

It occurred to our hero that here, maybe, was to overtake him such an
adventure as that which he had just a moment before been desiring so
ardently.  Nor was he mistaken; for the negress, first looking this way
and then that, with an extremely wary and cunning expression, and
apparently having satisfied herself that the street, for the moment,
was pretty empty of passers, beckoned to him to draw nearer.  When he
had approached close enough to her she caught him by the sleeve, and,
instantly drawing him into the garden beyond, shut and bolted the gate
with a quickness and a silence suggestive of the most extravagant
secrecy.

At the same moment a huge negro suddenly appeared from the shadow of
the gatepost, and so placed himself between Jonathan and the gate that
any attempt to escape would inevitably have entailed a conflict, upon
our hero's part, with the sable and giant guardian.

Says the negress, looking very intently at our hero: "Be you afeard,
Buckra?"

"Why, no," quothed Jonathan; "for to tell thee the truth, friend,
though I am a man of peace, being of that religious order known as the
Society of Friends, I am not so weak in person nor so timid in
disposition as to warrant me in being afraid of any one. Indeed, were I
of a mind to escape, I might, without boasting, declare my belief that
I should be able to push my way past even a better man than thy large
friend who stands so threateningly in front of yonder gate."

At these words the negress broke into so prodigious a grin that, in the
moonlight, it appeared as though the whole lower part of her face had
been transformed into shining teeth.  "You be a brave Buckra," says
she, in her gibbering English.  "You come wid Melina, and Melina take
you to pretty lady, who want you to eat supper wid her."

Thereupon, and allowing our hero no opportunity to decline this
extraordinary invitation, even had he been of a mind to do so, she took
him by the hand, and led him toward the large and imposing house which
commanded the garden.  "Indeed," says Jonathan to himself, as he
followed his sable guide--himself followed in turn by the gigantic
negro--"indeed, I am like to have my fill of adventure, if anything is
to be judged from such a beginning as this."

Nor did the interior sumptuousness of the mansion at all belie the
imposing character of its exterior, for, entering by way of an
illuminated veranda, and so coming into a brilliantly lighted hallway
beyond, Jonathan beheld himself to be surrounded by such a wealth of
exquisite and well-appointed tastefulness as it had never before been
his good-fortune to behold.

Candles of clarified wax sparkled like stars in chandeliers of crystal.
These in turn, catching the illumination, glittered in prismatic
fragments with all the varied colors of the rainbow, so that a mellow
yet brilliant radiance filled the entire apartment. Polished mirrors of
a spotless clearness, framed in golden frames and built into the walls,
reflected the waxed floors, the rich Oriental carpets, and the
sumptuous paintings that hung against the ivory-tinted paneling, so
that in appearance the beauties of the apartment were continued in
bewildering vistas upon every side toward which the beholder directed
his gaze.

Bidding our hero to be seated, which he did with no small degree of
embarrassment and constraint, and upon the extreme edge of the gilt and
satin-covered chair, the negress who had been his conductor left him
for the time being to his own contemplation.

Almost before he had an opportunity to compose himself into anything
more than a part of his ordinary sedateness of demeanor, the silken
curtains at the doorway at the other end of the apartment were suddenly
divided, and Jonathan beheld before him a female figure displaying the
most exquisite contour of mould and of proportion.  She was clad
entirely in white, and was enveloped from head to foot in the folds of
a veil of delicate silver gauze, which, though hiding her countenance
from recognition, nevertheless permitted sufficient of her beauties to
be discerned to suggest the extreme elegance and loveliness of her
lineaments. Advancing toward our hero, and extending to him a tapering
hand as white as alabaster, the fingers encircled with a multitude of
jewelled rings, she addressed him thus:

"Sir," she said, speaking in accents of the most silvery and musical
cadence, "you are no doubt vastly surprised to find yourself thus
unexpectedly, and almost as by violence, introduced into the house of
one who is such an entire stranger to you as myself.  But though I am
unknown to you, I must inform you that I am better acquainted with my
visitor, for my agents have been observing you ever since you landed
this afternoon at the dock, and they have followed you ever since,
until a little while ago, when you stopped immediately opposite my
garden gate.  These agents have observed you with a closeness of
scrutiny of which you are doubtless entirely unaware.  They have even
informed me that, owing doubtless to your extreme interest in your new
surroundings, you have not as yet supped.  Knowing this, and that you
must now be enjoying a very hearty appetite, I have to ask you if you
will do me the extreme favor of sitting at table with me at a repast
which you will doubtless be surprised to learn has been hastily
prepared entirely in your honor."

So saying, and giving Jonathan no time for reply, she offered him her
hand, and with the most polite insistence conducted him into an
exquisitely appointed dining room adjoining.

Here stood a table covered with a snow-white cloth, and embellished
with silver and crystal ornaments of every description.  Having seated
herself and having indicated to Jonathan to take the chair opposite to
her, the two were presently served with a repast such as our hero had
not thought could have existed out of the pages of certain
extraordinary Oriental tales which one time had fallen to his lot to
read.

This supper (which in itself might successfully have tempted the taste
of a Sybarite) was further enhanced by several wines and cordials
which, filling the room with the aroma of the sunlit grapes from which
they had been expressed, stimulated the appetite, which without them
needed no such spur.  The lady, who ate but sparingly herself,
possessed herself with patience until Jonathan's hunger had been
appeased.  When, however, she beheld that he weakened in his attacks
upon the dessert of sweets with which the banquet was concluded, she
addressed him upon the business which was evidently entirely occupying
her mind.

"Sir," said she, "you are doubtless aware that every one, whether man
or woman, is possessed of an enemy.  In my own case I must inform you
that I have no less than three who, to compass their ends, would gladly
sacrifice my life itself to their purposes.  At no time am I safe from
their machinations, nor have I any one," cried she, exhibiting a great
emotion, "to whom I may turn in my need.  It was this that led me to
hope to find in you a friend in my perils, for, having observed through
my agents that you are not only honest in disposition and strong in
person, but that you are possessed of a considerable degree of energy
and determination, I am most desirous of imposing upon your good-nature
a trust of which you cannot for a moment suspect the magnitude.  Tell
me, are you willing to assist a poor, defenceless female in her hour of
trial?"

"Indeed, friend," quoth Jonathan, with more vivacity than he usually
exhibited, with a lenity to which he had heretofore in his lifetime
been a stranger--being warmed into such a spirit, doubtless, by the
generous wines of which he had partaken--"indeed, friend, if I could
but see thy face it would doubtless make my decision in such a matter
the more favorable, since I am inclined to think from the little I can
behold of it, that thy appearance must be extremely comely to the eye."

"Sir," said the lady, exhibiting some amusement at this unexpected
sally, "I am, you must know, as God made me.  Sometime, perhaps, I may
be very glad to satisfy your curiosity, and exhibit to you my poor
countenance such as it is.  But now"--and here she reverted to her more
serious mood--"I must again put it to you: are you willing to help an
unprotected woman in a period of very great danger to herself?  Should
you decline the assistance which I solicit, my slaves shall conduct you
to the gate through which you entered, and suffer you to depart in
peace.  Should you, upon the other hand, accept the trust, you are to
receive no reward therefor, except the gratitude of one who thus
appeals to you in her helplessness."

For a few moments Jonathan fell silent, for here, indeed, was he
entering into an adventure which infinitely surpassed any anticipation
that he could have formed.  He was, besides, of a cautious nature, and
was entirely disinclined to embark into any affair so obscure and
tangled as that in which he now found himself becoming involved.

"Friend," said he, at last, "I may tell thee that thy story has so far
moved me as to give me every inclination to help thee in thy
difficulties, but I must also inform thee that I am a man of caution,
having never before entered into any business of this sort.  Therefore,
before giving any promise that may bind my future actions, I must, in
common wisdom, demand to know what are the conditions that thou hast in
mind to impose upon me."

"Indeed, sir," cried the lady, with great vivacity and with more
cheerful accents--as though her mind had been relieved of a burden of
fear that her companion might at once have declined even a
consideration of her request--"indeed, sir, you will find that the
trust which I would impose upon you is in appearance no such great
matter as my words may have led you to suppose.

"You must know that I am possessed of a little trinket which, in the
hands of any one who, like yourself, is a stranger in these parts,
would possess no significance, but which while in my keeping is fraught
with infinite menace to me."

Hereupon, and having so spoken, she clapped her hands, and an attendant
immediately entered, disclosing the person of the same negress who had
first introduced Jonathan into the strange adventure in which he now
found himself involved.  This creature, who appeared still more
deformed and repulsive in the brilliantly lighted room than she had in
the moonlight, carried in her hands a white napkin, which she handed to
her mistress.  This being opened, disclosed a small ivory ball of about
the bigness of a lime.  Nodding to the negress to withdraw, the lady
handed him the ivory ball, and Jonathan took it with no small degree of
curiosity and examined it carefully.  It appeared to be of an exceeding
antiquity, and of so deep a yellow as to be almost brown in color.  It
was covered over with strange figures and characters of an Oriental
sort, which appeared to our hero to be of Chinese workmanship.

"I must tell you, sir," said the lady, after she had permitted her
guest to examine this for a while in silence, "that though this appears
to you to be of little worth, it is yet of extreme value.  After all,
however, it is nothing but a curiosity that any one who is interested
in such matters might possess.  What I have to ask you is this: Will
you be willing to take this into your charge, to guard it with the
utmost care and fidelity--yes, even as the apple of your eye--during
your continuance in these parts, and to return it to me in safety the
day before your departure. By so doing you will render me a service
which you may neither understand nor comprehend, but which shall make
me your debtor for my entire life."

By this time Jonathan had pretty well composed his mind for a reply.

"Friend," said he, "such a matter as this is entirely out of my
knowledge of business, which is, indeed, that of a clerk in the
mercantile profession.  Nevertheless, I have every inclination to help
thee, though I trust thou mayest have magnified the dangers that beset
thee.  This appears to me to be a little trifle for such an ado;
nevertheless, I will do as thou dost request.  I will keep it in safety
and will return it to thee upon this day a week hence, by which time I
hope to have discharged my cargo and be ready to continue my voyage to
Demerara."

At these words the lady, who had been watching him all the time with a
most unaccountable eagerness, burst forth into words of such heart-felt
gratitude as to entirely overwhelm our hero.  When her transports had
been somewhat assuaged she permitted him to depart, and the negress
conducted him back through the garden, whence she presently showed him
through the gate whither he had entered and out into the street.




III. The Terrific Encounter with the One-eyed Little Gentleman in Black


Finding himself once more in the open street, Jonathan Rugg stood for a
while in the moonlight, endeavoring to compose his mind into somewhat
of that sobriety that was habitual with him; for, indeed, he was not a
little excited by the unexpected incidents that had just befallen him.
From this effort at composure he was aroused by observing that a little
gentleman clad all in black had stopped at a little distance away and
was looking very intently at him.  In the brightness of the moonlight
our hero could see that the little gentleman possessed but a single
eye, and that he carried a gold-headed cane in his hand.  He had hardly
time to observe these particulars, when the other approached him with
every appearance of politeness and cordiality.

"Sir," said he, "surely I am not mistaken in recognizing in you the
supercargo of the ship SUSANNA HAYES, which arrived this afternoon at
this port?"

"Indeed," said Jonathan, "thou art right, friend.  That is my
occupation, and that is whence I came."

"To be sure!"  said the little gentleman.  "To be sure!  To be sure!
The SUSANNA HAYES, with a cargo of Indian-corn meal, and from dear good
friend Jeremiah Doolittle, of Philadelphia.  I know your good master
very well--very well indeed.  And have you never heard him speak of his
friend Mr. Abner Greenway, of Kingston, Jamaica?"

"Why, no," replied Jonathan, "I have no such recollection of the name
nor do I know that any such name hath ever appeared upon our books."

"To be sure!  To be sure!"  repeated the little gentleman, briskly, and
with exceeding good-nature.  "Indeed, my name is not likely to have
ever appeared upon his books, for I am not a business correspondent,
but one who, in times past, was his extremely intimate friend.  There
is much I would like to ask about him, and, indeed, I was in hopes that
you would have been the bearer of a letter from him.  But I have
lodgings at a little distance from here, so that if it is not
requesting too much of you maybe you will accompany me thither, so that
we may talk at our leisure.  I would gladly accompany you to your ship
instead of urging you to come to my apartments, but I must tell you I
am possessed of a devil of a fever, so that my physician hath forbidden
me to be out of nights."

"Indeed," said Jonathan, whom, you may have observed, was of a very
easy disposition--"indeed, I shall be very glad to accompany thee to
thy lodgings.  There is nothing I would like better than to serve any
friend of good Jeremiah Doolittle's."

And thereupon, and with great amity, the two walked off together, the
little one-eyed gentleman in black linking his arm confidingly into
that of Jonathan's, and tapping the pavement continually with his cane
as he trotted on at a great pace.  He was very well acquainted with the
town (of which he was a citizen), and so interesting was his discourse
that they had gone a considerable distance before Jonathan observed
they were entering into a quarter darker and less frequented than that
which they had quitted.  Tall brick houses stood upon either side,
between which stretched a narrow, crooked roadway, with a kennel
running down the centre.

In front of one of these houses--a tall and gloomy structure--our
hero's conductor stopped and, opening the door with a key, beckoned for
him to enter.  Jonathan having complied, his new-found friend led the
way up a flight of steps, against which Jonathan's feet beat noisily in
the darkness, and at length, having ascended two stairways and having
reached a landing, he opened a door at the end of the passage and
ushered Jonathan into an apartment, unlighted, except for the
Moonshine, which, coming in through a partly open shutter, lay in a
brilliant patch of light upon the floor.

His conductor having struck a light with a flint and steel, our hero by
the illumination of a single candle presently discovered himself to be
in a bedchamber furnished with no small degree of comfort, and even
elegance, and having every appearance of a bachelor's chamber.

"You will pardon me," said his new acquaintance, "if I shut these
shutters and the window, for that devilish fever of which I spoke is of
such a sort that I must keep the night air even out from my room, or
else I shall be shaking the bones out of my joints and chattering the
teeth out of my head by to-morrow morning."

So saying he was as good as his word, and not only drew the shutters
to, but shot the heavy iron bolt into its place.  Having accomplished
this he bade our hero to be seated, and placing before him some
exceedingly superior rum, together with some equally excellent tobacco,
they presently fell into the friendliest discourse imaginable.  In the
course of their talk, which after awhile became exceedingly
confidential, Jonathan confided to his new friend the circumstances of
the adventure into which he had been led by the beautiful stranger, and
to all that he said concerning his adventure his interlocutor listened
with the closest and most scrupulously riveted attention.

"Upon my word," said he, when Jonathan had concluded, "I hope that you
may not have been made the victim of some foolish hoax. Let me see what
it is she has confided to you."

"That I will," replied Jonathan.  And thereupon he thrust his hand into
his breeches-pocket and brought forth the ivory ball.

No sooner did the one eye of the little gentleman in black light upon
the object than a most singular and extraordinary convulsion appeared
to seize upon him.  Had a bullet penetrated his heart he could not have
started more violently, nor have sat more rigidly and breathlessly
staring.

Mastering his emotion with the utmost difficulty as Jonathan replaced
the ball in his pocket, he drew a deep and profound breath and wiped
the palm of his hand across his forehead as though arousing himself
from a dream.

"And you," he said, of a sudden, "are, I understand it, a Quaker. Do
you, then, never carry a weapon, even in such a place as this, where at
any moment in the dark a Spanish knife may be stuck betwixt your ribs?"

"Why, no," said Jonathan, somewhat surprised that so foreign a topic
should have been so suddenly introduced into the discourse. "I am a man
of peace and not of blood.  The people of the Society of Friends never
carry weapons, either of offence or defence."

As Jonathan concluded his reply the little gentleman suddenly arose
from his chair and moved briskly around to the other side of the room.
Our hero, watching him with some surprise, beheld him clap to the door
and with a single movement shoot the bolt and turn the key therein.
The next instant he turned to Jonathan a visage transformed as suddenly
as though he had dropped a mask from his face.  The gossiping and
polite little old bachelor was there no longer, but in his stead a man
with a countenance convulsed with some furious and nameless passion.

"That ball!" he cried, in a hoarse and raucous voice.  "That ivory
ball!  Give it to me upon the instant!"

As he spoke he whipped out from his bosom a long, keen Spanish knife
that in its every appearance spoke without equivocation of the most
murderous possibilities.

The malignant passions that distorted every lineament of the
countenance of the little old gentleman in black filled our hero with
such astonishment that he knew not whether he were asleep or awake; but
when he beheld the other advancing with the naked and shining knife in
his hand his reason returned to him like a flash.  Leaping to his feet,
he lost no time in putting the table between himself and his sudden
enemy.

"Indeed, friend," he cried, in a voice penetrated with terror--"indeed,
friend, thou hadst best keep thy distance from me, for though I am a
man of peace and a shunner of bloodshed, I promise thee that I will not
stand still to be murdered without outcry or without endeavoring to
defend my life!"

"Cry as loud as you please!" exclaimed the other.  "No one is near this
place to hear you!  Cry until you are hoarse; no one in this
neighborhood will stop to ask what is the matter with you.  I tell you
I am determined to possess myself of that ivory ball, and have it I
shall, even though I am obliged to cut out your heart to get it!"  As
he spoke he grinned with so extraordinary and devilish a distortion of
his countenance, and with such an appearance of every intention of
carrying out his threat as to send the goose-flesh creeping like icy
fingers up and down our hero's spine with the most incredible rapidity
and acuteness.

Nevertheless, mastering his fears, Jonathan contrived to speak up with
a pretty good appearance of spirit.  "Indeed, friend," he said, "thou
appearest to forget that I am a man of twice thy bulk and half thy
years, and that though thou hast a knife I am determined to defend
myself to the last extremity.  I am not going to give thee that which
thou demandest of me, and for thy sake I advise thee to open the door
and let me go free as I entered, or else harm may befall thee."

"Fool!" cried the other, hardly giving him time to end.  "Do you, then,
think that I have time to chatter with you while two villains are lying
in wait for me, perhaps at the very door? Blame your own self for your
death!"  And, gnashing his teeth with an indescribable menace, and
resting his hand upon the table, he vaulted with incredible agility
clean across it and upon our hero, who, entirely unprepared for such an
extraordinary attack, was flung back against the wall, with an arm as
strong as steel clutching his throat and a knife flashing in his very
eyes with dreadful portent of instant death.

With an instinct to preserve his life, he caught his assailant by the
wrist, and, bending it away from himself, set every fibre of his body
in a superhuman effort to guard and protect himself.  The other, though
so much older and smaller, seemed to be composed entirely of fibres of
steel, and, in his murderous endeavors, put forth a strength so
extraordinary that for a moment our hero felt his heart melt within him
with terror for his life.  The spittal appeared to dry up within his
mouth, and his hair to creep and rise upon his head.  With a vehement
cry of despair and anguish, he put forth one stupendous effort for
defence, and, clapping his heel behind the other's leg, and throwing
his whole weight forward, he fairly tripped his antagonist backward as
he stood. Together they fell upon the floor, locked in the most
desperate embrace, and overturning a chair with a prodigious clatter in
their descent--our hero upon the top and the little gentleman in black
beneath him.

As they struck the floor the little man in black emitted a most
piercing and terrible scream, and instantly relaxing his efforts of
attack, fell to beating the floor with the back of his hands and
drubbing with his heels upon the rug in which he had become entangled.

Our hero leaped to his feet, and with dilating eyes and expanding brain
and swimming sight stared down upon the other like one turned to a
stone.

He beheld instantly what had occurred, and that he had, without so
intending, killed a fellow-man.  The knife, turned away from his own
person, had in their fall been plunged into the bosom of the other, and
he now lay quivering in the last throes of death. As Jonathan gazed he
beheld a thin red stream trickle out from the parted and grinning lips;
he beheld the eyes turn inward; he beheld the eyelids contract; he
beheld the figure stretch itself; he beheld it become still in death.




IV. The Momentous Adventure with the Stranger with the Silver Ear-rings


So our hero stood stunned and bedazed, gazing down upon his victim,
like a man turned into a stone.  His brain appeared to him to expand
like a bubble, the blood surged and bummed in his ears with every
gigantic beat of his heart, his vision swam, and his trembling hands
were bedewed with a cold and repugnant sweat.  The dead figure upon the
floor at his feet gazed at him with a wide, glassy stare, and in the
confusion of his mind it appeared to Jonathan that he was, indeed, a
murderer.

What monstrous thing was this that had befallen him who, but a moment
before, had been so entirely innocent of the guilt of blood?  What was
he now to do in such an extremity as this, with his victim lying dead
at his feet, a poniard in his heart?  Who would believe him to be
guiltless of crime with such a dreadful evidence as this presented
against him?  How was he, a stranger in a foreign land, to totally
defend himself against an accusing of mistaken justice?  At these
thoughts a developed terror gripped at his vitals and a sweat as cold
as ice bedewed his entire body. No, he must tarry for no explanation or
defense!  He must immediately fly from this terrible place, or else,
should he be discovered, his doom would certainly be sealed!

At that moment, and in the very extremity of his apprehensions, there
fell of a sudden a knock upon the door, sounding so loud and so
startling upon the silence of the room that every shattered nerve in
our hero's frame tingled and thrilled in answer to it.  He stood
petrified, scarcely so much as daring to breathe; and then, observing
that his mouth was agape, he moistened his dry and parching lips, and
drew his jaws together with a snap.

Again there fell the same loud, insistent knock upon the panel,
followed by the imperative words: "Open within!"

The wretched Jonathan flung about him a glance at once of terror and of
despair, but there was for him no possible escape.  He was shut tight
in the room with his dead victim, like a rat in a trap.  Nothing
remained for him but to obey the summons from without.  Indeed, in the
very extremity of his distraction, he possessed reason enough to
perceive that the longer he delayed opening the door the less innocent
he might hope to appear in the eyes of whoever stood without.

With the uncertain and spasmodic movements of an ill-constructed
automaton, he crossed the room, and stepping very carefully over the
prostrate body upon the floor, and with a hesitating reluctance that he
could in no degree master, he unlocked, unbolted, and opened the door.

The figure that outlined itself in the light of the candle, against the
blackness of the passageway without was of such a singular and foreign
aspect as to fit extremely well into the extraordinary tragedy of which
Jonathan was at once the victim and the cause.

It was that of a lean, tall man with a thin, yellow countenance,
embellished with a long, black mustache, and having a pair of
forbidding, deeply set, and extremely restless black eyes.  A crimson
handkerchief beneath a lace cocked hat was tied tightly around the
head, and a pair of silver earrings, which caught the light of the
candle, gleamed and twinkled against the inky darkness of the
passageway beyond.

This extraordinary being, without favoring our hero with any word of
apology for his intrusion, immediately thrust himself forward into the
room, and stretching his long, lean, bird-like neck so as to direct his
gaze over the intervening table, fixed a gaping and concentrated stare
upon the figure lying still and motionless in the centre of the room.

"Vat you do dare," said he, with a guttural and foreign accent, and
thereupon, without waiting for a reply, came forward and knelt down
beside the dead man.  After thrusting his hand into the silent and
shrunken bosom, he presently looked up and fixed his penetrating eyes
upon our hero's countenance, who, benumbed and bedazed with his
despair, still stood like one enchained in the bonds of a nightmare.
"He vas dead!" said the stranger, and Jonathan nodded his head in reply.

"Vy you keel ze man?" inquired his interlocutor.

"Indeed," cried Jonathan, finding a voice at last, but one so hoarse
that he could hardly recognize it for his own, "I know not what to make
of the affair!  But, indeed, I do assure thee, friend, that I am
entirely innocent of what thou seest."

The stranger still kept his piercing gaze fixed upon our hero's
countenance, and Jonathan, feeling that something further was demanded
of him, continued: "I am, indeed, a victim of a most extravagant and
extraordinary adventure.  This evening, coming an entire stranger to
this country, I was introduced into the house of a beautiful female,
who bestowed upon me a charge that appeared to me to be at once
insignificant and absurd.  Behold this little ivory ball," said he,
drawing the globe from his pocket, and displaying it between his thumb
and finger.  "It is this that appears to have brought all this disaster
upon me; for, coming from the house of the young woman, the man whom
thou now beholdest lying dead upon the floor induced me to come to this
place.  Having inveigled me hither, he demanded of me to give him at
once this insignificant trifle.  Upon my refusing to do so, he
assaulted me with every appearance of a mad and furious inclination to
deprive me of my life!"

At the sight of the ivory ball the stranger quickly arose from his
kneeling posture and fixed upon our hero a gaze the most extraordinary
that he had ever encountered.  His eyes dilated like those of a cat,
the breath expelled itself from his bosom in so deep and profound an
expiration that it appeared as though it might never return again.  Nor
was it until Jonathan had replaced the ball in his pocket that he
appeared to awaken from the trance that the sight of the object had
sent him into.  But no sooner had the cause of this strange demeanor
disappeared into our hero's breeches-pocket than he arose as with an
electric shock.  In an instant he became transformed as by the touch of
magic.  A sudden and baleful light flamed into his eyes, his face grew
as red as blood, and he clapped his hand to his pocket with a sudden
and violent motion.  "Ze ball!" he cried, in a hoarse and strident
voice.  "Ze ball!  Give me ze ball!"  And upon the next instant our
hero beheld the round and shining nozzle of a pistol pointed directly
against his forehead.

For a moment he stood as though transfixed; then in the mortal peril
that faced him, he uttered a roar that sounded in his own ears like the
outcry of a wild beast, and thereupon flung himself bodily upon the
other with the violence and the fury of a madman.

The stranger drew the trigger, and the powder flashed in the pan. He
dropped the weapon, clattering, and in an instant tried to draw another
from his other pocket.  Before he could direct his aim, however, our
hero had caught him by both wrists, and, bending his hand backward,
prevented the chance of any shot from taking immediate effect upon his
person.  Then followed a struggle of extraordinary ferocity and
frenzy--the stranger endeavoring to free his hand, and Jonathan
striving with all the energy of despair to prevent him from effecting
his murderous purpose.

In the struggle our hero became thrust against the edge of the table.
He felt as though his back were breaking, and became conscious that in
such a situation he could hope to defend himself only a few moments
longer.  The stranger's face was pressed close to his own.  His hot
breath, strong with the odor of garlic, fanned our hero's cheek, while
his lips, distended into a ferocious and ferine grin, displayed his
sharp teeth shining in the candlelight.

"Give me ze ball!" he said, in a harsh and furious whisper.

At the moment there rang in Jonathan's ears the sudden and astounding
detonation of a pistol-shot, and for a moment he wondered whether he
had received a mortal wound without being aware of it.  Then suddenly
he beheld an extraordinary and dreadful transformation take place in
the countenance thrust so close to his own; the eyes winked several
times with incredible rapidity, and then rolled upward and inward; the
jaws gaped into a dreadful and cavernous yawn; the pistol fell with a
clatter to the floor, and the next moment the muscles, so rigid but an
instant before, relaxed into a limp and listless flaccidity.  The
joints collapsed, and the entire man fell into an indistinguishable
heap upon and across the dead figure stretched out upon the floor,
while at the same time a pungent and blinding cloud of gunpowder smoke
filled the apartment.  For a few moments the hands twitched
convulsively; the neck stretched itself to an abominable length; the
long, lean legs slowly and gradually relaxed, and every fibre of the
body gradually collapsed into the lassitude of death.  A spot of blood
appeared and grew upon the collar at the throat, and in the same degree
the color ebbed from the face leaving it of a dull and leaden pallor.

All these terrible and formidable changes of aspect our hero stood
watching with a motionless and riveted attention, and as though they
were to him matters of the utmost consequence and importance; and only
when the last flicker of life had departed from his second victim did
he lift his gaze from this terrible scene of dissolution to stare about
him, this way and that, his eyes blinded, and his breath stifled by the
thick cloud of sulphurous smoke that obscured the objects about him in
a pungent cloud.




V. The Unexpected Encounter with the Sea-captain with the Broken Nose


If our hero had been distracted and bedazed by the first catastrophe
that had befallen, this second and even more dreadful and violent
occurrence appeared to take away from him, for the moment, every power
of thought and of sensation.  All that perturbation of emotion that had
before convulsed him he discovered to have disappeared, and in its
stead a benumbed and blinded intelligence alone remained to him.  As he
stood in the presence of this second death, of which he had been as
innocent and as unwilling an instrument as he had of the first, he
could observe no signs either of remorse or of horror within him.  He
picked up his hat, which had fallen upon the floor in the first
encounter, and, brushing away the dust with the cuff of his coat sleeve
with extraordinary care, adjusted the beaver upon his head with the
utmost nicety.  Then turning, still stupefied as with the fumes of some
powerful drug, he prepared to quit the scene of tragic terrors that had
thus unexpectedly accumulated upon him.

But ere he could put his design into execution his ears were startled
by the sound of loud and hurried footsteps which, coming from below,
ascended the stairs with a prodigious clatter and bustle of speed.  At
the landing these footsteps paused for a while, and then approached,
more cautious and deliberate, toward the room where the double tragedy
had been enacted, and where our hero yet stood silent and inert.

All this while Jonathan made no endeavor to escape, but stood passive
and submissive to what might occur.  He felt himself the victim of
circumstances over which he himself had no control. Gazing at the
partly opened door, he awaited for whatever adventure might next befall
him.  Once again the footsteps paused, this time at the very threshold,
and then the door was slowly pushed open from without.

As our hero gazed at the aperture there presently became disclosed to
his view the strong and robust figure of one who was evidently of a
seafaring habit.  From the gold braid upon his hat, the seals dangling
from the ribbon at his fob, and a certain particularity of custom, he
was evidently one of no small consideration in his profession.  He was
of a strong and powerful build, with a head set close to his shoulders,
and upon a round, short bull neck.  He wore a black cravat, loosely
tied into a knot, and a red waistcoat elaborately trimmed with gold
braid; a leather belt with a brass buckle and hanger, and huge
sea-boots completed a costume singularly suggestive of his occupation
in life.  His face was round and broad, like that of a cat, and a
complexion stained, by constant exposure to the sun and wind, to a
color of newly polished mahogany.  But a countenance which otherwise
might have been humorous, in this case was rendered singularly
repulsive by the fact that his nose had been broken so flat to his face
that all that remained to distinguish that feature were two circular
orifices where the nostrils should have been.  His eyes were by no
means so sinister as the rest of his visage, being of a light-gray
color and exceedingly vivacious--even good-natured in the merry
restlessness of their glance--albeit they were well-nigh hidden beneath
a black bush of overhanging eyebrows.  When he spoke, his voice was so
deep and resonant that it was as though it issued from a barrel rather
than from the breast of a human being.

"How now, my hearty!" cried he, in stentorian tones, so loud that they
seemed to stun the tensely drawn drums of our hero's ears. "How now, my
hearty!  What's to-do here?  Who is shooting pistols at this hour of
the night?"  Then, catching sight of the figures lying in a huddle upon
the floor, his great, thick lips parted into a gape of wonder and his
gray eyes rolled in his head like two balls, so that what with his flat
face and the round holes of his nostrils he presented an appearance
which, under other circumstances, would have been at once ludicrous and
grotesque.

"By the blood!" cried he, "to be sure it is murder that has happened
here."

"Not murder!" cried Jonathan, in a shrill and panting voice.  "Not
murder!  It was all an accident, and I am as innocent as a baby."

The new-comer looked at him and then at the two figures upon the floor,
and then back at him again with eyes at once quizzical and cunning.
Then his face broke into a grin that might hardly be called of
drollery.  "Accident!"  quoth he.  "By the blood! d'ye see 'tis a
strange accident, indeed, that lays two men by the heels and lets the
third go without a scratch!"  Delivering himself thus, he came forward
into the room, and, taking the last victim of Jonathan's adventure by
the arm, with as little compunction as he would have handled a sack of
grain he dragged the limp and helpless figure from where it lay to the
floor beside the first victim.  Then, lifting the lighted candle, he
bent over the two prostrate bodies, holding the illumination close to
the lineaments first of one and then of the other.  He looked at them
very carefully for a long while, with the closest and most intent
scrutiny, and in perfect silence.  "They are both as dead," says he,
"as Davy Jones, and, whoever you be, I protest that you have done your
business the most completest that I ever saw in all of my life."

"Indeed," cried Jonathan, in the same shrill and panting voice, "it was
themselves who did it.  First one of them attacked me and then the
other, and I did but try to keep them from murdering me. This one fell
on his knife, and that one shot himself in his efforts to destroy me."

"That," says the seaman, "you may very well tell to a dry-lander, and
maybe he will believe you; but you cannot so easily pull the wool over
the eyes of Captain Benny Willitts.  And what, if I may be so bold as
for to ask you, was the reason for their attacking so harmless a man as
you proclaim yourself to be?"

"That I know not," cried Jonathan; "but I am entirely willing to tell
thee all the circumstances.  Thou must know that I am a member of the
Society of Friends.  This day I landed here in Kingston, and met a
young woman of very comely appearance, who intrusted me with this
little ivory ball, which she requested me to keep for her a few days.
The sight of this ball--in which I can detect nothing that could be
likely to arouse any feelings of violence--appears to have driven these
two men entirely mad, so that they instantly made the most ferocious
and murderous assault upon me.  See! wouldst thou have believed that so
small a thing as this would have caused so much trouble?"  And as he
spoke he held up to the gaze of the other the cause of the double
tragedy that had befallen.  But no sooner had Captain Willitts's eyes
lighted upon the ball than the most singular change passed over his
countenance.  The color appeared to grow dull and yellow in his ruddy
cheeks, his fat lips dropped apart, and his eyes stared with a fixed
and glassy glare.  He arose to his feet and, still with the expression
of astonishment and wonder upon his face, gazed first at our hero and
then at the ivory ball in his hands, as though he were deprived both of
reason and of speech.  At last, as our hero slipped the trifle back in
his pocket again, the mariner slowly recovered himself, though with a
prodigious effort, and drew a deep and profound breath as to the very
bottom of his lungs.  He wiped, with the corner of his black silk
cravat, his brow, upon which the sweat appeared to have gathered.
"Well, messmate," says he, at last, with a sudden change of voice, "you
have, indeed, had a most wonderful adventure."  Then with another deep
breath: "Well, by the blood!  I may tell you plainly that I am no poor
hand at the reading of faces.  Well, I think you to be honest, and I am
inclined to believe every word you tell me.  By the blood!  I am
prodigiously sorry for you, and am inclined to help you out of your
scrape.

"The first thing to do," he continued, "is to get rid of these two dead
men, and that is an affair I believe we shall have no trouble in
handling.  One of them we will wrap up in the carpet here, and t'other
we can roll into yonder bed-curtain.  You shall carry the one and I the
other, and, the harbor being at no great distance, we can easily bring
them thither and tumble them overboard, and no one will be the wiser of
what has happened.  For your own safety, as you may easily see, you can
hardly go away and leave these objects here to be found by the
first-comer, and to arise up in evidence against you."

This reasoning, in our hero's present bewildered state, appeared to him
to be so extremely just that he raised not the least objection to it.
Accordingly, each of the two silent, voiceless victims of the evening's
occurrences were wrapped into a bundle that from without appeared to be
neither portentous nor terrible in appearance.

Thereupon, Jonathan shouldering the rug containing the little gentleman
in black, and the sea-captain doing the like for the other, they
presently made their way down the stairs through the darkness, and so
out into the street.  Here the sea-captain became the conductor of the
expedition, and leading the way down several alleys and along certain
by-streets--now and then stopping to rest, for the burdens were both
heavy and clumsy to carry--they both came out at last to the harbor
front, without any one having questioned them or having appeared to
suspect them of anything wrong.  At the water-side was an open wharf
extending a pretty good distance out into the harbor.  Thither the
captain led the way and Jonathan followed.  So they made their way out
along the wharf or pier, stumbling now and then over loose boards,
until they came at last to where the water was of a sufficient depth
for their purpose.  Here the captain, bending his shoulders, shot his
burden out into the dark, mysterious waters, and Jonathan, following
his example, did the same.  Each body sank with a sullen and leaden
splash into the element where, the casings which swathed them becoming
loosened, the rug and the curtain rose to the surface and drifted
slowly away with the tide.

As Jonathan stood gazing dully at the disappearance of these last
evidences of his two inadvertent murders, he was suddenly and
vehemently aroused by feeling a pair of arms of enormous strength flung
about him from behind.  In their embrace his elbows were instantly
pinned tight to his side, and he stood for a moment helpless and
astounded, while the voice of the sea-captain, rumbling in his very
ear, exclaimed: "Ye bloody, murthering Quaker, I'll have that ivory
ball, or I'll have your life!"

These words produced the same effect upon Jonathan as though a douche
of cold water had suddenly been flung over him.  He began instantly to
struggle to free himself, and that with a frantic and vehement violence
begotten at once of terror and despair.  So prodigious were his efforts
that more than once he had nearly torn himself free, but still the
powerful arms of his captor held him as in a vise of iron.  Meantime,
our hero's assailant made frequent though ineffectual attempts to
thrust a hand into the breeches-pocket where the ivory ball was hidden,
swearing the while under his breath with a terrifying and monstrous
string of oaths.  At last, finding himself foiled in every such
attempt, and losing all patience at the struggles of his victim, he
endeavored to lift Jonathan off of his feet, as though to dash him
bodily upon the ground.  In this he would doubtless have succeeded had
he not caught his heel in the crack of a loose board of the wharf.
Instantly they both fell, violently prostrate, the captain beneath and
Jonathan above him, though still encircled in his iron embrace.  Our
hero felt the back of his head strike violently upon the flat face of
the other, and he heard the captain's skull sound with a terrific crack
like that of a breaking egg upon some post or billet of wood, against
which he must have struck.  In their frantic struggles they had
approached extremely near the edge of the wharf, so that the next
instant, with an enormous and thunderous splash, Jonathan found himself
plunged into the waters of the harbor, and the arms of his assailant
loosened from about his body.

The shock of the water brought him instantly to his senses, and, being
a fairly good swimmer, he had not the least difficulty in reaching and
clutching the cross-piece of a wooden ladder that, coated with slimy
sea-moss, led from the water-level to the wharf above.

After reaching the safety of the dry land once more, Jonathan gazed
about him as though to discern whence the next attack might be
delivered upon him.  But he stood entirely alone upon the dock--not
another living soul was in sight.  The surface of the water exhibited
some commotion, as though disturbed by something struggling beneath;
but the sea-captain, who had doubtless been stunned by the tremendous
crack upon his head, never arose again out of the element that had
engulfed him.

The moonlight shone with a peaceful and resplendent illumination, and,
excepting certain remote noises from the distant town not a sound broke
the silence and the peacefulness of the balmy, tropical night.  The
limpid water, illuminated by the resplendent moonlight, lapped against
the wharf.  All the world was calm, serene, and enveloped in a profound
and entire repose.

Jonathan looked up at the round and brilliant globe of light floating
in the sky above his head, and wondered whether it were, indeed,
possible that all that had befallen him was a reality and not some
tremendous hallucination.  Then suddenly arousing himself to a renewed
realization of that which had occurred, he turned and ran like one
possessed, up along the wharf, and so into the moonlit town once more.




VI. The Conclusion of the Adventure with the Lady with the Silver Veil


Nor did he check his precipitous flight until suddenly, being led
perhaps by some strange influence of which he was not at all the
master, he discovered himself to be standing before the garden-gate
where not more than an hour before he had first entered upon the series
of monstrous adventures that had led to such tremendous conclusions.

People were still passing and repassing, and one of these groups--a
party of young ladies and gentlemen--paused upon the opposite side of
the street to observe, with no small curiosity and amusement, his
dripping and bedraggled aspect.  But only one thought and one intention
possessed our hero--to relieve himself as quickly as possible of that
trust which he had taken up so thoughtlessly, and with such monstrous
results to himself and to his victims.  He ran to the gate of the
garden and began beating and kicking upon it with a vehemence that he
could neither master nor control.  He was aware that the entire
neighborhood was becoming aroused, for he beheld lights moving and loud
voices of inquiry; yet he gave not the least thought to the disturbance
he was creating, but continued without intermission his uproarious
pounding upon the gate.

At length, in answer to the sound of his vehement blows, the little
wicket was opened and a pair of eyes appeared thereat.  The next
instant the gate was cast ajar very hastily, and the pock-pitted
negress appeared.  She caught him by the sleeve of his coat and drew
him quickly into the garden.  "Buckra, Buckra!" she cried.  "What you
doing?  You wake de whole town!"  Then, observing his dripping
garments: "You been in de water.  You catch de fever and shake till you
die."

"Thy mistress!" cried Jonathan, almost sobbing in the excess of his
emotion; "take me to her upon the instant, or I cannot answer for my
not going entirely mad!"

When our hero was again introduced to the lady, he found her clad in a
loose and an elegant negligee, infinitely becoming to her graceful
figure, and still covered with the veil of silver gauze that had before
enveloped her.

"Friend," he cried, vehemently, approaching her and holding out toward
her the little ivory ball, "take again this which thou gavest me!  It
has brought death to three men, and I know not what terrible fate may
befall me if I keep it longer in my possession.

"What is it you say?" cried she, in a piercing voice.  "Did you say it
hath caused the death of three men?  Quick!  Tell me what has happened,
for I feel somehow a presage that you bring me news of safety and
release from all my dangers."

"I know not what thou meanest!" cried Jonathan, still panting with
agitation.  "But this I do know: that when I went away from thee I
departed an innocent man, and now I come back to thee burdened with the
weight of three lives, which, though innocent I have been instrumental
in taking."

"Explain!"  exclaimed the lady, tapping the floor with her foot.
"Explain! explain! explain!"

"That I will," cried Jonathan, "and as soon as I am able!  When I left
thee and went out into the street I was accosted by a little gentleman
clad in black."

"Indeed!" cried the lady; "and had he but one eye, and did he carry a
gold-headed cane?"

"Exactly," said Jonathan; "and he claimed acquaintance with friend
Jeremiah Doolittle."

"He never knew him!" cried the lady, vehemently; "and I must tell you
that he was a villain named Hunt, who at one time was the intimate
consort of the pirate Keitt.  He it was who plunged a deadly knife into
his captain's bosom, and so murdered him in this very house.  He
himself or his agents, must have been watching my gate when you went
forth."

"I know not how that may be," said Jonathan, "but he took me to his
apartment, and there, obtaining a knowledge of the trust thou didst
burden me with, he demanded it of me, and upon my refusing to deliver
it to him he presently fell to attacking me with a dagger.  In my
efforts to protect my life I inadvertently caused him to plunge the
knife into his own bosom and to kill himself."

"And what then?"  cried the lady, who appeared well-nigh distracted
with her emotions.

"Then," said Jonathan, "there came a strange man--a foreigner--who upon
his part assaulted me with a pistol, with every intention of murdering
me and thus obtaining possession of that same little trifle."

"And did he," exclaimed the lady, "have long, black mustachios, and did
he have silver ear-rings in his ears?"

"Yes," said Jonathan, "he did."

"That," cried the lady, "could have been none other than Captain
Keitt's Portuguese sailing-master, who must have been spying upon Hunt!
Tell me what happened next!"

"He would have taken my life," said Jonathan, "but in the struggle that
followed he shot himself accidentally with his own pistol, and died at
my very feet.  I do not know what would have happened to me if a
sea-captain had not come and proffered his assistance."

"A sea-captain!" she exclaimed; "and had he a flat face and a broken
nose?"

"Indeed he had," replied Jonathan.

"That," said the lady, "must have been Captain Keitt's pirate
partner--Captain Willitts, of The Bloody Hand.  He was doubtless spying
upon the Portuguese."

"He induced me," said Jonathan, "to carry the two bodies down to the
wharf.  Having inveigled me there--where, I suppose, he thought no one
could interfere--he assaulted me, and endeavored to take the ivory ball
away from me.  In my efforts to escape we both fell into the water, and
he, striking his head upon the edge of the wharf, was first stunned and
then drowned."

"Thank God!" cried the lady, with a transport of fervor, and clasping
her jewelled hands together.  "At last I am free of those who have
heretofore persecuted me and threatened my very life itself!  You have
asked to behold my face; I will now show it to you!  Heretofore I have
been obliged to keep it concealed lest, recognizing me, my enemies
should have slain me."  As she spoke she drew aside her veil, and
disclosed to the vision of our hero a countenance of the most
extraordinary and striking beauty.  Her luminous eyes were like those
of a Jawa, and set beneath exquisitely arched and pencilled brows.  Her
forehead was like lustrous ivory and her lips like rose-leaves.  Her
hair, which was as soft as the finest silk, was fastened up in masses
of ravishing abundance.  "I am," said she, "the daughter of that
unfortunate Captain Keitt, who, though weak and a pirate, was not so
wicked, I would have you know, as he has been painted.  He would,
doubtless, have been an honest man had he not been led astray by the
villain Hunt, who so nearly compassed your own destruction.  He
returned to this island before his death, and made me the sole heir of
all that great fortune which he had gathered--perhaps not by the most
honest means--in the waters of the Indian Ocean.  But the greatest
treasure of all that fortune bequeathed to me was a single jewel which
you yourself have just now defended with a courage and a fidelity that
I cannot sufficiently extol.  It is that priceless gem known as the
Ruby of Kishmoor.  I will show it to you."  Hereupon she took the
little ivory ball in her hand, and, with a turn of her beautiful
wrists, unscrewed a lid so nicely and cunningly adjusted that no eye
could have detected where it was joined to the parent globe. Within was
a fleece of raw silk containing an object which she presently displayed
before the astonished gaze of our hero.  It was a red stone of about
the bigness of a plover's egg, and which glowed and flamed with such an
exquisite and ruddy brilliancy as to dazzle even Jonathan's
inexperienced eyes.  Indeed, he did not need to be informed of the
priceless value of the treasure, which he beheld in the rosy palm
extended toward him.  How long he gazed at this extraordinary jewel he
knew not, but he was aroused from his contemplation by the sound of the
lady's voice addressing him.  "The three villains," said she, "who have
this day met their deserts in a violent and bloody death, had by an
accident obtained knowledge that this jewel was in my possession.
Since then my life has hung upon a thread, and every step that I have
taken has been watched by these enemies, the most cruel and relentless
that it was ever the lot of any unfortunate to possess.  From the
mortal dangers of their machinations you have saved me, exhibiting a
courage and a determination that cannot be sufficiently applauded.  In
this you have earned my deepest admiration and regard.  I would
rather," she cried, "intrust my life and my happiness to you than into
the keeping of any man whom I have ever known!  I cannot hope to reward
you in such a way as to recompense you for the perils into which my
necessities have thrust you; but yet"--and here she hesitated, as
though seeking for words in which to express herself--"but yet if you
are willing to accept of this jewel, and all of the fortune that
belongs to me, together with the person of poor Evaline Keitt herself,
not only the stone and the wealth, but the woman also, are yours to
dispose of as you see fit!"

Our hero was so struck aback at this unexpected turn that he knew not
upon the instant what reply to make.  "Friend," said he, at last, "I
thank thee extremely for thy offer, and, though I would not be
ungracious, it is yet borne in upon me to testify to thee that as to
the stone itself and the fortune--of which thou speakest, and of which
I very well know the history--I have no inclination to receive either
the one or the other, both the fruits of theft, rapine, and murder.
The jewel I have myself beheld three times stained, as it were, with
the blood of my fellow-man, so that it now has so little value in my
sight that I would not give a peppercorn to possess it.  Indeed, there
is no inducement in the world that could persuade me to accept it, or
even to take it again into my hand.  As to the rest of thy generous
offer, I have only to say that I am, four months hence, to be married
to a very comely young woman of Kensington, in Pennsylvania, by name
Martha Dobbs, and therefore I am not at all at liberty to consider my
inclinations in any other direction."

Having so delivered himself, Jonathan bowed with such ease as his stiff
and awkward joints might command, and thereupon withdrew from the
presence of the charmer, who, with cheeks suffused with blushes and
with eyes averted, made no endeavor to detain him.

So ended the only adventure of moment that ever happened to him in all
his life.  For thereafter he contented himself with such excitement as
his mercantile profession and his extremely peaceful existence might
afford.




Epilogue


In conclusion it may be said that when the worthy Jonathan Rugg was
married to Martha Dobbs, upon the following June, some mysterious
friend presented to the bride a rope of pearls of such considerable
value that when they were realized into money our hero was enabled to
enter into partnership with his former patron the worthy Jeremiah
Doolittle, and that, having made such a beginning, he by-and-by arose
to become, in his day, one of the leading merchants of his native town
of Philadelphia.



